Politica Sacra and Civilis: Or, A Model of Civil and Ecclesiastical
GOVERNMENT. WHEREIN, Besides the positive Doctrine concerning STATE and CHVRCH
in general, Are debated the principal Controversies of the TIMES concerning the
CONSTITUTION OF THE State and Church OF ENGLAND, Tending to Righteousness,
Truth, and Peace.

By GEORGE LAWSON, Rector of More in the County of Salop.

The Second Edition.

LONDON, Printed for J.S. and are to be Sold by T. Goodwin at the Maidenhead
over against St. Dustans Church in Fleet Street. 1689.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
Reader,
IN the time of our divisions, and the execution of God's Judgments upon the
three Nations, I set my self to inquire into the causes of our sad and woeful
condition, and to think of some Remedies to prevent our Ruin. Whilst I was
busy in this search; I easily understood, that the Subject of our Differences
was, not only the State but the Church. This gave occasion to peruse such
Authors as write of Government, and to study the Political part of the Holy
Scriptures, wherein I found many things concerning the Constitution, the
Administration, the Corruption, the Conversion and Subversion of Civil States
and Kingdoms, with much of Church Discipline. There I observed certain Rules of
Government in general, and some special, and proper to Civil, or else to
Ecclesiastical Polities. All these, according to my poor Ability I reduced to
Method, and applied them to our own Church and State severally. I further took
notice of our principal differences both Civil and Ecclesiastical, and did
freely deliver mine own Judgment concerning the particular parties, and their
Opinions, yet so that I endavoured to be of no Party, as a Party. And though in
some things I differ from them, yet it was not out of singularity, or an humor
of opposition, but out of an unfeigned desire of Truth; which in many things I
found so evident, that whosoever should not acknowledge it, must needs be
wilful, and blinded with partiality or prejudice. Whilst I go on in this work,
I easily perceived, that as our sins and impenitency brought God's Judgments
upon us, so our ignorance and errors in matters of Government, with prejudice,
partiality, pride, obstinacy and want of charity were the causes of our
divisions, which gave great advantage to our Enemies and Foreign Politicians:
who, as formerly, so now especially at this time, fear our union and agreement
more than ever, because we are become a Warlike Nation, and furnished with
Gallant Men both by Sea and Land, therefore their great Work is to continue our
Differences amongst our selves, as subservient to their Interest. These causes
once discovered, the Remedies were obvious, if men were in any capacity to make
use of them. For, sincere repentance, and a real reformation private and
public, with the punishment of crying sins, are very effectual to avert God's
Judgments: And to renounce our Errors, to be informed in the Truth; to lay
aside all pride, partiality, prejudice, obstinacy, self-interest; to put on
humility and charity, which is the bond of perfection, and to let the peace of
God rule in our hearts, are the only way to quench the fire of Contention, and
firmly to cement us together. Yet, though good men may propose clear truths,
dispel the mists of Error, persuade to repentance, and pray, yet there seems
to be little hope of peace and settlement. For, after so many fearful Judgments
executed upon us, and severe admonitions given us from Heaven, pride,
covetousness, injustice, oppression, malice, cruelty, and abominable hypocrisy
continue, and nothing is reformed. This is the reason, why God's hand is
stretched out still: many persons have suffered, many great Families have been
ruined, many feel God's heavy hand to this day: but who shall suffer most and
last no man knows. Men of the same English Blood, and of the same Protestant
Profession continue obstinate in their Errors, rigid and high in their
Opinions, resolved in their different Designs, admire their own Models of
Government in Church and State, will not abate of their Confidence, and refuse
to recede from their supposed Principles. Some are for a boundless Liberty, and
will not be confined by the rules and dictates of Reason or the common Faith
revealed from Heaven; these have no Principles, but seem to have abandoned not
only Christianity, but their own reason. Some are for Peace, yet only upon
their own terms, though not so reasonable at they should be. Some complain they
are wronged, and must be satisfied: Others are very high and must be revenged.
Every party must reign, or else they will be Enemies. Many men of great Estates
and excellent Parts, who as yet have suffered little or nothing, look on as
Strangers, and will do nothing, whilst Church and State lie a Bleeding, ready
to breathe out their last. And what can be the issue, but that either we shall
be brought very low, made a poor and base people, and willing of peace upon
very hard terms, and yet hardly obtain it; or we shall be made a scorn and
derision to the Nations round about us, a prey unto our Enemies, and they, who
hate us, shall rule over us. To prevent so sad a condition, my humble request
to all true hearted English Protestants, is, seriously to consider, 1. What our
Condition was before the Scots first entered England with an Army. 2. What
those things were, which then the best and wisest desired to be reformed both
in Church and State. 3. What Reformation we are capable of at this present
time. 4. Where the guilt of so much blood as has been shed, especially in
Ireland, does principally lie. 5. What our duty is as we are English, as we are
Christians, as we are Protestants, which amongst other things is to deliver the
Gospel to our Posterity, as we received it from our Fathers. 6. What may be the
most effectual means according to the rules of Reason and Divine Revelation, to
promote the public good without respect of Persons or Parties, that so no
wicked men, but only such as fear God, may have cause to rejoice. This is all
I thought good by this Epistle to signify unto thee at the present, for the
rest referring thee to the Book, and remaining

Thine, to serve in the Lord, George Lawson.

In opus politicum viri clarissimi Georgi Lawsonii, popularis mei.
QVis tandem augustas regnandi digerit arts,
Et solidam sceptris commodat Author opem?
Instituit magnas subtilis pagina Gentes,
Dat populis pacem, principibusque fidem.
Publica privata sudantur munia dextra,
Quod multi curant, unius ecce labor.
Tam been regna locat, potuit regnasse videri,
Heu! major cathedra quam fuit ille sua!
Stant secura brevi subnixa Palatia charta,
Nec facile amoto cardine, regna labant:
Vendicat haec populis leges, vim legibus: armat
Te Themi; quae debes plectere, sola potes.
Nil metuas, neque jam metuaris, Regule; demptum est
Posse nocere aliis, velle nocere tibi.
Haec succurrisset nascenti pagina Romae,
Ne vacet Egeriam consuluisse Numae.
Nosset Sparta isthaec, duro formata Lycurgo,
Secula mansisset, quot stetit illa dies:
Nec tibi Parthenope, gemino quater amplius anno vid. Comin. de bell. Neap.
lib. 5.

Mutasset dominos plebs malefida suos.
Nec sibi foedasset fastos tam turpiter Anglus,
Mill per incertas mobilis usque vices.
Quam been Lawsoni! magni dignissimus haeres
Nominis, ille salo jura dat; ipse solo.
Qui regnare doces and qui parere, libenter
Imperium calami cedimus ecce tibi.
Te tantum genuit vicus brevis, angulus orbis
Langcliff, nascenti conscia terra mihi.
Eborac invideant, vel Athenae; debeo plura
Jam pro te patriae, pro patriaque tibi.
J. Carr, M. D.

The Arguments of the several Chapters.
CHAP. I.
THE Propriety of God acquired by Creation, and continued by Preservation, the
ground of God's Supreme Dominion and Power, which is Universal over all
Creatures, more particular and special over Men and Angels; who are capable of
Laws, Rewards, Punishments, not only Temporal but Eternal: The exercise of this
Power over men immediate, or mediate. Mediate in his Government by men, over
men, is either Temporal and Civil, or Spiritual and Ecclesiastical. Of the
Government Spiriritual before Christ's incarnation, and after his Session at
the right hand of God. Of the Church Christian, Triumphant, Militant, Mystical,
Visible, Universal, Particular. The particular parts of the Universal Church,
as visible, the principal subject of the following Discourse. Of our
Differences and the Causes thereof: of hope of better times, and the Author's
disposition and intention.

CHAP. II. Of a Community Civil.
What Politica is, what a Commonwealth, the subject of Politica: What the
parts of a Commonwealth: what a Community in general, which is the subject of
a Commonwealth; the name and nature of it. Of a Community Civil, the matter
and the form thereof, the Original of Civil Communities; the members both
natural and naturalized, whether they be imperfectly, or formally, or eminently
such. The capacity of this Association to receive the form of a Civil
Government. Liberty, Equality, Propriety, Adjuncts to this Community.

CHAP. III. Of an Ecclesiastical Community.
The Definition of it; the explication of the Definition. The distinction of
the Members, less or more perfectly such: the manner of Incorporation; Liberty,
Equality, and aptitude to receive a form of Discipline. Proprieties of this
Society. Where, something concerning Children born of Christian Parents,
whether they be members of the Church, or no.

CHAP. IV. Of Power Civil.
The parts of Politica, Constitution and Administration: what Constitution is,
and what the parts of a Commonwealth both Civil and Ecclesiastical, which are
two: 1. Sovereign. 2. Subjects. What Power in general, what Power Civil, what
Supreme Power or Majesty Civil; the Branches thereof, which are called Jura
Majestatis; the multitude of them reduced to order by several Writers, and by
the Author. The Properties of Majesty, which is real or personal. What
Sovereign real and personal may do. The subject of Real Majesty in England; the
personal Majesty of the Parliament, and of the King.

CHAP. V. Of the Acquisition of Civil Power, and the Amission thereof.
Civil Power, not essential, but accidental to any Person. It Is acquired in an
extrordinary, or ordinary way. In an ordinary way by consent or Conquest;
justly or unjustly, as by Usurpation. Usurpation no good Title. The Person
Usurping Power at the first, by subsequent consent may acquire a good Title.
Succession, and the several ways of Succession. Amission of Power by violence,
or voluntary consent, or death. Whether any can be made Sovereign by condition?
Whether Sovereign Power once acquired may be forfeited: how, and to whom the
forfeiture may be made.

CHAP. VI. Of Power Ecclesiastical.
The Power is Spiritual, not Civil. Why it is called the Power of the Keys, as
different from that of the Sword. Binding and loosing, the same with shutting
and opening: and both belong chiefly to Legislation and Jurisdiction. This
Power is Supreme and Independent in every particular Church constituted aright
according to the Rules of the Gospel. The Branches and several Acts of it: as,
making of Canons, the constitution of Officers, Jurisdiction, disposing of the
Churches goods. Of the extent, and also the bounds of the Power. Certain
distinctions of Spiritual Government, as Internal, External, Universal,
Particular, Formal, Material, or Objective.

CHAP. VII. Of acquiring or losing Ecclesiastical Power.
The just acquisition of this Power extraordinary in the highest measure, as in
Christ, or in an inferior degree, as in the Apostles. How ordinary Churches
derive it from Christ by the Gospel-Charter in an ordinary way. The Power of
the Church, and Church Officers unequal. The several ways of Usurping, and also
of losing this Power.

CHAP. VIII. Of the disposition of Power Civil, from the several manners of
which arise the several forms of Government.
General Observations premised. The several ways of disposing Majesty, or
Supreme Power in a State. Pure Forms. Monarchies, Despotical and Regal. Pure
Aristocracies and Democracies. Mixed Governments, when the Power is placed in
the several States jointly. The Constitution of England. Our Kings and their
Title. Peers, Commons, Parliaments, and the limits of their Power. The limits
of the King's personal Majesty. Our late divisions and confusions. Whether King
or Parliament as separate, could be justified by the fundamental constitution
of England. By what Rule the Controversy must be tried. Whether Party at the
first was more faithful to the English Protestant interest. How the state of
the Controversy* altered. The high and extraordinary actings of all Parties.
The good that God has brought out of our Disorders and Confusions. Whom God
has hitherto most punished. What is to be done, if we intend a Settlement of
State and Church.

CHAP. IX. Of the Disposition of Power Ecclesiastical, and whether the Bishop
of Rome be the first Subject of it under Christ.
The many and great differences about the first subject of the Power of the
Keys: The Pope, the Prince, the Prelate, the Presbyter, the People challenge it
as due unto them by a Divine Right. Their several pretended Titles examined.
Whether that of the Bishop of Rome be good or valid. His greatness, state, and
pomp. The opinions of some Authors concerning him. The power he challenges is
Transcendent. The reasons to prove his title taken from Politics: Ancient
Writers, the Scriptures. The insufficiency of them: though some may seem to
prove the possession, yet none make good the Title.

CHAP. X. Whether Civil Sovereigns have any right unto the power of the Keys.
Their power and advantage to assume and exercise this power. Their power not
spiritual, but temporal. The power of ordering Matters of Religion, what it is,
and how it differs from the power of the Keys, Jus Religionis ordinandae,
rightly understood, belongs to all higher Powers. The Kings and Queens of
England, though acknowledged over all persons, in all causes, both Civil and
Ecclesiastical, supreme Governors, yet had not the power of the Keys. What
meant by those words of the Oath of Supremacy. Erastians worthy of no answer,
because they mistake the state of the Question, and do not distinguish between
the power of the Sword, and the power of the Keys.

CHAP. XI. Whether Bishops be the primary subject of the power of the Keys.
The different Opinions concerning the Definition and Essence of a Bishop, as
also concerning the first Institution of Episcopacy. St. Hierom's opinion in
this point. Spalatensis his Arguments to prove the divine Right of Bishops, as
invested with the Power of Ordination and Jurisdiction examined and answered.
Dr. Andrew's judgment in this point. After the primitive and also the
Hierarchical Bishop, which differ much, the English Episcopacy different from
both the former; in some things proper to its self is examined. Though some
Episcopacy be grounded upon a divine general Precept; yet it is not the primary
subject of the power of the Keys; neither is Episcopal Government proved to be
necessary by any special Evangelical Precept of universal, and perpetual
Obligation.

CHAP. XII. Whether Presbytery be the primary Subject of the power of the Keys.
The abolition of Episcopacy and Surrogation of Presbytery in several reformed
Churches. The nature, institution and distinction of Ecclesiastical Presbyters.
The places of Scripture, whereon the Divine Right of Law, or Rulong Elders is
grounded, examined. The Reasons why Presbyters cannot be the primary Subject of
this Power. The Arguments of the Authors of Jus Divinum, Ecclesiastici
Regiminis insufficient to prove it. The English Presbytery, as intended and
modelled by the Parliament, with the Advice of the Assembly of Divines inquired
into; the perfections and imperfections of the same, as modelled by the
Parliament without the King. Certain reasons which may be imagined, why the
Parliament would not trust the Ministers alone with this power.

CHAP. XIII. Whether the power of the Keys be primarily in the People.
The Opinion of Morellius and the Brownists, of Blondel, of Parker, and his
mistake in Politics, applied to the Church to make it a mixed Government. The
judgment of the Author concerning the Power of the Keys to be primarily under
Christ in the whole Church, exercised by the best and fittest for that work.
The explication of his meaning concerning the Power, the Subject of the power,
and the manner how this power is disposed in this Subject. The Confirmation of
the Proposition; that the power of the Keys is in the whole Church, both by the
institution and exercise of this power. Where is premised a confutation of Mr.
Parker's Opinion, grounded upon two several places, as he understands them. The
principal places of Scripture concerning Church Government in foro exteriori
explicated, to find out where this power is by institution, for Legislation,
Jurisdiction, and making of Officers.

CHAP. XIV. Concerning the extent of a particular Church.
The several extensions of the Church in excess, according to the opinions of
such as subject all Churches particular to that one Church of Rome: of such as
subject all to a general Council. Whether Mr. Hudson is justly charged by Mr.
Hooker and Mr. Ellis, and diverse others, as guilty of Popery, in asserting the
Unity of the universal Church. The Congregational extent: what Congregations
are? How they are gathered? Whether the primary subject of an Independent
power. The Arguments of Mr. Parker and the Dissenting Brethren from Scripture
and Politics, answered. A National extent examined. What means to be used for
to compose our differences, and to settle peace amongst us.

CHAP. XV. Of Subjection Civil.
What Subjection in general is, the degrees of it. What a subject in a Civil
State is: the definition explained. What the duties of Subjects be. What
offenses are contrary to this subjection; what Rebellion and Treason: the
several degrees of Treason. What Usurpation is; whether any subjection be due
to usurped Powers. When a power is dissolved. How far the Oaths of Supremacy
and Allegiance bound the English subject. Whether the Civil War did dissolve
the Government. Whether the late Warlike Resistance made against the King's
party and his Commissions was Rebellion, or no? Something of the Question.
Whether upon any cause it be lawful for the Subjects to resist, or take up Arms
against their lawful Sovereign? as it is handled by Arnisaeus. Whether after the
War said to be between King and Parliament was commenced, there was any
ordinary Legal power which could induce an Obligation to subjection? Whether
the Act of alteration, or any other Form since proposed, could introduce an
Obligation. Whether it be lawful to submit unto an extraordinary power, when no
Legal power according to the Fundamental Constitution can be had. The
distinction, division, and education of Subjects.

CHAP XVI. Of Subjection Ecclesiastical.
What Ecclesiastical Subjection is. The distinction of Ecclesiastical Subjects.
The qualification of a Churchmember. Something of separation from a Church.
The alterations, divisions made, and the Errors, Blasphemies professed in the
Church of England in these late times. The manner of admission of
Church Members. The ancient and also the modern division of Ecclesiastical
Subjects, and their subordination. The Hierarchical Order. The Education of
Church Members.

LIB. I.
CHAP. I. Of Government in General, and the Original thereof.
wisdom, decreed them by his will, and produced them by his Power, and to this
Day works all things according to the counsel of his will, Ephesians. 1.11. In
this respect he is worthy to receive Glory, and Honor, and Power, because he
has created all things, and for his pleasure they are, and were created, Rev.
4.11. By Creation he began, by Conservation he continued to be actually the
Proprietary of all things: for he made them of nothing, and gave them being and
existence, so that they wholly always depend upon him, and are absolutely his.
Therefore he has power to dispose of them as he pleases, and to order them to
those ends he created them. This ordination of them, which began immediately
upon Creation, continues and shall continue to the end, and is either General
of all things, or Special, of some special, more noble and more excellent
Creatures: Such are Men and Angels, endued with understanding and Free Will,
and capable of Laws, rewards and punshments, both Temporal and Eternal. The
ordination of these is more properly and strictly called Government, which is a
part of divine Providence: The Government of Angels no doubt is excellent and
wonderful, though we know little of it, because not revealed.

Mercy; this man we find in a twofold capacity; the first is temporal,
confined to this mortal life, the second is spiritual, and in both he is
subject to his Maker and Eternal King, who does not always exercise his Power
himself immediately, either in the constitution or administration of these
earthly States, but as he uses the ministry of Angels, so he makes men his
Deputies and Vicegerents, these are called Higher Powers ordained of God, who
are trusted with, and bear the Sword to protect the good, and punish the bad,
according to certain Laws and Rules of Wisdom and Justice. This power may reach
the Persons and the goods of mortal man, but not the Soul and Conscience, which
are exempted and reserved to the Tribunal of God, who cannot only kill the
Body, but cast both Body and Soul into Hell, and reward Men with Spiritual and
Eternal Rewards, which the Powers of the World cannot do. Of this Government by
the temporal Sword something shall be said in the following discourse, but with
some reference to that which is Spiritual, that the generals wherein they do
agree, the particulars wherein they differ, the subordination of the one unto
the other may be the better known. All men should be of this spiritual Society,
but are not many excluded through their own fault and just Judgment of God?
This separation was made betimes, for we read of Cain cast out of God's
presence, and excommunicate; of the Sons of God, and the Sons of Men before the
Flood; of Jews and Gentiles, after that the World was peopled by the Sons of
Noah, and the Family of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob singled out of all other
Nations, and this before the Incarnation and the Glorification of the Messiah.
And since then we may observe that there are Christians opposed to Pagans and
Idolaters, which do not acknowledge one only God; to Mahometans, who
acknowledge the true God, who made Heaven and Earth, but not God Redeemer by
Jesus Christ; to Jews, who confess God the Creator, and Jesus Christ in
general, but as yet to come; to Apostates, who first professed the Truth, but
afterward denying it; are Excommunicated by a Sentence and Decree of Heaven:
Though these be many, and of several and different sorts, yet they are
reducible to two Societies or Cities, the one of God, the other of the Devil,
as the learned Austin did well observe in his excellent Treatise of the City of
God; this Spiritual Society was governed by God, as sole Monarch from the
beginning, without any Vicar or Deputy universal, till such time, as Christ
having finished the great work of expectation, was set at the right hand of
God, and made the Administrator general of the Church Christian, for now that
is the name of this Spiritual Society. This Church, and especially as
Christian, may be considered under several Notions, and distinguished into that
which now triumphs in Heaven, and is secure of everlasting Bliss, and that
which is militant aiming at a final Victory, and expecting a perpetual Peace.
2. This militant Church may be conceived to be either as mystical, consisting
only of real Saints, and such as by a lively Faith have Fellowship with Christ,
and are living members of his Body; or visible, of such as acknowledge and
profess their Faith in God, and in his Son Jesus Christ already exhibited; and
set at the Right hand of God; and because the sincerity of this Profession is
known certainly to God alone, therefore in this visible Society we find Judas
amongst the Apostles; Simon Magus amongst Christians; Pharisees and Saduces,
though a generation of Vipers, amongst the Disciples of John Baptist, yet these
are but Chaff, upon the Floor mingled with the Wheat, and by the Fan in
Christ's hand to be separated, and burned with unquenchable fire.

who never appointed any one Vicar Universal, or supreme Independent Judicatory
visible on Earth, with plenitude of Power over all Christians of all Nations.
The Word, Sacraments, Ministry and the outward means of Conversion belonging to
this Church, as considered under this notion; and every particular person
therein is first admitted into this Society, and made a Member thereof before
he can be a Member of any particular Church; Though one baptized in a
particular Church under a form of externel Government may be solemnly received
both as a member of the universal, and also that particular Body at one and the
same time; yet in order of nature he must be conceived as a member of the
universal, before a Member of that particular; For we are first Christians, and
subject to Christ, before we can be subject to the Power of any particular
Church. For we are baptized into one Body Universal, and in the Name of God the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, not into the Church of Rome, Corinth, Ephesus,
Jerusalem, or into the Name of any of the Governors or Officers of these
Churches: particular visible Churches are parts of the universal, and are first
so many several Communities denominated usually from some place, and after that
by association and consent receive a form of Government visible and external.
This kind of spiritual visible policy, Scope of the Work.
and the Government thereof is the principal subject of the ensuing discourse,
wherein I aim at Peace and Truth, desiring not to kindle, but to quench, or at
least abate the flames of dissension, which so long and so violently have raged
amongst us.

itching ears, and every new and strange opinion does affect and much take with
them: Few are well grounded in the principles of Christian saving truth, Means
to prevent Errors.
so as to have a distinct, methodical knowledge of them, with an upright humble
heart disposed to practice what they know; for a distinct knowledge of
Fundamentals, with a sincere desire and intention to practice and live
accordingly, are excellent means to avoid Errors, for such God will guide in
his truth; some aim at an higher perfection than this life can reach, and
boasting of their high seize insolently censure others, or look upon them
with scorn and contempt, as far below them. Some design to make Men Scepticks
in all matters of Religion, that then their minds being like Matter ready to
receive any form, they may more easily imprint upon them what they please; yet
in the issue many of them prove Atheists and enemies to all Religion. The grand
Politicians and chief Agents, who do least appear, animate the Design, take all
advantages, watch all opportunities, single out the fittest persons, and make
men even of contrary Judgments, and of a temper quite different from
themselves, instrumental and efficient to their own Ruin; yet I hope that God
in the end will not only discover, but disappoint them. All these bandy
together, and do conspire to destroy the Protestant English interest, and it is
a sad thing, that Orthodox Christians take little notice of these things, but
fearfully wrangle about matters of less moment, to the great prejudice of the
necessaries and substantials of Religion.

All this is come upon us for our neglect and abuse of a long continued Peace,
and the light of the Gospel shining so gloriously amongst us. We are guilty,
but God is just, and also merciful and wonderfully wise. For he is trying of us
to purge away the Tin and dross; and he expects that we should search more
accurately, pray more fervently, and more humbly depend upon him, whose wisdom
is such as that he can and will bring light out of darkness; good out of evil;
and a far more excellent Order out of our confusions. The prayers of the
upright for this end are made and heard in heaven already, and what we desire
in due time shall be effected: For he will comfort Sion, he will comfort all
her waste places, and he will make her Wilderness like Eden, and her Desert
like the Garden of the Lord. This indeed is a work to which man contributes
little, hinders much, retards long, that Gods hand and Wisdom may the more
appear, and that he may have the glory. In the mean time Christ takes care of
the universal Church, and the parts thereof, converting some, confirming
others, and directing all true believers to eternal Glory; and though a storm
be raised, and the same very terrible, yet it is nothing, but we may be
confident, when we consider the skill and miraculous power of our Heavenly
Pilot.

these endued with far more excellent gifts I would give occasion, and also
make a motion to exercise their improved parts and learning in this Subject,
and do this poor distracted Church of ours, a part of the universal, some far
more glorious service. God may make me, though very unworthy, an instrument of
his Wisdom to inform the ignorant, and remove their Errors, and correct their
mistakes. It may also through God's Blessing contribute something unto Peace,
by uniting well affected minds: I am enemy to no man, yet professedly bent
against errors; and that not only in others, but also in my self, if once I
know them. I am not pre-engaged to any Party, but a servant unto truth, and
devoted unto Peace. I wish I may not be prejudicate, or partial, or precipitate
as many do, who contend to maintain a Party or a Faction, but do not care to
search out the truth; these do not close up, but open the breaches amongst us,
and make them wider, and leave others unsatisfied. Our differences be so many,
and so great, that we seem to be incapable of any Peace; yet God can do
wonders, and we may trust in him, who in his time will give us Peace, if not on
Earth; yet certainly in Heaven, the place of our Eternal Rest.

CHAP. II. Of Government in general, and of a Community Civil.
Church Government presupposes the Rules of Government in general, Sect. 1.
The reason of differences in Church Affairs.
therefore he that will know the latter, must understand the former: For he
that is ignorant of Government, must needs be ignorant of Church Government;
and this is the very case of many in our days, and this is one cause of many
differences amongst us at this time; to give some light in this particular, I
will say something of Government in General, the Government of God, whereby he
more immediately orders man to his final and immortal estate; I have according
to my poor ability declared in my Theopolitica, or Divine Politics, therefore
I will confine my discourse to the Government of man by man, or rather the
Government of God by men set over men. For God communicates some measure of his
Power to mortal men; and such as are entrusted with it, become his Vicegerents
and bear his name, according to that of the Psalmist, I have said ye are Gods,
Psalm. 82.6. My design in this Treatise is not to deliver an exact Systeme of
Politics, yet I will make use of those rules I find in political writers of
better rank, but with a reservation of a liberty to my self to vary from them,
as I shall see just cause. To pass by the distinction of Government Monastical
and Oeconomical, I will pitch upon that which is Political. The subject whereof
is a Community and Society larger than that of a Family, and may be sufficient
to receive the form of a Commonwealth.

Politica) which some call the rule of Government of a Polity is. 2. What a
Polity or Commonwealth. 3. What the parts of ( Politica) be. Politica, or
Politics is the act of well ordering a Commonwealth.

A Commonwealth is the order of Superiority and Subjection in a Community for
the Public Good.

Of Politics there be two parts, What a Commonwealth in general is.
the constitution administation
of a Commonwealth.

These Rules are the foundation of the following Discourse, Foundation of the
Work.
and inform us that (Politica) is an act, that is a rule of Divine Wisdom to
direct some operations of the Creature: for so I understand it here. 2. That
the Object of this rule is a Commonwealth. 3. That the proper act is to direct
how to order a Commonwealth aright, so that it may attain its proper end. 4.
That the subject matter of a Commonwealth is a Community or common and public
Society of Men. 5. That the Form is an order of Superiority and Subjection
established in this Community. 6. That the end of this order is the common good
or benefit of the whole and every part. 7. That seeing a Commonwealth must
first be made by establishing the order of Superiority and Subjection, and
being once made, must act according to the order determined; therefore Politica
must have two parts, the first must be the Rule of the Constitution, the second
the Rule of Administration. For the more orderly proceeding in this particular,
I will begin with the Constitution, which will take up the first Book of this
Treatise; then I will proceed to the Administration, the Subject of the Second
Book.

Constitution.
And we may be allowed to say, that a Community is the matter of a
Commonwealth; and a Commonwealth, as some understand it, the form of a
Community. These two, 1. a Community, 2. a Commonwealth, are chiefly to be
handled in this first Part.

A Community may be considered in General. Special.


In General I will examine the name. nature.


Community in general.
The name in Hebrew is (...) in Greek (...) and that may come of (...), because
the matter of a Community is a multitude, in Latin, Civitas, Populus, and here
observe, that (...), Populus, Publicus, seem to have some affinity; yet we must
distinguish between Civitas and Vrbs. For the former signifies the People, the
latter the Place, Buildings, Habitations of the People. The Romans promised the
Carthaginians not to destroy Civitatem Carthaginis, to make good their word,
they brought out the People, which was Civitas, and then ruined Vrbem, the
Place, Buildings, Walls, Houses; though Plebs and Populus, as Civitas and
Respublica, are sometimes taken for the same, yet more properly Plebs signifies
the meaner and inferior part of the People, and Populus the whole Body, both
the highest and the lowest. Civitas also differs from Respublica, as the Matter
from the Form, the Body from the Soul in many Writers of Politics. The Hebrew
word (...) is turned by the Septuagint most frequently, (...), Populus, the
People; yet sometimes (...), a Nation, sometimes (...), a confused multitude,
sometimes (...), a Congregation, sometimes (...), a multitude, sometimes (...),
a Generation; all these signify a multitude of Persons, some ways united and
combined together, which agrees always unto a Community. Forsterus tells us
that (...) is a multitude of People or Society, which being joined together,
have the same Name, Language, Laws, Religion, Polity. Though this is true
sometimes, yet it is not always so; and to have the same Polity, is not only
to be a Community, but a Commonwealth. It Is true, that Israel, not long after
their coming out of Egypt, had the same Name, Language, Laws, Religion,
Polity, both Civil and Ecclesiastical.

De C. D. lib. 19. Cap. 21. Cap. 22.
and we may learn it out of Austine, as he did from the Roman Orator,
according to both these, Respublica est res Populi. Populus est coetus
multitudinis juris consensu and utilitatis communione sociatus, in another
place, Populus est coetus multitudinis rationalis, rerum quas diligit, concordi
communione sociatus. Arnisaeus out of Aristotle describes it to be a perfect
Society of Vicinities, having all things necessary to an happy Life; yet
because these definitions are not perfect, I will first enquire further into
the nature of a Community, as it is the subject of a Commonwealth. 2. Discover
the Original of Communities, 3. Declare who are Members of a Community. A
Community is a Society of Persons immediately capable of a Commonwealth; or it
is a Society fit to receive a Form of Public Government: This is the general
nature of a Community, which may be considered under a Civil or Ecclesiastical
notion.

What Community Civil is.
and capable of a Commonwealth Civil. And here I will take ocasion more
distinctly to explain what is a Community in general. 2. What this Community
Civil is. In a Community there are Men; for the matter of it is rational, not
irrational Creatures. 2. There must be a multitude of them. 3. This must be a
multitude of Families and Vicinities to distinguish it from a College, an
University, an Army, and other occasioned Multitudes. 4. These must Associate
and be United together; for they make up this body, not as severally
considered, but as joined together in one; for the Genus is a Society. This
Society presupposes Union, and is a Communion, whereby they Communicate in
something common to the whole; as in an Organical Body, there are many Members.
2. These are united to make one whole body of many parts. 3. From this Union
arises a Communion and Participation in some things which agree and belong
unto the whole body as a body. This Union does, not arise merely from some
accident or cohabitation, or natural instinct, but from a rational and just
consent, ex juris Consensu, says Cicero; for till they be thus united, they
cannot be immedately capable of, or in proxima potentia to a Commonwealth,
therefore, this union must be rational, according to that of Austine, Populus
est coetus multitudinis rationalis. 2. It must be free and voluntary, for it is
by consent. 3. Because Thieves, Pirates, Conspirators, Murderers, Seditious
Persons, yea Devils may be united by a rational consent, and yet cannot make a
Commonwealth, neither can be any fit subject thereof: it must be just, for so
the learned Father understands the words of the great Orator, ex juris
consensus, though all multitudes of men by the light of Nature, or by the Laws
of God revealed, if they enjoy divine Revelations, are bound to associate and
unite so far as God shall direct and enable them, yet they cannot associate
unjustly. For they are bound to associate and unite so far as God shall direct
and enable them, yet they cannot associate unjustly. For they are bound to
observe certain Rules of eternal Justice, so that both the things wherein they
unite, and the manner of uniting must be just; and the more just the
association, the more excellent and perfect the Commonwealth and Ordination
may be. From this union arises a communion or common union; or as they are one
common union; for as they are one common body, so they have some things, Acts,
Rights, which are common; wherein all jointly have a share or part: for a
Community is one person morally considered, and whatsoever is not private is
public and common. These common things may be few or many: and as the Persons
united have one common Reason, Will, and Power, so they all communicate in
these things, and do certain common Acts as a Society, which are acts not of a
part but of the whole. Yet these things, Acts, Rights, Privileges, Interests,
differ from those which are common either unto other Creatures, or Mankind in
General. This Society was ordained of God for the benefit of mankind, and tends
much unto their good and happiness, temporal at least. For God saw at the first
Creation, that it was not good for man to be alone, therefore he created Woman,
who together with Man, was the root and Original of all Humane Societies; Genesis
2.18. Two says the Preacher are better than one, and woe be to him that is
alone, Eccles. 4.9, 10. where his principal intention is to show the excellency
and benefit of Society, yet he presupposes Love, Humanity, and a nearer
affection to those of one and the same Society, than to all mankind in general;
and in this Civil Society there must be Families to distinguish it from single
Persons, and Vicinities to difference it from Families, and 2. An association
both rational and just, so 3. There must be in them thus associated an
immediate capacity and fitness, to receive a Commonwealth or form of
Government. For though this association conduces much unto their safety, help,
comfort, and furnishes them with many things not only necessary, but
convenient, which without association they could not so easily enjoy, yet
without a form of Government, these advantages could not be so firm and
lasting. This fitness, capacity, and immediate disposition to a form of civil
Government does not arise so much from the multitude of the persons, or extent
and goodness of the place of their habitation, as from their good affections
one toward another, and the number of just, wise and eminent persons amongst
them, who are fit, not only to be the matter of a state, but to model it, and
order it once constituted; experience hereof sufficient we have at this day in
this Nation; for so many and great are our differences both in judgment and
affections, and our several interests so contrary, that the same Language,
Laws, Religion, common Country cannot firmly unite us together; but we are
ready every moment to fly asunder and break in pieces, if we were not kept
together rather by the sword of an Army, than by any civil Power and Policy, or
good affection; this is a sad condition, and a just judgment upon us for our
sins.

to inform the Reader, that he might the better understand the nature of a
Community, before I said any thing of the original thereof, which is the next
in order. The original is either natural or accidental. Original of community.
The natural source is that which has some principles in the Creation of man,
who though fallen retains something of Creation, whereby he continues not only
a reasonable creature, but also sociable. For man by nature, as the Philosopher
observed is, (...) a sociable creature, because he has not only reason, but
speech, without both which there can be no human Society, as humane amongst us.
This natural propension to Society presupposes mankind actually existing and
multiplied; therefore it pleased God at the first to make man and Woman the
foundation of a Family, and Families of Vicinities; this is the reason why the
Authors of Politics, following the Philosopher, speak so much of oeconomical
relations, as the foundation of a Community. The first Relation is of Man and
Wife, the second of Parents and Children, the third of Masters and Servants;
God at the beginning did give men not only reason and language, but a power of
Generation, with a blessing, so that one man and one woman joined in the sacred
bond of Matrimony became husband and wife first, and then Parents of children
and of Childrens children, till they multiply to a numerous Posterity. Thus God
blessed our first Parents before, and Noah's Family after the Flood, that they
replenished and peopled the Earth, and became not one, but many Communities.
And it was a strange providence and wonder, to divide the multiplied Posterity
of Noah, by diving the Language, into several companies, and disperse them into
several parts of the Earth; and hence the many Societies of the World, and
their different Communities God Promised Abraham to make him a Father of many
Nations; that is, not only of many civil, but spiritual Societies, Genesis 17.5.
and he said to Rebekah, two Nations are in thy womb, Genesis 25.23. Thus Jacob's
Family multiplied in Egypt to a great Community; so that the original of
Societies civil are from God, the cause of all things, 1. As making men, and
enduing them with reason and speech. 2. As multiplying and blessing them. 3. As
dividing them into several parts and portions of the Earth, where they may
cohabit and have communion one with another. 4. Besides all these, he so
creates them, and orders them in the very first molding of them, when they are
multiplied, that they have need one of another, and one may be beneficial and
helpful unto another, so that their subsistence and their well-being depends
upon Society, for as he has made the Body to consist of many members, so that
they have their several offices and ministrations, all useful one for another,
so that the body cannot be a body without many members, nor subsist without
some necessary parts, nor well continue or be perfect and entire without all
and every one, so in like manner has he composed these great Bodies and
Communities; some by his providence are Rich, some are poor, some wise, some
ignorant, some strong, some weak, some bold, some timorous, some fit for
learning and more noble place, some of inferior quality; some fit for
husbandry, some for trade; and some fit for one trade, some fit for another:
Though we, who have our houses, Stocks, Trades, Fairs, Markets, Towns, Cities,
Villages, do not understand this so well; yet they, who make new discoveries,
and begin new Plantations, are very sensible of the necessity and benefit of
Society civil. This was made evident by that policy of the Philistines, who by
taking away from Israel their Smiths, and depriving them but of one trade,
disarmed the great body of that Nation; for we read there was no Smith found in
all the Land of Israel, so that it came to pass in the day of battle, that
there was neither Sword nor Spear found in the hand of any of the people that
were with Saul and Jonathan; and when God intended to ruin not only the State,
but the Community of Judah; he threatens to take away not only the mighty man,
the man of War, the Judge, the Prophet, and the Prudent, and the Ancient, the
Captain of Fifty, and the honorable man, and the Counselor, but the cunning
Artificer, and the eloquent Orator, Esa. 3.2, 3. Though God alone can be fully
happy by himself alone, without Man or Angel, or any company, yet man cannot.
Man solitary is very imperfect, and like a Body which wants some necessary
parts: God knows this full well, therefore he so orders Multitudes of
Vicinities, that he inclines them by their very constitution to Society; for by
it they are not only stronger and more able to defend themselves, and provide
for their safety, but also they are better supplied with necessaries, and
commodities; what one has not, another has; what one cannot do, another can;
what few are not able to effect, many may, and all much more. But that whereby
God is the immediate cause of Society is voluntary consent, to which he
inclines their hearts, when he has once multiplied them and cast them
together. This consent whether tacit or express is grounded upon Love and good
Affection, with an intention to do good and just things one for another,
according to the work of the eternal Law written in their hearts. The
accidental original is when by divine Providence many from several Countries
are cast together in one Place or part of the Earth, and that upon several
occasions, or for several causes; these in time grow familiar and acquainted
one with another, and for mutual Help, Safety, Benefit, cement into one Body,
and according to the dictate of natural Reason, join in one common Interest;
this, some say, was the original of the State of Venice at the first. Thus the
several distinct Communities upon the division of Languages at Babel had their
beginning. Thus one part of a Community seeking some new place for their
habitation, becomes a distinct Community of themselves.

Members of a Community.
To say nothing of Municipal Societies, Colonies, Plantations, Provinces,
Titular Members, who are only Cives honorarii, this is a general Rule, that
after a form of Government once introduced, whosoever are Subjects, are Cives,
Members of that Community, and continue such, though the form of Government be
altered or dissolved: For there are degrees of them; for some are virtualiter
and diminute, some formaliter and plene, some eminenter Cives, Members of a
Community, that is, they are either imperfectly or perfectly such. The lowest
rank is of such as are not sui juris sed sub potestate aliena, free and in
their own Power. To this form are reduced Women, Children, Servants, Strangers,
whether sojourning, or inhabiting out of their own Commonwealth; some kind of
Tenants or Vassals do so much depend upon others; that they are not competent
Members; all these are virtually included in others upon whom they depend.
Formally and fully Members are all such, as being Males of full Age, Free,
Independent, have the use of Reason, and some competent Estate; such
Freeholders seem to be with us.

These become such by Birth, Election, Manumission.


Or they are Natural, Naturalized.


Being once such, they have Jus suffragii in publicis, as our Freeholders have
a Vote in choosing their Knights for the Parliament, and they virtually give
their suffrage in that Assembly by their Representatives. Eminenter Cives are
such, who by reason of their Descent, Estates, Parts, Noble Acts, are not once
Members, but somewhat more, as being fit for Honor, Offices and Places of
Power, if once a Commonwealth be constructed.

of Nature, which a Community does not take away; and further, there is no
dominium eminens, as in a Commonwealth there must necessarily be. Liberty of
Persons there is, because every complete Member is sui juris, and no ways bound
by the Rules of a Civil supreme Power; and this is more than can be in a State
once constituted, wherein this Liberty is bounded by Allegiance and Laws: there
is Equality, for there is no Superior or Inferior in respect of Government,
because there is no Government, no Sovereign, no Subject, all are fellows, Et
socii quatenus socii sunt aequales; inequality of Superior and Inferior Civil
arises from a form of Government, which is sometimes Despotical, that it is
destructive both of Liberty and Propriety. This inequality is consistent with
an imparity of Birth, Parts, Estate; for Age: for this is from Nature or
Providence; these Civil Societies may be less or greater both in respect of the
number of Persons, and extent of Place: Neither can the certain number of
Persons, nor the particular bounds of Place be well determined. If it be be too
large, it cannot so well unite, if too little, it is insufficient to protect or
provide for it self, and so falls under the protection of others.

upon a dissolution of a former model, or upon a failure of Succession in a
time does virtually contain a Supreme Power, and has a Liberty and Right to
determine upon what Form they please, so that it be good; though it is true,
that this Power may be taken from them by a Potent Invader, or some other way;
and here it is to be noted, that when a Form of Government is altered or
dissolved, any Community may remain, nay, under a Government it retains the
nature of a Community, as the matter and subject of the Commonwealth, wherein
every Subject must be considered, first, as Civis, a Member of the Community,
before he can be conceived as subditus, a Member of the Commonwealth. This
stricter Association of a Multitude, to make a particular Community, does no
way hinder their Society or Communion with other Communities, or with all
Mankind upon the Earth so far as is possible, in things which may add unto
their Happiness.

CHAP. III. Of an Ecclesiastical Community.
Ecclesiast. Community.
HItherto of a Community in general, and of a Community Civil, that which we
call Ecclesiastical follows: this in opposition to that which we call Temporal
and Civil is Spiritual, and is such in respect of Religion; for as there are
matters of this life, which concern us as mortals with relation one unto
another, so there are matters of God, spiritual, divine, and of a far higher
allay; there is no Nation or People, though rude and barbarous, but profess
some Religion, by the observation whereof they acknowledge their dependence
upon a superior Power and Providence far above that of mortal man; yet many,
contrary to the very light of Nature, either worshipped that which was not
truly God, or with the true God a false Deity; or the true God alone, without
any certain rule and direction from Heaven, after the invention of men, or the
suggestion of the Devil, of these there have been many Communities, which I
will no further mention; for these were never called Churches, or the people of
the living God; for the true Church is a Community of such as worship the true
and living God, according to certain rules of Truth revealed from Heaven, and
now contained in the holy Scriptures. And these direct us to worship God, not
only as Creator, but as Redeemer by Christ: Such a kind of Society there has
been ever since the Fall of Adam, and the first promise of Christ; and all
these Societies of all places and all times might be called Christians, because
all the members thereof professed Faith in Christ, either as to come, or
already come; yet because these Believers and Worshippers of God the Redeemer
began to be called Christians after Christ's Exaltation at the right hand of
God in the Apostles times; I intend principally to speak of this Community
Christian in the times of the New Testament; therefore to pass by the Churches
before the Flood, and after till the time of Christ's exaltation, I will
confine my self unto the Communities Christian in the latter and stricter sense.

sense. I do not say it is a Society of Families, as formerly was expressed in
the Definition of a Civil Community. For though the Churches of Jerusalem,
Antioch, Rome, Corinth, Ephesus, and other places, might in their several
divisions and precincts contain some whole Families, and perhaps Vicinities
Christian; or because their habitation was in the same City or place, they
might be called Vicinities, in which sense all particular Churches should be
Vicinities: yet our Savior tells us, that upon the preaching of the Gospel,
there should follow such a division in Religion, even in the same Family: That
there should be five in one house divided, three against two, and two against
three, Luke 12.52. So that there might be several Religions professed and
exercised in one Family, and the persons of several Societies. Thus it is with
us since our unhappy divisions: for the Husband sometimes is of one Church, the
Wise of a second, the Children of a third or fourth. Yet sometimes a whole
Family might come in together: as the Nobleman or Ruler of Capernaum believed
and his whole house, John 4.53. Lydia and her whole Household were baptized at
one time. The Jailer and his whole House believed, and was baptized the same
night, Acts 16.33, 34. As in Families, so much more in Vicinities, not only
several, but also contrary Religions have been practiced. So that the first
thing to be considered in the Definition, is persons as Christians. And here I
might take occasion to enquire, Whether a Parish may be a Congregation
Christian, and a multitude of Parishes in the same Vicinity may be a Community
Spiritual, Mr. Hooker gives occasion of this enquiry. A Parish may be
considered under a Civil or Ecclesiastical Notion: Under a Civil, as first made
by a Power Civil, and also a civil Society as a part of an allotment for civil
ends, and under civil Officers. In an Ecclesiastical action it is a Society and
Body Politic Spiritual, appointed for Worship and Discipline. In which respect
it consists as a Vicinity of such persons as within the precincts thereof
profess the same Religion, and join in the same worship, have one and the same
Pastor or Pastors, and usually frequent the same religious Assemblies. In
this respect, if either Jews, or Heathens, or Mahometans, or Heretics, or
Pagans died within the same Precinct, they are not of the same Society, yet are
bound to pay their Tithes for the maintenance of God's worship in that place.
And these Tithes, as determined by the civil Magistrate, to be paid in that
place, and to be recovered by civil Laws, may be called a Lay-fee: but as they
are due to Christ for to maintain the Gospel and divine Worship, they come
under another notion. Further, though the Pastor of such a Parish may, as
opportunity is offered and occasion requires, do Christ service in other
places, yet he is in a special manner bound to that place, and not only to
edify the converted, but to convert the unconverted in that place.

Judas in the College of Apostles, a Simon Magus, a Demas amongst Christians:
for there has been and will be tares amongst the wheat, and chaff on Christ's
floor, which none can separate but he that has his Fan in his Hand. And let no
man doubt, but that such as Christ and his Apostles admitted and retained in
the visible Church till they were openly discovered, that man might judge of
them, such we must admit and retain, and may do it.



2. An union of this multitude. 3. A communion. Yet as the multitude must be
Christian, so the union and communion must be even in holy and spiritual
things. 1. They they must be a multitude, yet not a little number or a few, as
will appear afterward. The power and right of a College may be preserved in
one, and exercised in three; and a small number may make a Family-society, yet
here in this particular it is not so. As there must be a multitude: so, 2. They
must be united in a sacred bond of Christian Religion. For, as in a natural, so
in a spiritual political body, there must be not only many members, but they
must be all united in one to make up the body. This union as the civil, is not
merely from Vicinity of place, but from voluntary and free consent directed,
not only by reason, but the rules of God's Word; for that must be united not
merely as men, but as Christians. This consent may be tacit or express, and
must make them one, not only when they make and assemble in one place, but when
they are parted asunder. For by reason of this bound, a Fraternity spiritual
continues amongst them. And the more solemn, serious, regular, deliberate and
agreeable to the Gospel it shall be, the more effectual, comfortable, and
lasting it will prove. This union is not made either by Baptism or profession,
but it presupposes both. And though it may be made by a free and voluntary
consent, yet all Vicinities of Christians, who by Divine Providence have an
opportunity to associate, are by a Divine Precept bound to unite and consent to
such an Union. And this Union is so firm, not because of Man's Consent, but
God's Precept and Institution, to which it shall be conformable. From this a
multitude of Christians become morally one Person spiritual: and as such, may
act and do many things. And every particular Member of this Body is bound to
seek the good of the whole and every part, and the good of this particular
Society, more than of any other, though he must endeavor the good of all, so
far as God shall enable him. Upon this Union therefore follows a Communion. For
as they all partake in all things and privileges, and rights, which are common
to all, so they must communicate their Gifts, Cares, Labors, for the promoting
of the general good of all, and particular good of every one. As by this Union
they become one Person, so they receive a Power and Ability to act as one
Person for the special good of themselves. Yet it does not give them power to
separate either from the Universal Church, or from other Communities in any
thing God has made Common, either to the Universal Church, or other particular
Communities.

By this time you understand that a Community Christian is a society of
Christians, yet this is not all: it must be a Society of Christians fitted for
and immediately capable of an external form of Government Spiritual, and the
same Independent. For in a Commonwealth of necessity there must be a Supreme
and Independent Power, otherwise it has not the Essence and Being of a
Commonwealth. Therefore in Politics both Civil and Ecclesiastical, we speak
of a Community as it is actually the Subject of a form of Government, or fitted
immediately to be such, otherwise we shall be haeterogeneous, or at least
exorbitant.

Take notice therefore that this Community is not a Civil Society, nor the
Society of all Christians living at the same time on the Earth, which make up
the Body of the Church Universal or Visible, as subject to Christ, nor of a
Family, or Congregational, or any petty Christian Society, but of such a
Society Christian as is immediately capable of an Independent Discipline.

2. Though some Acts of Discipline may by a Paternal Spiritual Power be
performed, and so likewise in a Congregation some degrees of Power
Ecclesiastical may reside and be exercised, yet this is not sufficient to make
them such a Society as we speak of.

3. In this Community and Independent Power of Discipline is virtually
contained.

4. This cannot be except it consist of such Members as are fit both to model a
Commonwealth, and manage a supreme Power of the Keys.

5. This Community, before a form of Government be introduced, is but like a
homogeneal or similar Body, and then becomes Organical, when it is the actual
subject of a Commonwealth, and a formal visible Polity. And besides the
consent required to the constitution of a Community, there must be another
consent to make it a Polity: and the latter is distinct and really different
from the former. For a multitude of Christians as such, are not the immediate
matter of a Spiritual Visible State, but a Community, and a sufficient
Community, as such, is the subject of this Political Form.

6. That Company of Christians which is not sufficiently furnished with Men of
Gifts and Parts, and yet presumes to set up an Independent Judicature, must
needs offend. For where God gives not sufficient Ability, he gives not
Authority. That every petty Congregation, which enjoys Word, Sacraments,
Ministry have an entire, Intensive, Independent, Judicative Power in it self,
and therefore may refuse to associate with others, is the opinion of some,
which can hardly be proved out of the Word of God.



1. The Apostles endued with the Holy Ghost from above, preached, That Jesus of
Nazareth was crucified at Jerusalem for our Sins, rose again, was made Lord and
King, and that Remission of Sins and Eternal Life was granted to all such as
should repent and believe in him. Such as heard the Doctrine, believed it,
professed their Faith, and promised to live accordingly, were baptized, and so
admitted as visible Subjects of Christ's Kingdom. So they were made Christians,
and remote materials of this Community.

2. When they were once multiplied so as to make several Congregations for
Worship, and there were found fit Men to be Pastors, Pastors were ordained
and set over the Flocks: and these became Societies for Christian Worship.

3. When there was a competent number of such in a Vicinity as were able to
manage a Supreme Independent Power, they associated and combined together in
one Body for to introduce a form of external Government. If any after, they
became a Community or a Polity, were converted within their precincts, and did
manifest his conversion so far as man might judge of it, he was Baptized, and
was admitted a Member of their Community. This was the manner of entering into
and being incorporated into this Body. And now if any Pagans, Jews, Mahometans,
by the Doctrine of the Gospel be reduced to the Christian Faith, then they must
enter, in this manner they must be admitted. This Association and Incorporation
is not from the Laws, Decrees, and mere consent of Men, but from the Power or
Commandment and Institution of God, who requires that such as are once made
Christians, should Associate, and that others in whose Power it is, should
admit them. These are like Branches ingrafted, not Natural, but are made
Members by Election. And whosoever is thus incorporated, he is first made a
Member of the Universal Church, and a Subject to God the Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, before he can be a Member of any particular Society. For he must of
necessity be first a Christian before he can be a Member of a Christian
Society; for the matter is before the form. If his Profession be sincere,
presently upon his conversion he is made a living member of Christ, and an heir
of Glory, far greater privileges, than to be a visible member of any visible
spiritual polity. And though there is a certain priority of Order, yet one and
the same person may be made a living member of Christ, a member of a Christian
Community, and of a visible spiritual polity at one and the same time.

A good ground of Childrens right to Baptism.
so there be natural branches of these Communities, as well as of the great and
Universal Society, for such there have been, and that by divine Ordination; and
never any yet could evidently prove out of Scripture, that this Law and
Ordinance, which made the Children part of the Parents, and one Person with
them in matter of Religion, was abrogated or reversed to this day. Therefore
Children born of Christian Parents, who were Members both of the universal and
particular Communities, and not disfranchised, are members of a Christian
Community by birth at least in Charity; and they must needs be presumptuous
Dictatours, who exclude them. It Is true, that Infants born of men as men, are
men; of such as are free, are free; of such as are noble, are noble. And so
such as are born of Mahometans, are Mahometans; and such as are born of Jews,
are Jews; such as are born of Heathens are by their birth Heathens, and aliens
to the Commonwealth of the Christian Israel, and strangers from the Covenants
of Promise, Ephesians. 2.12. And shall not such as are born of Christians be
Christians? That Covenant which God made with Abraham, though accidentally
different, is essentially the same with that of the Gospel, as appears, Romans 4.
and Gal. 3. yet in that Covenant, God promised to be a God to him and his seed
after him, and this part of it which includes the Children with their Parents,
must needs remain in force, if there be no clause of exception in the new
Testament. If there be, Where is it? As for the example and instance from the
Apostles baptizing only such as professed their Faith. 1. It does not follow
that only such persons were baptized, because that none but such are expressly
named. 2. When its written, that whole Houses were baptized, no wit of man can
prove that none of these were Infants. 3. Those expressly mentioned were adult,
and sui juris, such are not Children: and their Baptism was but Matter of Fact,
not of Law: shall the children be first seminally and virtually in their
Parents, then after extraction by Birth part of their Parents, and one person
with them both by the Laws of God and Men, even so far as they may be punished
for the sins of their Parents; and shall their Parents be bound for them, and
they bound in their parents in matter of Religion? And shall not Gods promise
extend so far as their Obligation? surely it must. This manner of Incorporation
by birth is from God, who, 1. by his Divine providence brings them forth into
the light of the World within the bosom of the Church, so that they are born of
Christian Parents, who are members of a Community Christian; and 2. From his
Institution. For though an Infant should be born of Christian Parents, Members
of a Christian Community, yet he could not be a Christian, and have any
privilege spiritual, except it had been God's will and pleasure to account and
judge him to be such. For its the Decree, the Promise, the Covenant of God that
makes him a Christian. For as born of his immediate Parents, or by them of
Adam, or of them as godly or ungodly, he cannot be a Member of the Church. And
to be so, is not to have actual Faith, or to be justified and sanctified as
believers at age, but to have a right unto the promise, which no Heathen or any
other born out of the Church can have. And as part of his Parents and included
in the Covenant by the will of God, he has this privilege. The Promise (says
Peter) is to you and your Children, and to all afar off, even to as many as the
Lord our God shall call, Acts 2.39. where observe, that the promise was not
only to them at age, but also to their Children. Again, You are the Children of
the Prophets, and of the Covenant, which God made with our fathers, saying unto
Abraham, In thy seed shall all the Nations of the earth be blessed, Acts 3.25.
Where note: 1. That the Covenant was concerning everlasting bliss by Christ the
seed of Abraham. 2. That this Covenant includes all Nations, not only Jews but
Gentiles. 3. That this is the Covenant of the Gospel for substance. 4. That the
present Jews were within this Covenant by birth, and that both for the
obligation to duty, and the right unto the promise. For they were the children
of the Prophets and of the Covenant, which neither the Heathens, nor their
children could be before they were called, and their children in them. From all
this it appears, how the Original of these Communities are from God; for He 1.
makes them Christians. 2. Multiplies them in the same Vicinity. 3. Inclines
their hearts to associate, and stirs up some eminent persons to motion and
endeavor the association. 4. By his Divine providence brings some into the
world in the bosom of the Church, and includes by his gracious Covenant Infants
with their Parents in this spiritual Society.

body, yet considered in it self, and in the qualities of the several members,
there is an imparity, and something organical in it. For they are so qualified,
and the gifts of God so variously disposed in them, that they are several ways
disposed for to contribute according to their several graces, something to the
benefit of the whole and one another. This the Apostle makes clear, 1 Cor. 12.
and 14. Chap. These distinctions and degrees are like those in the members of
civil Society. For, 1. Some are virtualiter and diminute cives, incomplete
members, as women, children, and many weak Christians.

2. Some are so gifted and qualified, as they are fit to act and give suffrage
in business which concerns the whole. These are formaliter cives, complete
members.

3. Some are endued with more than ordinary knowledge, wisdom, grace above the
rest, and most fit to introduce a form of Government, and act in the highest
businesses of Administration. These are eminenter cives, eminently members.
Such as being members of another Church, and yet sojourn or inhabit in a
Community distant from their own, before they are incorporate, though upon
Certificate and Letters communicatory, they may partake in sacris, yet they are
but diminute cives, members incomplete and for a time. For, as such, they can
have no vote or suffrage of any power in things public. They may indeed advise
and declare their mind, and their counsel may be liked and accepted.

etc. Heb. 13.17. For Ministers are Officers and Representatives of Christ, and
therefore must needs have power in foro interiori and conscientiae, as the
Schoolmen speak. Yet Ministers, as Ministers, have no power of the Keys in foro
exteriori: they are only eminent members of the Community, otherwise the
Government external of the several Congregations in one Community should be
purely Aristocratical in them, and Monarchical in a single Congregation.

2. They are equal as members of a Community in respect of Power and
Government, which is not yet introduced, or at least considered as not actually
brought in, they cannot command or judge one another: neither can the whole
sentence any single member. For that were to act as a Commonwealth, which as
yet is not.

3. The whole is in an immediate capacity to form a Government, as you heard
before. This may be done immediately by the eminent and complete members, or by
a delegation of a power of modelling the Government by a few of the principal,
and fit for such a work, and afterward approved and ratified by all. And
though the general Rules of Discipline are plainly delivered in the Scriptures;
yet few will understand them, or apply them right, and it is an hard thing to
abolish the corruptions of former Governments; so that many times a Discipline
is settled and perfected only by degrees and in a long time: What hinders
Reformation.
Not only the constitution, but a reformation of a Church meets with many
difficulties. One reason is, there is so little of Christianity in many, and
none in some, that yet profess their Faith in Christ, which either they do not
understand, or refuse to practice. This has given occasion to some to gather
Churches out of Churches, and to separate. How justly or wisely this has been
done, something may be said hereafter.

CHAP. IV. Of a Commonwealth in general, and Power Civil.
Community; wherein three things were principally to be examined: 1. What a
Community in general. 2. What a Community civil. 3. What a Community
Ecclesiastical is: and all this is done. Therefore to proceed, observe, that a
Community is like a matter without form in respect of something that it must
receive, yet a matter and a subject disposed and in proxima potentia to receive
a form to perfect it: A Community formed is a Commonwealth.
and this form is that we call a Commonwealth, a Polity, a State, wherein we
may observe four things. 1. That it is an order. 2. An order of superiority and
subjection: this is the general nature of it. 3. An order of superiority and
subjection in a Community. 4. Such an order tending to the peace and happiness
of a Community. 1. It Is (...) an Order, or as some understand the Philosopher
(an Ordination) which is a disposing of things in their proper place. For as
the learned Father observes, De C. D. Lib. 19. cap. 13.
Ordo est parium dispariumque rerum sui cuique loca tribuens dispositio. It Is
inter plura, which may be equal or unequal. For there may be an order of
Priority and Posteriority in time or place amongst equals. Therefore, 2. It Is
an order of Superiority and Subjection in respect of Power. Yet, 3. Because
there is a superiority and subjection in a Family, a College, a Corporation,
therefore it is an order of superiority and subjection in a Community, whether
civil or Ecclesiastical. 4. Because there may be such an order in a Community
of wicked men and Devils, if that might be called a Community, where the
Association is unjust, as properly it cannot; therefore it must be such an
order as tends and conduces directly to the peace and happiness of the
Community. This an unjust order cannot do. To understand this the better, you
must know that all Communities spiritual and temporal are grounded upon that
Commandment of God, Neighbor a notion of Society.
Love thy Neighbor as thy self: where that word Neighbor may signify indeed
a single person, yet it includes a notion of society: and the Hebrew word (...)
signifies Socius. This Neighbor therefore is either a single person, yet as a
Society, or collective as in a Family, Kindred, Congregation, Corporation,
Community. This Love is the true cause of all association, and is the special
duty of all parties associated. A Commonwealth is grounded upon a branch of
that great Love, the fifth Commandment, which presupposing superiority and
subjection, in respect of power, requires certain duties of the parties
superior and subject both in a greater and lesser society. And because these
duties cannot be performed in great Societies, except this Order be settled,
therefore by that Commandment all Communities are bound, so far as they are
able, to erect a form of Government. In which respect Politics are from God,
not only allowing and approving them, nor merely as enabling men, but
commanding them enabled to establish and preserve them established, for the
better manifestation of his glory and their own greater good temporal and
spiritual. From hence it is evident, that Politics both civil and
Ecclesiastical belong unto Theology, and are but a branch of the same.



Which are Imperans Subditus
the Sovereign Subject.
And because the Sovereign is Civil, Ecclesiastical


I will begin with the Civil, and so proceed to the Ecclesiastical. And seeing
that Imperans the Sovereign, is a concrete* and therefore signifies the Power,
Subject of this Power.


I will first speak of Power, then of the Subject of this Power.

The Power must be considered what it is in General, Special.


In respect of the Subject, I will declare the manner how it is acquired,
disposed.


This is the Method which I intend to observe, and wherewith I acquaint the
Reader. My observation of it will make the Discourse more clear and distinct.
The Readers knowledge of it will help both his understanding and his memory.

Pars imperans, the Sovereign civil, which is the first part of a
Commonwealth, is one invested with Majesty civil. Where observe, 1. That it is
a part of a Polity, and that is the general nature of it: and is an essential
or integral part, which together with the Subject gives essence to the State,
and constitutes it in being and existence. 2. Its the first part: for though as
superiority and subjection, and so Sovereign and Subjects are Relates, and in
that respect simultaneous; yet the Sovereign is not only the first in dignity,
but in some sort by origination, if not as a cause. For as paternity in some
respect is before filiation, so it is in this particular. For subjection does
rather follow upon Sovereignty, than the contrary. And therefore in molding a
State, they first determine upon a Sovereign, whereupon instantly and at the
same time follows without any thing intervening, subjection. 3. This party that
is Sovereign is invested with Majesty Civil. Where we have two things. 1.
Majesty an adjunct. 2. The subjection invested with it. And as Power is the
very essence of a Superior, so Majesty is of a Sovereign.

Majestas est maxima in civitate potestas; Majesty is the greatest power in a
Community. 1. Its potestas, Power. 2. Maxima in civitate, Potestas est Jus
Imperandi, Power is a right to govern. It Is Jus a Right, and in it self is
always just, and is from some propriety, and as the absolute propriety, so the
absolute power of all things is from God, and there is no power but derived
from him. It Is not Physical but Moral, and so nomen juris, and may be
considered as a faculty or habit, which qualifies the Subject to do something
which one that has no power cannot do. The proper act of it is to Govern, and
in Governing to Command, so as to bind the party subject to obedience, or
punishment. This Imperium or Command is an act of the Will, and presupposes
some act of the Understanding, and must needs be ineffectual, and in vain
without a sufficient coactive force. And because the Understanding may be
ignorant or erroneous, the Will unjust, the coactive force act accordingly:
therefore the understanding of a Superior as such, ought to be directed by
Wisdom, his commanding Will by Justice, and his Executive force by both. And
that act of Power which is not thus directed is not properly an act of Power,
nor any such Command of the Jewish Rulers, when it was devoid both of Wisdom
and Justice, and it was so much the more invalid, because contrary to an
express command of a Superior Lord and Master even Jesus Christ. This Power is
an Excellency, and makes the party invested with it like unto God: and the
greater it is, the greater the excellency of him that has it; Though it is in
it self good and just, as being from God; or rather the power of God in the
creature intellectual, yet it may be exercised either too little or too much.
For one that is invested with it may do less or more than his power does
warrant him; nay, he may act contrary to the Rules of divine Wisdom and
Justice. And such is the imperfection of man, that there is no perfect
Government in the world, but that God does supply all defects and aberrations.
For the Judge of all the World will do right; and in the final Judgment will
complete all Justice, and reward every man according to his works, so that
nothing in any person, Man or Angel, but shall be judged.

Majesty Civil, which is the greatest power in a Civil Community; the power of
a Sovereign, whereby he is able to bind the whole Community and every Member
thereof. It Is an act of the public and universal Will, directed by the
universal Judgment, made effectual by the universal and general coactive force:
and all this is done according to the Rules of Justice and Wisdom. And that the
best, wisest and most just, are most fit to govern. To know it the better, we
must consider, 1. The principal and several kinds of acts. 2. The qualities of
it: the particular acts of this power in one Community are numberless, yet all
reducible to one. And that is the wise and just Government and ordering of the
Community: yet this is divided and subdivided by the Authors of Politics. And
the several Branches of this Power, are called Jura Majestatis, Praerogativa,
Regalia, etc. The distinction of these Rights, are made according to the
several acts of Majesty conversant about several different Objects, and
according to the diversification of the Objects, is the diversity and
difference of these Rights. I might here relate both the number and the method
of these Rights of Majesty, as delivered by Angelicus, Bodin, Clapmarius,
Grotius, Bisoldus, Arnisaeus, and others, if it were either needful or useful.
The Civilians, and sometimes, though seldom, the Casuists mention them. Yet
hardly two of them agree either in the method, or the number, or the particular
names of them.

Grotius reduces them to a certain Order. Qui regit civitatem eam regit per
se circa universalia in legibus condendis abolendis
singularia
alios magistratus publica circa actiones Belli pacis
res vectigalia dominium eminens.

Privata ad publicum ordinata, quae sunt res inter privatas quas dirimi oportet
propter pacem.
Curatores

-- Yet this is far short of some others, and indeed no ways accurate. The
Civilians, some of them reduce them into Order, according to the several acts
of this power, which are acts of Grace. Justice.


Bisoldus does distinguish of Majesty, and informs us, that it is Real Personal.


Majesty in the People really, etc.
Real in the People, personally in the Prince; He understands by the People the
Community: and under God, that is the primary subject of it, wherein it
virtually resides, and out of which by the constitution it is educed. It has
power to form a State, where there is none, and if after a form once
introduced, the Order be not good, they may alter it: What the Rights of
personal Majesty is, he tells us, but what those of real Sovereignty be, he
says nothing: Majesty so naturally belongs unto the Community, that upon a
failer of succession, or a dissolution it divolves to them: and that People is
not wise, which parts wholly with it, and absolutely alienates it, as the
Romans are said Lege Regia to have done, if necessity or some very weighty
cause required it not.

Arnisaeus, who has composed a whole Treatise of this subject, in which he
informs, 1. Of the name. 2. Of the nature of Majesty. For 1. The name may be
given to such as have nothing of the thing, and so be a mere Title. 2. It may
signify Dignity or Honor without any Power. The nature of it consists in
Power, which has several branches, concerning which he relates the Opinion and
Judgment of the Philosopher of Historians, of the writers of Politics, of
Lawyers, and in the end delivers his own mind, and reduced them to certain
Heads: in this manner.

Iura majestatis sunt
Majora Defensionis Gubernationis in
Minora de aerario colligendo Legibus condendis Magistratibus constituendis.

The first division is taken from the inequality of these Prerogatives and
Rights. The second he seems to ground upon these words -- That our King may
judge us, and go out before us, and fight our Battles, 1 Samuel 8.20. Where to
Judge, seems to signify to Govern by Law, and Officers: to go out before us
and fight our Battles, presupposes in his Judgment the power of the Militia.
To these he adds other two, concerning the ordering of Religion, and Coining of
Money. Under these general Heads, he reduces many other particulars: and so
proceeds to handle, 1. the greater, 2. The less Prerogatives severally, and
that largely. This, with the salving of some doubts, and confuting some
Errors, is the Scheme and substance of the whole Treatise, divided into three
several Books.



Majestas est
Realis, quae potest rempublicam Constituere abolere mutare reformare
Personalis quae agit cum exteris De Bello Pace
Per Foedera Legationes

suis circa divina religionem ordinando humanae leges ferendo exequendo



This, though not exact, may serve the turn, and in some measure declare the
several branches of this great Power, which in it self is but one, yet has
many acts, and the same different, in respect of several and different Objects
and Subjects. I only mention the chief Heads, to which the rest may be reduced,
for the better and more distinct understanding of it: I will more particularly
explain my self.

1. Therefore Majesty is Real Personal.


Real is in the Community, Real Majesty greater than Personal.
and is greater than Personal, which is the power of a Commonwealth already
constituted. For, as you have heard before, this form of a Commonwealth is
virtually in it before it be constituted, and their consent is the very
foundation of it. And this consent whether mediate or immediate, tacit or
express, is so necessary, that though a people be conquered, yet the Victor
cannot govern them as men without their consent: Nay more, when God designed
immediately, first Saul, then David, yet the election and consent of the people
did concur with and follow upon the Divine Designation. As this Real Majesty is
a Power to model a State, so its always inherent and can never be separated;
insomuch, that when a form of Government is dissolved, or there shall be a
failer of Succession, the Power of the Sovereign does divolve unto them by the
law of nature, or rather it was always in the people. As this Community has
the power of constitution, so it has of dissolution, when there shall be a
just and necessary cause. Hence appears the mistake of Junius, Brutus, The
mistake of Junius, Brutus, Buchanon Heno.
Buchanon, Heno, and others: when they say, Ejus est destituere, Cujus est
constituere, if they meant it of the multitude and body of the Subjects, as
Subjects under a form of Government, it can only be true of a Community where
they have just and necessary cause. Subjects as Subjects cannot do it, because
of their Subjection and Obligation, whereas the Community as a Community is
free from any Obligation to any particular Form, either from the Laws of God,
Natural or Positive, or from their own Consent or Oaths: And though the People
in this consideration are bound both by the Natural and Positive Laws of God to
constitute a Government, if they can, yet they are not bound to this Form or
that. Another Act of this Majesty in the Community is, when they see it
necessary and just, and they have not only Power but Opportunity to do it, to
alter the Form of the Government: this Act as with us, is above the Power of a
Parliament, which may have Personal, yet cannot have this Real Majesty. For a
Parliament does necessarily presuppose a Form of Government already agreed
upon, A Parliament cannot alter a form of Government.
whereby they are made the Subject of Personal Soveraignity. Therefore they
cannot alter or take away the cause whereby they have their being, nor can they
meddle with the fundamental Laws of the Constitution, which if it once cease,
they cease to be a Parliament. If the Government be dissolved, and the
Community yet remains united, the People may make use of such an Assembly as a
Parliament, to alter the former Government, and constitute a new; but this they
cannot do as a Parliament, but considered under another Notion, as an immediate
Representative of a Community, not of a Commonwealth. And thus considered, the
Assembly may constitute a Government, which as a Parliament cannot do, which
always presupposing the Constitution, as such, can act only in and for the
administration. That Community is wise which does, A happy Community.
and happy which can keep their Majesty so due unto them, as to limit their
personal Sovereigns, so as not to suffer them to take it from them, and assume
it to themselves.

Majesty Personal.
As there is a real, so there is a personal Majesty, so called, because it is
fixed in some Persons who are trusted with the exercise of it, and may, and
many times do forfeit to God, and in some cases forfeit to the Community or the
People; for when it is said it may be forfeited to the People: we must
understand, that the People is not Plebs, the meanest and the lowest rank, and
but a part of the Community, but the whole Community it self as a Community,
otherwise, we may lay the Foundation of all kinds of Tumults, Confusions,
Seditions, and Rebellions. The Person or Persons trusted with the Majesty and
Power, are bound to seek the good of the whole People, and for that end they
are trusted with it, and no otherwise. Hence the saying, Suprema lex salus
populi esto. Acts of Personal Majesty. 1. Without.
The Acts of this Power, which it has a right to exercise, are many, and that
in respect of those without, or those within the Commonwealth. For agit cum
exteris, it deals and acts with those without. This is not the first, but
rather the last kind of acting. It arises from the relation which it has to
other States, with which it may have some society, though it has no dependence
upon it. The Rules of this Acting, as it respects themselves and the States
with whom they deal, are the Laws of Nations. Yet the particular Laws of every
several State may determine the Rules, according to which it will act with, or
against another State. Because one State may wrong, or benefit, or strengthen
and help another: hence it comes to pass that sometimes there is a cause of
War. For when by Ambassadors or other Agents, the State wronged demands
satisfaction or Justice, and cannot be heard, then there remains no way but to
hazard a War, and defer the cause to God to decide it by the Issue, which he
shall give. Sometimes a State may be unjustly invaded, in which case there is
no remedy but a defensive War. 1. To judge and determine of this War, whether
offensive or defensive, to have the chief Command, to grant Commissions, to
Press Men, provide for Arms and Money; to denounce and proclaim the War by
Heralds, belongs unto the Sovereign, who is trusted with this Militia, not only
against foreign States, but against Seditious and Rebellious Subjects. 2. After
a War begun and continued, a Peace may be concluded, and this is another Act of
Majesty Personal. 3. Because one State may strengthen, help, and benefit
another, hence Leagues of Peace and Amity; and also for mutual offense or
defense, or for Protection, or for Commerce. Yet none of these are valid by the
very Law of Nations, but as made, concluded, continued by the supreme Powers
Personal. 4. The Sovereigns of several States cannot in their own Persons,
except very rarely, meet together and act personally face to face one with
another, neither is it convenient or expedient so to do. Therefore a way and
means dictated by the light of Nature has been invented to act by others, who
are their Deputies and Representatives, and these are called Ambassadors. To
send these, whether ordinary or extraordinary, and to give them Power and
Commissions, with Instructions and Letters Credential, that their Acts may be
valid, is the right of Majesty Personal. To this Head may be referred the
sending of Heralds and Agents or Envoyes.

Within.
With these it acts, 1. In matters of Religion. For Magistratus est custos
utriusque tabulae, where by Magistrate, we must not understand Officers, but
supreme Governors, as the word is taken largely by many Authors, especially
such as profess Theology. For it is the Duty, Sovereigns must order Matters of
Religion.
as it is the Right of Civil Sovereigns to order matters of Religion, and that
in the first place, so far as it tends unto or concerns the peace and happiness
of a State, which depends much upon the establishment, profession and practice
thereof. As they must order it, so they must not only constantly and sincerely
profess, practice it themselves, but as Sovereigns protect and defend their
Subjects in the profession and exercise of the same, so far as their
coactive-force and Sword may justly do it. This should be their first and
principal Work, which they should do, not only for the good of the people, but
their own happiness, success and establishment in the Throne. They are not to
associate as Priests or Presbyters, nor arrogate the power of making Canons,
Ordination, Excommunication, Absolution, and such like Acts, which are purely
spiritual, yet they may make Civil Laws concerning those things, and execute
the same, and also ratify by Civil Acts the Ecclesiastical Canons; and punish
such as shall violate the same. Yet this right does presuppose the Religion,
which they establish and maintain to be true and instituted from Heaven. It Is
true, that the consciences of men are subject only unto God, and to him alone
are they answerable for their secret thoughts and opinions, which men can have
no certain cognizance of. Yet if they broach errors in Religion, and
blasphemies, and seek by communicating them by word, or writing to seduce,
pervert, infect others, they disturb the peace of the State, offend God, and
bring Gods Judgments from Heaven upon themselves, who are guilty of such sins,
and upon the Sovereign and the subject of that State where they live. And in
this case, though the consciences cannot be forced, yet their estates, persons,
lives, are liable to the sword, and, in that respect they may and ought to be
punished by the sword of Justice. This is so a Right of Civil Sovereigns, that
we never read of any State of civilized people without Laws concerning
Religion and the worship of a Deity. I confess, this branch of civil Power is
not rightly placed, nor is the method exact, because it comes in under the
Heads of Legislation and Jurisdiction, the matter of both which are Religion,
men's, persons, estates, and lives.

Civil matters.
Concerning these we have two acts of Majesty. 1. Legislation. 2. Execution of
Laws made, hence these two, Jura Majestatis. 1. A right to make Laws. 2. A
right to execute them. This Power of making Laws is the principal and most
necessary, and does inseparably adhere unto the Sovereign once constituted. It
was Jethro's counsel to Moses, which with Gods approbation, he followed, to
teach the people Laws, that all Subjects and Officers might know their work and
duty, and the Rule which must direct them in all actions of Officers and
subjects as such, this was Gods order. For, after that he became their
Sovereign, and the people of Israel his subjects, he proceeds to make Laws
Moral, Ceremonial, Judicial, yet the personal Sovereign has no power to make
fundamental Laws concerning the constitution, but only for the administration.
This our Parliaments, if rightly constituted and duly acting for the public
good, I honor as much as any man, may take notice of. Yet I may not presume to
teach them, much less correct them. This Power is given by the consent of the
people in the constitution, who upon their submission become their Sovereigns
subjects, and are bound thereupon, either to obey his Laws once made, or
suffer. This is not merely a Power to teach and direct them, but to bind them.
To this Head, are brought the Power of repealing, interpreting, altering Laws,
with Dispensations, Reservations, naturalizing, granting Privileges,
conferring Honors, founding Colleges and Corporations, Legitimation,
restoring the blood tainted, and all acts of Grace, as giving immunities,
exemptions, tolerations, indulgences, acts of oblivion.

which in this place is not the execution of the Judges Sentence, for that
follows as a distinct act of Jurisdiction. This right of Majesty is of far
greater latitude, and reaches all acts that tend to the execution of the Laws,
which are in vain, if not put in execution. And because this cannot be done
without Officers and Judgment, therefore this comprehends under it

The right of making Officers. administration of Justice.


The making of Officers, as without which the Laws cannot be put in execution,
is the first of these two. By Officers, I understand all such as are used by
the Sovereign, for to put in practice the Law, and perform any public act.
These may be either ordinary or extraordinary, temporary, or standing; for
Peace or War, for to deal with forriegn States. Such are all Dictatours,
Viceroyes, Regents, Treasurers, Counselors, Judges, Sheriffs, Constables,
Captains and Commanders by sea or land, in time of Peace or War. To these may
be referred Heralds, Ambassadors, public Agents, with the rest, which shall
be mentioned in the second Book of this Treatise. And because he is no Officer,
which has not some public power, and this he cannot have of and from himself,
therefore all Officers are made such by the Sovereign; who by granting
Commissions, and other ways derives their power unto them. And as he gives
them power, so he may remove them, and revoke their power, or translate them,
or call them to account. To choose, nominate, propose them, may be an act of the
people or some of them, yet to constitute them and give them their political
being, is an act of Majesty, either mediate or immediate. And because the
personal Sovereign and his Officers cannot do their duty and discharge their
places without sufficient maintenance, therefore in this respect, there is a
right to command the purse. For, as they say, he that bears the sword, must
have the purse. And, if there be not a sufficient standing Revenue and Treasury
determined in the constitution, the Sovereign must have a power to raise moneys
to defray the public necessary charges. Hence, that Universal and eminens
dominium of Majesty in every State, so much mentioned in the Authors of
Politics. The reason of this is clear in the very light of nature, that the
people maintain their Governors, because the benefit of the Government
redounds unto them, according to that of the Apostle, For this cause pay you
tribute also, for they are Gods Ministers, attending continually upon this very
thing. Render therefore to all their dues, tribute to whom tribute is due,
custom to whom custom, Romans 13.6, 7. It Is true, that Sovereigns may have their
private purse: therefore some distinguish, inter aerarium and fiscum. Aerarium
is the public Treasury, which is maintained by Tribute, Custom and other
Impositions: and this is to be raised and disposed of by the supreme for the
preservation of the public. Fiscus, as some tell, is the Sovereigns private
purse, whereof he may dispose at will and pleasure. This public propriety
presupposes every man's several propriety, and no ways prejudice it. This
right is reckoned by some amongst the lesser Prerogatives, but there can be no
minora Jura Majestatis in proper sense. For, because Majestas is Maxima
potestas, therefore all the essential parts and rights are so too.

as well capital as not capital, with Dispensations in Judgment, suspension of
Execution, pardons. To this of Jurisdiction also belongs all reservations of
certain causes: the receiving last appeals, the final determinations, and
irrevocable sentences. By virtue of this Power, Commissions for judicial
proceedings, Courts, the order of trial from first to last, all calling of
Assemblies general and provincial, Civil and Ecclesiastical, are determined.
From all this it is evident, that all Jurae Majestatis may be reduced to the
Legislative, Judicial, and Executive Power, if we understand Judicial, and
Executive in a larger sense, than they are commonly taken. And here it is to be
noted, that Majesty Real is before and above all Majesty personal. And by
personal Majesty or personal Sovereign, I do not mean only one single* person
as a Monarch, but all Aristocratical and Polyarchical Sovereigns, who are many
Physically, but considered as one person morally, as jointly invested with one
Power Sovereign.

Properties of Majesty.
to signify the properties thereof. These are either included in the essence,
or flow from it. For 1. It Is absolute and so Arbitrary, Absolute, soluta
legibus. It cannot be bound by any Laws, nor judged, because the Sovereign is
the Lawgiver himself, and the Fountain of Jurisdiction. He may bind himself by
Oath to govern, and judge according to the Laws, not to be governed or judged
by the Laws. Yet no Sovereign personal is free from the Obligation of the
natural and positive Laws of God in force: and how far he is inferior to the
real Sovereign, who is subject to the same Laws; I will not here discuss. 2.
It Is universal, not only in respect of all acts of Government, but of all
persons within that Territory. For it must be coadequate to the whole body,
which it must act and animate, it is neither greater nor less. No persons,
things or actions within, can be exempted from this Power, nor can it extend to
any thing, person, action without, but per Accidens. 3. Its supreme, not in
respect of God, nor of the power of other States, but in respect of the power
of Fathers, Masters, Officers, Corporations, and Societies within every several
State. For by virtue of Majesty it is that Sovereigns are equal in respect of
themselves, superiors in respect of their Subjects; and inferiors unto God,
whose servants and subjects they are, trusted with a particle of his power, and
accountable unto him. 4. It Is Independent (yet not in respect of God) upon whom
all Sovereigns do not only chiefly but wholly depend, but in respect of all
subordinate Powers within, but coadequate to them without. For all power civil
within the Territory is derived from Majesty. Fiduciary Princes therefore as
such are not Sovereigns, though they may have the title of Sovereignty; yet a
Sovereign may be fiduciary for some part of a Country within, and part of the
Dominions of another Sovereign. Neither can the chief Magistrate of a
Commonwealth, trusted at certain times with the general exercise of the Power
be such. Protection and Vassalage are conceived by some not to destroy
Independency, neither does confederation. For though the League between several
States, as in Switzerland, and the united Netherlands Provinces may be strict,
and Commissioners may be made and trusted with great power in things, which
concern the several States jointly (such the States General of the
Low Countries be) yet this is thought to be no diminution of Majesty. For it
remains entire in the several Republics: 5. Its indivisible, for though it
has several branches, which may be distinguished, yet they cannot be
separated. For if you take away but one, much more if you take away more, you
make it imperfect and essentially defective, and insufficient to Govern. For as
in Philosophy, Essentia est indivisibilis: so in Politics, Majestas est
indivisibilis and sic Majestatis Jura sunt inseparabilia. As these Rights are
indivisible in respect of themselves, so they are in respect of the Subject.
For divide and separate some of them, even but one from the Sovereign, he is an
imperfect Sovereign, take away all he cease to be a Sovereign. Again the
Subject of Majesty and of all the rights and parts thereof must be only one,
either Physically or Morally: If you divide the Subject, you destroy them. For
if in this Commonwealth we give part of these to the King, part to the Peers,
part to the Commons, we make it a Babel, and destructive of it self. For,
suppose the King have the Militia to himself, he may command the Purse, make
void the Laws, revoke Judgments, reject Parliaments, and none can hinder him,
because neither Peers nor Commons have any right to the Sword whereby to defend
themselves. Therefore little heed is to be given to that Book, or bitter
Invective entitled, Elenchus motuum nuperorum, which informs from the Lawyers,
if we may believe him, that these Sovereign Rights were thus divided. 6. From
this, that it is Indivisible follows it, that it is incommunicable. For to
whomsoever they are, communicated, they cease to be Subjects, and the Sovereign
to be a complete Sovereign, and this Communication tends to the dissolution of
the Government. 7. It Is perpetual, that is, fixed in a certain subject, to
continue in the same according to the fundamental Laws of Constitution.
Therefore the Temporary or occasional power, though very great of a Dictatour,
or Regent, or Protector, who are but trusted with it for a time in
extraordinary cases, and upon occasion, cannot be Majesty when there is an
Interregnum, or suspension of the Government, by reason of Sedition, Faction,
Rebellion, Civil War, or some other cause, it is good and expedient for the
safety of a State, to set up some extraordinary Governor or Governors,
trusted for a time with transcendent Power, till the State disturbed and not
capable of any Union be settled, which done, that Power does cease, and Majesty
is fixed in his proper, primary, and constant subject, that the Government may
run in the old Channel, except they intend to make an alteration of the
Constitution.

Europe, as in the Emperor of Germany, the Kings of Denmark, Sweden, Poland,
and England. For our Kings had not only the title of Majesty, but some power
with the title. For in the intervals of Parliament, he was Sovereign alone, and
all and every one, yea the greatest were his subjects. He called and summoned
Parliaments, made all Officers by sea and land, sent and received Ambassadors,
conferred all Honors, the subjects swear Allegiance to him. His Dignity was
eminent, his State great, and so many advantages he had, that if he should have
used them all, he might easily have undone his subjects, and so have undone
himself. Yet he had not the power of the purse: He was sworn to corroborate the
just Laws and Customs, which the people had chosen. In the Parliament he made a
third party, yet so, that neither in acts of Laws or Judgment, could he do
any thing without the Peers and Commons, and as Sir Roger Owen in his
Manuscript observes together with them, he was greater than himself. Yet, as
Kings have sometimes curbed Parliaments, so Parliaments have Kings, and
disposed of the Militia, the Navy, the Ports, the chief Offices; Nay, they have
sometimes judged Kings, accusing them of acting against the fundamental
Constitution, and challenging such Power as tended to the dissolution of the
same, and have deposed them. But of this particular something may be said
hereafter; these kinds of Sovereigns have so much power, whether more or less
as the Constitution gives them, yet it will be a difficult thing to keep them
within their bounds.

CHAP. V. Of the manner how Civil Power is acquired.
WHat the Nature of Power in general, and Majesty Civil is, has been declared.
The next thing to be considered, is the Subject, who from it is denominated a
Sovereign, and we must enquire first, how this Power is acquired. 2. How
disposed in a certain Subject. As for the acquisition it is certain, Man as Man,
or as a Member of a Community, cannot have it from himself, but it must be
communicated to him from God, who being the Universal Sovereign, is the
Fountain and Original of it, and derives some part of it unto Man, and a
greater measure unto Mortal Sovereigns than other Men. Yet he does not this
immediately, but mediately for the most part. It Is extrinsecal, and comes
aliunde, not only unto Men but Angels. A Paternal Power, which is more Natural,
is acquired by Generation, though sometimes by Adoption. This Generation from
divine Benediction is the seminary of all Societies, which as Societies and
Communities may be so disposed and complete, as virtually to contain in them a
Power of a Commonwealth, and by a general consent constitute an actual
Sovereign. The Sovereign before he was made such was not invested with Majesty,
but it was extrinsecal unto him. And here that distinction between the Power it
self, the Designation of the Persons Governing, and the Form of Government is
worthy taking notice of. The Designation of the Persons, and the Form of
Government is from God, leaving Man at Liberty, but not so the Power, which is
more from him than the other two. Though the parties justly possessed of power
may be thought to have the propriety of it, yet they have not any: for let it
be never so firmly conveyed upon them by designation and submission, yet they
are but trusted with it. Princes tell us they hold their Crowns and Kingdoms
per Deum and Gladium. If they mean that they derive their power from God, so as
that they neither receive, nor hold it from the Bishops of Rome, or the
Emperor, or any other Mortals; it may be true; yet they have their power so
from God, that they are invested with it by Humane Designation. And as for
their Sword, it may by a Conquest make way for a Government, but it cannot
constitute it. The fundamental Charter of all Civil Majesty, Fundamental
Charter of Civil Majesty.
is the fifth Commandment, taken in a large sense, and understood by other
Scriptures, which speak more expressly and distinctly of Civil Government. In
this Commandment including much more by Analogy than is expressed, we may
observe, that there is a power of Superiority and Excellency, as in Fathers, so
in the Princes and Rulers of the World, and that from God, who made them Men,
Fathers, Princes. 2. That all Government should be Paternal. Not that the
firstborn of the most ancient Family in every Tribe, Kindred, Nation, should be
a Sovereign; for that we seldom find, but that they should as Fathers love
their Subjects, and seek their Good, and tender them as Fathers do their
Children. 3. That by virtue of Gods Command, so soon as they are actually
Governors, Honor and Subjection are due unto them. 4. That all Vicinities, as
far as they are able, ought first to associate, and then establish an order of
Government, and observe it, that their days may be long in the Land, wherein
God has placed them, and that it may go well with them.

Power how got.
as it is from Man, so it is from God, who rules in the Kingdoms of the World,
and sets up one, and puts down another, so that this Power may be communicated
from him, and so acquired by Man, that it may be taken away, and lost again.
The Method of the Discourse following is this, Majestas.
acquiritur just and modo extraordinario and divina designatione. ordinario
and inchoitur quae it continuatur succesione per electionem vel libera,
election^ vi and armis. indeterminat^m astrictam familiae ubi mares tantum jure
quasi hereditario, quast jure succedant.
foemina quoque jure quasi hereditario, quast jure succedant.




injuste usurpata vel dolo malo, pecuniae, homicidio alio modo

Amittitur modo ordinato naturaliter morte imperantis. defectu successionis.
moraeliter voluntaria imperantis resignatione. desertione.
violenta invasione vel ab intra. extra.


inordinato injusta dissolatione mala administratione, eujus summus grad^s
Tyrannus.




1. Acquiritur justo modo extraordinario ut divina designatione and unctione.
Power may first be acquired, and that several ways, Justly got extraordinary.
as justly or unjustly, in an extraordinary or ordinary manner.

This extraordinary way, and more immediate from God we find in Scripture.

For thus Moses, Joshua, many of the Judges, Saul, David, Jeroboam, Jehu, were
designed to their places of Government

Some of those, as Saul, David, Jehu, were anointed by Gods appointment, and
the Scepter entailed upon David's Family in the Kingdom of Judah.

Yet two things are remarkable in the designation of Saul and David.

1. That after the Divine Unction the People assemble, and in a general
Assembly by their Votes, freely chose them, and voluntarily submit, and without
Election they could not actually and effectually Reign. This does signify that
there can be no orderly or lasting Government without consent, tacit or express
of the People: For Men must be Governed as rational and free, for such they are
as Men.

This was the manner of investing the Kings of England.

For at the Coronation, amongst other things, this is done: The King being
before them, one does ask the People, Will you have this Man to be King, or
Reign over you? This is more fully expressed in the Form of Coronation, which
at present I have not by me, and does signify, that they should have the
voluntary consent of the People. 2. That if we may believe Fortescue, the Kings
of England had not Regiam potestatem, sed politicam a populo effluxam. 3. That
they did not derive that Power from the first Investiture as Hereditary, but in
another way. The second thing to be noted is, How Kings must govern.
That those Kings thus designed of God, were bound to govern according to the
moral, judicial, ceremonial Laws of God. This implies that no Princes should
govern by an arbitrary Power, but according to Laws, and them so wise, so just,
as that they may be truly said, to be rather the Laws of God than of Men.

Acquiritur modo ordinario inchoative in constitutione per -- liberam
electionem, vim armorum ex causa justa. Ordinarily.
for his usual way is by ordinary providence, and that first in the beginning
and Constitution of a Government, the Foundation whereof may be laid in Peace
or War. In Peace, By Election.
power is acquired by a free election of a Sovereign, and singling out some
person or persons, to whom they will submit themselves. Sometimes it is
determined, that all jointly should be Sovereign, and every single person a
subject. This is the best, Best Government.
most just, and the wisest way, and most agreeable to man, as a rational
Creature. The parties, whether one or more, before their designation had no
civil power at all, but upon the designation, when they are once agreed upon,
declared and submitted unto, they must by divine institution of necessity have
so much power as is necessary for the Government, and general good of the
People. This Power which is now acquired, is Majestas, and is more from God
than Man; because it is a Power to do such things as God commands, or such as
are not contrary to his Will. In the first modelling of a State, they may
either compose one of their own invention, or take example from some other
Commonwealth, and take the whole or some part and make it their own. Thus the
foundation of the Roman State was first laid by Romulus, who in this work
followed the Greeks in many things, as Halicarnassaeus tells us, Antiq. Romans
lib. 2. In this case, whatsoever kind of State is constituted, there must be
some invested with Majesty personal, which by the free Election, and voluntary
Submission of the parties who are free, and have power to make this Election
and Submission, it is communicated, and so acquired. But if upon a Victory
obtained by a just and necessary War, By Conquest.
a people is reduced under the power of the party conquering, and they upon
certain terms submit, the power is acquired by the Sword, and their voluntary
Submission, which they would not have made, if they had not been Conquered. And
they who formerly were a free people, and would have chosen another, or
continued under their own personal Sovereign, if before the War they were under
a form of Government, do submit, because neither they nor their Sovereign can
protect them. And if they be brought so low that they must either subject
themselves or do worse, or perish, they willingly come under the protection of
the Conqueror, if he be willing to protect them, and take them as his Subjects:
Majesty acquired in this manner for the most part, is more despotical and
absolute. And that Princes are divested of Majesty and People of Liberty, and
fall under the power of Strangers, it is from the just Judgment of God,
punishing them for their Crimes. And this is a most common title of most
Sovereigns in the World. Yet it may be said, that the inward motives of the
Conquerors of the Earth are Ambition, or Covetousness, or Cruelty, therefore
this kind of Title is not good. The answer is, That, in respect of any one, or
more of all these motives it is unjust. Yet, if we consider this Title, as given
by God, in making them Victorious, and rewarding them for the execution of
Justice, which they seldom think upon, and also the consent of the people and
their submission, When they can do no better, it is certainly just; What strange
Instincts from Heaven, what Commands from God, what suggestions from Angels or
God's Messengers, or Prophets, Conquerors might have, we know not. Jehu was
anointed and designed by God to cut off Ahab's Family, and had a promise
afterward. Judah also and many Nations were persuaded, and in some sort
commanded by the Prophet Jeremy, as sent from God, to submit unto the King of
Babylon, and come under his protection.


liberam and indeterminatam astrictam familiae ubi mares solum foeminae quoque
jure quasi haereditario succedant.


After a Title is once established by the Fundamental Charter, and the first
investiture, care is taken how this Title may be continued, that so not only
the present, but the future Sovereign and subject of personal Majesty may be
determined, and not only the State, but the Sovereign thereof may become
perpetual and immortal. This can no ways be done but by Succession, and this
depends upon Election at least of the first Constitutors of the State, which
determines the successive Sovereigns to acquire their Title by Election, or
Birth, or both. If by Election only, that many times is left free to the
Electors, to choose out of what Family or Country they please. Thus the Roman
and also the German Emperors and the Kings of Poland, acquire and receive their
Power. Sometimes the Election is confined to a Family or Line. In this respect
the Title is said to be Hereditary, which is not to be understood, as though
the personal Sovereigns were absolute proprietaries of the Crown, or had power
of alienation; but because they are like those, who in civil Law are called,
Haeredes sui, Heirs natural, by Law and Birth, who succeed into, and by Birth
acquire the right which their Predecessors justly had. This Succession is
sometimes tied to the Males, as in France; sometimes is indifferent to Male or
Female Children. Thus it is in England, where the Kings and Queens are said to
have their Heirs: which, if we may believe the great Lawyer Sir Edward Coke
upon Magna Charta, are nothing but the Successors: For Heirs, says he, are
Successors: Yet surely he means Successors not only by Election, but Blood. In
this kind of Succession, sometimes the present Sovereigns, if they have
Children, may determine and declare, which of them shall succeed them. Thus
David chose Solomon. Sometimes it is otherwise, because by the Constitution it is
entailed upon the firstborn or next of Blood. This seems to be the ancient
right and custom of this Nation. This may be the reason, why King Henry VIII.
though he took upon him much of an absolute Prince, would not presume of
himself to define his Successor, but desires an act to be made in Parliament
for to enable him by Will to dispose of the Crown. Yet such an act could not
make void the Election used at the Coronation, which has something of the
Constitution in it, though it was made a mere formality.

Injuste usurpata dolo malo, pecunia, homicidio, alio modo.


As Power may be justly so it may be unjustly acquired, and this is usually
called Usurpation, Usurpation.
which is the taking and keeping possession of that which is not our own, or
which we have no Right unto. It Is true, that in Civil Law it is defined to be
praepossessio juris controversi. Yet in this manner of Usurpation, that Right
is seldom doubtful, but for the most part clear enough. The Power is always
good, because from God, and the act thereof, which is Government, is good; yet
the manner of acquiring may be bad. And it is observable, that many who have ill
acquired, have well used their Power. It Is generally held, That usurped Right
and Power is no Right or Power, because it is not in his proper subject.
Therefore it is conceived, that Tyrannus in titulo (such every Usurper is said
to be) cannot command and bind the people, nor do any acts of Government which
is valid, and may justly be removed before the people acknowledge him, or swear
fealty to him. And many think it unlawful to submit unto, or act under an
usurped Power. Sometimes it may be so, yet there are cases, when we may, nay we
must submit and act too. If Christians under the Heathen Emperors had stood
upon such terms as some do in our days, their condition had been far worse than
it was. For, though they liked not Usurpation, and the cursed means whereby
many acquired their power, yet this was their principle; Non multum interest
sub quorum imperio vivit homo cito moriturus, si qui imperant ad impia vel
iniqua nos non cogant, Aust. de L.D. Blood, Bribery, Treason, Rebellion, unjust
Invasions, they abhorred as abominable, and detested them as unfit means to
ascend an Imperial Throne. Yet it was not in their power to dispossess them
once possessed, and to establish better. They knew God had reserved this unto
himself. Neither did they think that by submitting unto their power, though
unjustly gotten, yet justly exercised, that they were guilty of their sinful
and unjust manner of Usurpation. Concerning this unjust Acquisition of personal
Majesty, many things may be observed: 1. There are few titles now, especially
such as are successive in a Line, which did not at first begin in Usurpation.
2. That the power it self with the just exercise thereof, is a different thing
from the manner of acquiring it. 3. That one that has the right in reversion
may unjustly prepossess it: and with us, as the Lawyer tells us, if the Heir
apparent by murder or some other way remove the present just Sovereign; yet so
soon as he is possessed of the Crown, he cannot be questioned, and indemnity
presently follows upon the possession. Richard the Third is called an usurper,
and was so at the first; yet his Laws and Judgments, and other Acts of
Government were, and are judged valid, after the Parliaments received him.
Henry VII. cannot be acquitted from usurpation till the Parliament acknowledged
him. Neither his Victory nor Marriage with the right Heir could give him a good
Title: though this might conduce to his quiet possession: He did never stand
upon that Marriage as the foundation of his right unto the Crown; for he knew
well enough, that if that had been his best and only Title, that though it
might make the Power good unto his Children, yet while she was living he must
hold the Crown in her Right, not in his own, and if she died before him, it was
lost. 4. Many Princes have invented Oaths for to secure not only the form of
Government, but the Crown unto their own Posterity and Family. And here it is
to be considered, whether these Oaths do not necessarily presuppose an higher
Obligation of fidelity, not only unto God, but their own native Country, to
which they are bound to be faithful under any form of Government or personal
Sovereign whatsoever. If their present Allegiance cannot stand with the
universal good, it is surely unlawful and unjust. For the good of the whole is
to be preferred before the good of a part: and we are bound to love the whole
body of the Community more than any Family, or some particular persons. Again,
it may prove sometimes impossible to be actually faithful and perform our
Oaths, either to the persons to whom they are taken, or their heirs and
successors, and then it will be unreasonable. 5. We must distinguish between
the humane positive Laws and Constitutions, and the Laws and Rules of divine
Providence; for that may be usurpation in respect of the former, which is a
just possession in respect of the latter. 6. As for removing an Usurper, or
refusing to submit unto him, or act under him, we must consider, 1. How far God
has any hand in dispossessing one and giving possession to another, least we
be found to resist God. 2. What means we resolve upon to remove and reject the
Usurper, and whether the Remedy will not be worse than the Disease. 3. What may
be the bad and miserable consequences of this refusal of submission and acting:
yet some will say, we will live peaceably and not meddle, neither will we own
the present Power nor act against it. But do such think, that any person or
persons, who have the Sword in their hands, to which their Lives and Estates
are subject, will suffer men within the bowels of the State to be Neuters, and
yet give them protection? 7. Such as justly acquire their power at the first
may be the greatest Usurpers, because they will challenge more power, than
either God will, or man can give: or more than by Constitution is due, or the
necessity of the State and public good require. 8. God may justly give to
Nebuchadnezzar, Alexander, that power, which they did unjustly seek, and this
for reasons best known unto himself; as for executing his Judgments upon other
Nations for their sins: when he has once given, the possession continued is
lawful. 9. It Is an heavy Judgment upon a people, when the title to personal
Majesty is doubtful and liable to usurpation, as it often falls out upon a
dissolution: civil War's a failure of succession, which is certain and clear,
or in other cases. And happy is that People, whose Nobles shall be of
themselves, and their Governors shall proceed out of the midst of them, Jer.
30.21. And also when these Governors enter quietly, according to the Laws of
God and the just constitution of men.

Amittitur modo
ordinato naturali morte imperantis, defectu successionis,
morali voluntaria resignatione desertione,
violenta invasione.


As Power may be acquired, and one that had it not may have it; so it may be
lost, and he that was possessed of it may be dispossessed. For, it is no
inseparable adjunct to any person or persons. And it is Gods will it should be
so. Therefore Crowns and Sceptres with Imperial Power, cannot be so entailed,
or any ways made sure by any constitutions of man as not to be cut off from any
Families or Persons. They are like unto Estates, which for want of Heirs, or
the extinction of Families, or some other ways may pass to strangers. It may be
lost in a way which is orderly and not from any unjust cause. And that first
naturally upon the death of the Sovereign or a failure of Succession. For all
Sovereigns, especially personal, are mortal, and as they live and reign so they
die and lay aside their Majesty, and leave it unto others. This is a common and
an usual way. And let no man take up a Crown but with a purpose to lay it down,
when it shall please God to require it: only the Crown of Heavenly Glory shall
abide upon our heads for ever. Death it self shall never be able to shake it
off, it sits too close. Therefore it were wisdom for to aim at an Eternal
Kingdom; for that is God's command, as it is his promise to give it to them that
seek it. Ambition is base and far below the excellency of that noble Creature,
which was made and redeemed for eternity. Yet there is old catching at these
earthly Crowns, which are a bait wherewith the most noble spirits are taken.
This was Satan's reserve and last temptation, wherewith he thought to overcome
our Savior. As persons so families may fail, and the supreme Power may return
unto a Community, which then has liberty either to alter the form of
Government, or if they retain the former model, to design another Sovereign,
and the same eligible either at random with a latitude, or in a certain Family.

Resignation, Desertion.
For in some cases a Sovereign may resign his power to another even in his
lifetime. Thus Charles the fifth, resigned his hereditary Dominions unto
Philip the first of Spain, and others have done the like. Some desert the
Charge either to take a better or a greater, as the Duke of Anjou deserted
Poland to succeed his Brother in the Kingdom of France, or out of discontent,
or upon some other cause. And usually in a vacancy, either upon the Issue
failing, or a desertion there follows a competition amongst pretenders. For as
they say, no man that has an Estate can want Heirs: so in this case there will
be pretenders, and many times Competitors. Thus it fell out in Portugal upon
the death of Sebastian and Henry the Cardinal his Uncle. For Anthony's
Legitimation could do him little good, his Sword was not long enough; the King
of Spain's was. Therefore his Title, though not the best, was yet the strongest
and most effectual. As this Power may be lost, or rather voluntarily laid
aside, so it may be violently invaded by a just War, either of the People
defending themselves, Subjects may defend their Rights.
and their Rights unjustly denied them or taken from them, which according to
the fundamental Constitution, they may and ought to maintain even against a
personal Sovereign, though not as their Sovereign, but as one that usurps
greater Power than is due unto him, and doing the People wrong. For some tell
us, that is no Right which may not be defended. The final issue of such a War
may be the overthrow of the Sovereign and his Party, and a Deposing of him, or
a rejection, or death, with the Exclusion of his Family. Whether these things
be done justly or no, must be known by the Laws of God written or natural, and
the Law of the Constitution of that State, where any such thing is done. Some
of our Barons Wars seem to be reducible to this case: as likewise the late
difference between King and Parliament, and the civil War following thereupon.
Yet even in that difference, if the Lords and Commons have, partem imperii, and
participate the Power jointly with the King, then they seem to have the
advantage: because, according to their own profession, the War being undertaken
by them in their own just and necessary defense, and ending in a clear Conquest
of the King, this not only preserved their own rights, but if we may believe
Grotius, and the case be as he puts it, or the same with his, the King plainly
lost his right. Yet if it was a War between Sovereign and Subject as such, it
was a Rebellion on the Subjects part, and so the King could lose no right. But
the War was said to be, as some express it, between the King and Parliament:
Yet the Parliament declared they fought for King and Parliament. And so the
King as King was not the enemy, yet it fell out that the person who was King
was Conquered and confined, and in the end put to death. But in these difficult
points, it is not easy either to have true and perfect information, or if we
had, to meet with an impartial Judge. Sovereignty may be taken away by a
foreign Invasion, upon a just War, whether Defensive or Offensive. For, if the
unjust party be conquered, the right of Sovereignty is lost, and this is an
usual case.

Amittitur modo inordinato: ut dissolutione, mala administratione.


The dissolution of a State, must needs destroy and take away all personal
Majesty. And except this dissolution be from a mutual consent of all parties,
Sovereign and Subject, for to erect a better frame; it must needs be inordinate
or disorderly. And if the personal Sovereign be the cause and begin this
dissolution without just reason, he must needs forfeit. What destroys Personal
Majesty.
For whosoever holds any power from the Constitution, and yet acts against it,
he must needs lose. And if he once lose his power, and through his own default,
his Subjects are freed from their Allegiance. This was the reason why the
Parliament passed so high a judgment upon the King. For, upon his withdrawing
from Parliament, refusing to return, and setting up his Standard, both the
Houses proceeded jointly together in adjudging it Treason against the State, or
Kingdom, in deserting his Parliament, betraying his Trust and People, setting
up his Standard, and levying War against the Parliament and Kingdom; that is,
against his own Peace, Crown and Dignity. Thus the Author of the rights of the
Kingdom. This he takes to be a peremptory sentence, and that the latter
General's Commission for to take the King was a strong Capias ut legatum. These
things are out of and beyond my sphere. Yet it is certain, that so far as the
Kings proceedings were against the Fundamental Constitution, so far they tended
to a dissolution and a forfeit of the power Regal. And when the Militia and the
Array did so fearfully clash and dash the people in pieces, there was a plain
dissolution of the Government for the present. And upon a Victory followed an
Act of Alteration, and not only the present Sovereign was dispossessed, 1. By a
Judgment, then by Death, but his Family disinherited, and continues so to this
day. Whatsoever Men in this particular have done, yet God has judged justly.
And it deeply concerns that Family seriously to consider what the guilt is, for
which God has so severely punished them. There is another cause whereby, and
for which Sovereignty is often lost; and that is male administratum. For as
Wisdom, Justice, Judgment, are the establishment of the Throne, and that by
virtue of Gods institution and promise: so is negligence, imprudence,
injustice, oppression, and other such like sins, a cause of dethroning and
divesting the Governors and Princes of the World. For these offend God, abuse
the Power wherewith they are but trusted, provoke the people: Therefore God
either stirs up their own people against them, or makes use of foreign power to
invade them, and delivers them into their hands. The highest degree of this ill
Administration is called Tyranny, and such wicked Governors are said to be
Tyranni in exercitio. For though their Title may be good, yet their power is so
abused, as that they for the most part are worse and more wicked than Usurpers.
These in their administration violate both the written and natural Laws of God,
the Law of Nations, the Law of the Constitution of that State where they
govern, and the Laws of Justice and Equity; the violation of all which tend
directly to the ruin of the Commonwealth. Arnisaeus, who together with Bodin,
is so much for absolute Princes, does confess that such a Tyrant does Excidere
jure suo etsi haereditario. And there is great reason for it: because his
manner of administration is against the very fundamental Rules, and the very
end of all Government. For God never did, Man never can give any power to be
unjust.

arcana imperii and dominationis, handled more at large by Clapmarius and
Angelius, whereof some are prudential Rules for the acquisition, and
conservation of the form of Government, and also for the continuance of power
in the hands of the Persons or Families possessed of it. Some of them are but
Sophisms of State, used too much by many Statesmen in these days, who separate
Religion and Policy to their own ruin. For as the learned Fitz-h^rbert has
made it evident, God will never prosper such courses. Hitherto also might be
referred the causes of corruption, conversion and subversion of States. Whereof
something shall be said in the Chapter of Disposition.

2. The right may be lost, and the possession continue, or the possession may
be lost, and the right may remain for a time.

3. That a bare title is no power. For as the sword in possession without
Wisdom and Justice is insufficient, so Wisdom and Justice, with a Title,
without the Sword cannot actually govern: because it cannot protect and punish.

4. No man can acquire and receive any power except God give it, nor keep it
any longer than God is willing to continue it. For he has reserved it in his
own hands to dispose of it to whom, and how long, and in what measure and
manner he pleases: yet he seldom does communicate it immediately, or in an
extraordinary way. He gives it for the most part mediately by man to man.
Therefore that Sovereigns hold their Crowns from God, and that they are supreme
next under God admits of some limitation and explication, otherwise it may
prove an error. For I am sure few of them receive their Sovereignty immediately
from God as Saul and David did. The immediate foundation of it is some humane
constitution and agreement made, not immediately by God, but Men. This, to such
as understand the fundamental Laws of States, is clear enough.

5. The greatest Power of any mortal man is but very little, and he is but
trusted with it for a while: and such is his frailty, that he cannot well
manage that little which is committed to him. Therefore all defects of humane
Government are supplied by the universal and eternal King, who punishes all
offenses, not punished by man, and rights all wrongs, not righted and rightly
judged by the Rulers of the World. And he makes use of Angels, Men, Armies, all
Creatures to execute his righteous Judgments.

6. Majesty hangs very loosely upon such as do possess it, they have no strong
hold of it. It Is easily separable from man, and man from it, and it is more
easily lost than acquired, and acquired many times more easily than kept.
Therefore it is that a Scepter is so easily turned to a spade, and a spade unto
a Scepter.

7. Here is the proper place to examine, 1. Whether Majesty can be conferred
upon any person or persons upon condition. 2. Whether once conferred and
received, it can be forfeited? Not to be conditionally given and received; not
to be liable to forfeiture, are not Jura Majestatis, as Mr. Hobbs improperly
calls them; but if they any ways agree to Majesty (as it will be hard to prove
they do) they are rather adjuncts than any thing else. For the first, Whether
they be given upon condition or no, cannot be well determined, except we
distinguish of this Power as given by God, and as given by Man. 2. Between
Majesty real and personal. 3. Between personal of the first, and of the second
degree. 4. Between the Sovereign, materially and formally considered. 1. God
never gave any Power or Majesty Real or Personal but upon condition, 1. That
the receiver use it well. 2. That he may take it away at will and pleasure. 2.
Real Majesty cannot by Man be given upon condition to a Community as free, and
such in proper sense. 3. A Community may give personal Majesty upon condition:
and by the Laws of God cannot give it otherwise. And the Condition is, that
they use it well and for the good of the people, according to the eternal Laws
of divine Wisdom and Justice; for that very end for which God ordained all
higher Powers and civil Government. And no good Sovereign will desire it upon
any other terms. Hence the Oaths solemnly administered to the Sovereigns of the
World; which the people impose upon them, not as Subjects, but as members of a
Free Community, and this imposing referrs to the first Constitution and the
fundamental Law of Government. This is clear enough in the first institution of
a King in England, as the Myrrour tells us. The Conqueror received the Crown
upon the same terms. And some good Lawyers inform us, that before the King had
taken his Oath to the people, he could not require an Oath of Allegiance from
them. Therefore Sir Edward Coke must be warily understood, when he makes the
Coronation but a formality. For though the setting of the Crown upon their
Heads, which is but a sign of Dignity and Honor, be but a Ceremony, yet the
matter of his Oath is essential to the making of him King; and if that, being
the substance of the fundamental Contract, be not presupposed, as first
consented unto, he cannot be a King. Bracton, who advances our Kings, as high
as any ancient Lawyer, says, Ipse autem Rex non debet esse sub homine, Bracton.
sed sub Deo and Lege quia lex facit Regem. Attribuat igitur Rex Legi, quod lex
attribuit ei, videlicet dominationem and potestatem. Non enim est Rex ubi
dominatur voluntas, non lex, l. 1. c. 8. And here he seems to understand, not
only the Law of constitution but administration. That he means the latter is
plain, when he says, Non debet esse major eo in Regno suo in exhibitione
juris. He formerly asserted that Rex non habet param in Regno suo, which is
true in respect of every single person, otherwise we know the King may be
judged. With this agrees that of the Myrrour, That it was the great abusion of
all, to say, the King was above the Laws, to which he ought to be subject. And
we know who makes these Laws. Arnisaeus, who is so zealous for absolute
Monarchs, confesses with the Philosopher, that ubi leges dominantur, the King
cannot be absolute. He observes three kinds of Oaths which Princes take: The
1. Is to maintain Religion; The 2. To do their Duty; Kings duty.
The 3. Whereby they subject themselves to the Laws. Such are the Oaths to be
taken by the Kings of Poland, Swethland, Denmark and England, whose
Coronation Oath includes all the three. Yet this very man having no better
Author than Holinshed, is bold to affirm, that our Kings were absolute
hereditary Monarchs. Bodin and Bisoldus seem to be of the same mind. And if
they be such, then says Arnisaeus, they are Kings before they take their
Oaths, and hereditary too. But, who told him so? How will he prove it? We know
for certain it is otherwise, and our Antiquaries in Law will say that he is very
ignorant, and yet very bold, if not an impudent flatterer. That Bodin with him
and others, should make the King of France absolute, there may be some color,
if we look upon their practice, for they act very highly as absolute Princes.
Yet if Hottoman, a better Lawyer, and a far greater Antiquary than either Bodin
or Arnisaeus, be true, the Kings of France are made Kings and receive their
Crowns from the first investiture, and that upon conditions? Neither is there
any Government, which has a rational and just constitution, which may be known
by ancient Records or unwritten constant Customs, but will manifest that the
Sovereigns thereof receive their Crowns, and keep them upon certain conditions,
different from the written and natural Laws of God. And it is remarkable, that
no Constitution can be good or allowable, which is not agreeable to those Laws.
It Is true, that if a people design one or more Persons to be their Sovereign,
and promise absolutely to acknowledge them, by that designation and promise,
they are bound to grant him or them all the power whereby he or they may be
absolute Sovereigns: and if they will keep their promise, they must not, they
cannot put any conditions upon him or them, which may tend to the diminution of
the Power already given. And they may give it so, as that he may as absolutely
transmit it and derive it to his Posterity. Yet if any shall do thus and set up
such an absolute Sovereign; that very Person or his Successor may be considered
materially as such, or such men, or formally as such Sovereigns. Materially
considered, especially as such as not yet invested, they may be bound to such
conditions as upon the nonperformance of them, they may forfeit. But, consider
them as actually and absolutely invested, there can be no such Obligation:
neither can any Conditions or Oaths be imposed upon them, except they be
willing to accept of them. Yet, if any people constitute such a Sovereignty,
it is to be examined how justly and wisely they have done, and whether they have
not enslaved both themselves and their posterity, and laid the foundation of
their own misery and ruin. Binds not posterity.
And if this Constitution be neither just nor wise, I cannot see how it should
bind posterity. And I would gladly know, whether those Authors, who are so
zealous for absolute hereditary Powers, can give us an instance of any wise and
just people, that at the first constitution did give their free and full
consent to such a Government. They never did, nor I think ever can instance in
this particular.

Majesty when forfeited.
Where you must note, that to forfeit any thing is to lose the right unto it.
For, it is one thing to lose the right, another to lose the possession. For as
before, one may lose his right and retain the possession, and lose his
possession, and yet retain his right. Therefore the Question is not de
possessionis sed de juris amissione. 2. The Question is not, Whether they may
forfeit to God, for that they undoubtedly may; but whether they may forfeit
unto men. 3. Who those Men are, to whom it may be so forfeited, so as they may
take the forfeit and that justly. For solution of this Question. 1. This I take
as a certain rule, that whatsoever is given and held upon condition, that may
be lost and forfeited. 2. A right once forfeited falls to the party who gave
it, and set down the conditions. 3. They, who from God give Majesty to any
person or family at the first, before they had any right unto it, are the
people and community to be governed. 4. There is no rational and intelligent
people in the World will bind themselves to subjection, but upon condition of a
just protection. No, a people conquered will not yield to be the subjects of
the Conqueror, but upon this condition. And, though his Sword may take away
their lives, yet it cannot make them his Subjects without their voluntary
submission. 5. No wise people, if they can do otherwise, will so submit
themselves as to lose the propriety of their goods, the liberty of their
persons, the enjoyment of their Religion, or to be governed by an Arbitrary
Power without just Laws. 6. Princes, Kings and Conquerors, may either by
themselves or their Ministers of State, insensibly encroach and usurp, yet
these encroachments and usurpations, cannot constitute a Right contrary to the
fundamental Laws. And there can hardly be found any other way, whereby many
become absolute and arbitrary Lords, but this way. 7. The party to which the
forfeiture is made, is not the Subjects, as Subjects, but the people and
community who only can invest one or more with Majesty, and constitute a
Government. Neither can Magistrates, as Magistrates, nor any Officers, as such,
take the forfeiture, Neither can Parliaments, except such as participate in the
personal Majesty, do any such thing. Yet, if the Sovereign once forfeit, When
Subjection ceases.
the Subjects cease to be Subjects. Nor can a great multitude of these, if they
make not the whole body either actually or mutually, though they cease to be
Subjects, challenge the forfeiture. By this you may easily understand how
loosely the Question between Arnisaeus and his party, and Buchanan, Arthusius,
Heno, Junius, Brutus and their adherents, is handled. 8. It Is certain, that
Sovereigns by Law, who have not the Legislative power in themselves solely, and
are bound by Oath to govern according to Laws, which they themselves cannot
make, may forfeit. 9. Such personal Sovereigns, as constantly act, not only
against the Laws of God and nature, but against the fundamental Laws, by which
they receive and hold their power, may and do forfeit. And this is one reason
why all Tyrants in exercise do excidere jure suo etsi haereditario, which
Arnisaeus himself affirms. Yet as he wisely observes, it is not safe always to
take the forfeiture. For it is better by petitions, prayers to God, or patient
suffering for a while (so that they suffer not the State in the mean time to
come to ruin) to seek and expect a redress, than suddenly to involve the
people in blood, and hazard the Commonwealth, and put it in such a condition,
as that it shall not be able in any due time to settle. Yet a real necessity of
defense does alter the case. Hitherto concerning the manner how Majesty may be
acquired or lost.

CHAP. VI. Of Power Ecclesiastical.


Jus Divinum Ecclesiastici Regiminis have sufficiently demonstrated. For the
persons rule, actions and end are to be considered, not under a Civil, but a
Spiritual notion. As styled by Divines, and that according to the Spirit's
language, and the phrase of Holy Writ, to be Potestas Clavium. And the acts
thereof are opening, shutting; or which are the same, binding, loosing. These
are Metaphorical terms, taken out of the Old into the New Testament. For our
Savior did love to use the Spirit's words. The first and chief place where we
read these words in a Political sense with reference to Government, is that of
the Evangelical Prophet. Isa. 22.2.
And the Key of the House of David will I lay upon his shoulder, so he shall
open and none shall shut, and he shall shut and none shall open. Where by Key
is meant Dominatio, or Potestas gubernandi. So Fererius, Schindler, Mollerus,
according to the former use do understand it. For there it is said, Verse. 21.
I will commit thy Government into his hand.

David was a Power over the Family, or of the Family over the Kingdom; nor
whether Eliakim was a Priest or a Prince over the Palace or the Temple. It Is
certain, David was a type of Christ; his House and Kingdom of the Church, and
his Regal Power of Christ's Regal Supremacy. Rev. 1.18.
For he has the Keys of Hell and Death, even that Key of David which binds
the soul and conscience, and disposes of man's spiritual and eternal estate,
and that by an irrevocable sentence. 1 Cor. 3.7.
This Power signified by Key or Keys is not Civil, but that of the Kingdom of
Heaven, which he Mat. 16.29.
promised first, and Joh. 20.22, 23.
conveyed afterward upon the Apostles. As for the acts of these Keys being
exercised, they are said to be sometimes shutting and opening: sometimes
binding and loosing. And though these seem to differ, yet they are the same,
and are acts of Government. For (...) to open is to loose, as Psalm. 102.20.
where it is turned by the Seventy two (...), and not only there, but in other
places, which I forbear to mention. And (...) to bind, is sometimes to govern
or exercise the acts of coercive power. So Psalm. 105.22. to bind his Princes,
compared with Psalm. 2.3. where bands and cords are the Laws and Edicts of
Christ. And the same word in the Chaldee, is obligavit ad obedientiam aut
poenam, (...) Dan. 6.7, 8, 9. is Translated by the Seventy two, (...), a
Decree, obligatio, interdictum. It Is also remarkable, that (...) to shut up,
signifies (...) to deliver into the hand of enemies, or to destruction, Job
16.11. Psalm. 78.48. Hence that phrase of delivering up to Satan, 1 Cor. 5.5. 1 Timothy 1.20. and also (...) to separate or exclude Lepers out of the holy Camp,
as Numb. 12.14, 15. and in other places: which was a Typical adumbration of
that act of Jurisdiction, which we call Excommunication.

Do 1 Cor. 5.12.
not ye judge them that are within, says the Apostle: I have nothing to do to
judge them without. For Ibid.
what have I to do to judge them also that are without? God has reserved them
to his own Tribunal. But Ibid. 13.
them that are without God judges. Yet those without the pale of the Church,
are not exempted from the Civil Jurisdiction of the Christian Magistrate, if
within his Territories. The Power of Hell and Death is not the power of the
Sword. The power given to the Church was not given to the State. The power of
the Kingdom of Heaven is not the power of the Kingdom of the Earth. The power
promised unto, and conferred upon the Apostles, was not estated upon the Civil
Magistrate, though Christian. This power opens and shuts the Gates of Heaven:
binds and loosens sinners as liable to eternal punishments, which no Civil
Sword can do. Therefore it is spiritual.

wise governing. Supreme therefore it is, both in respect of its own Members
within, and also of other Churches, enjoying equal power within themselves: and
are not Queens and Mothers, but Sisters in a parity of jurisdiction with it,
but no superiority of Command over it. For the parity of them without, is not
destructive of her Sovereignty over her own within. The universal Vicaridge and
plenitude of Monarchical power, arrogated by the Patriarch of Rome, cannot
justly depress or take away the Rights of any particular Church. This Power was
first challenged, then usurped, after that in a great measure possessed,
exercised and pleaded for. The pretended right and title was invented after
they had possession, and with a fair color did for a long time gull the world:
which at length awaked out of an universal slumber, and found it to be a dream.

jura or rights: which are four, 1. Of making Canons. 2. Of Constituting
Officers. 3. Of Jurisdiction; and, 4. Of receiving and dispensing of
Church-goods. Thus they may be methodized.

Jus Ecclesiasticum duplex
1. leges ferendi exequendi per- Rectorum constitutionem, jurisdictionis
exercitium.

2. bona Ecclesiastica dispensandi.
There may be other petty Jura, yet easily reducible unto these. And this
division, though grounded evidently upon Scripture, and will by the ingenious
be easily granted, yet it may seem new to some, upon whose understanding the
old perhaps has made too deep an impression. For I find the old distinction of
this power into two parts. The 1. Of Order. The 2. Of Jurisdiction to be
retained by many unto this day. Yet they do not unanimously define what this
Clavis or potestas ordinis is. Some will have it to be the same with Clavis
Scientiae, which the Schoolmen understood of that juridical knowledge, which
was antecedaneous and subordinate unto the Decree or definitive sentence.
Others say, it is the power of Ordination and making of Ministers. Others take
it to be the power of a Minister ordained to preach the Word, and administer
the Sacraments. In which respect it cannot belong to the external Government of
independent Churches. For a Minister, as such, is so a Deputy of Christ, as
that in the due execution of his Office he is above any particular Church, and
above the Angels. And his power in this regard is rather moral than political.
As under this notion, some give him jurisdiction in foro interiori, which the
Papists call forum poenitentiale. But in foro exteriori he cannot challenge it
as a Minister: For then it could not be communicated to any other with him, as
to ruling Elders representing the people. This the Bishops formerly assumed to
themselves, with a power to delegate the same to others.

ad extra. For it is his will and pleasure, that neither men nor Angels should
be subject unto him, but according to a certain Rule. This the Apostles, Elders
and Brethren put in practice, Act. 15. And the jus Canonicum Novi Testamenti
issued from this Power. Unto this Head are reduced the forms of Confession for
Doctrine, Liturgies for Worship, Catechisms for instruction in the Principles
of Religion, and Canons for Discipline in every well constituted Church. In
this Legislation Ecclesiastical, they either do declare what God before has
determined, or determine in things which God has left indifferent, what is
profitable and expedient aecording to the general Rules of order, decency,
unity and edification: according to that distinction of Laws into declarative
and constitutive.

Jus jurisdictionis cum ultima provocatione. Hitherto appertain all
Ecclesiastical Tribunals, Judges, judicial proceedings, the discussion of all
causes within their Cognizance, sentences of Authoritative admonition,
Suspension, Excommunication, Absolution and Execution of all. Besides all
these, because the Church, whilst on Pilgrimage toward her Heavenly City,
has need of these earthly and temporal goods; neither can the public Worship
of God, or her Officers be maintained, nor her poor Saints relieved without
them, therefore every particular Church should be furnished with a Revenue, and
have a kind of publicum aerarium of her own; which is not to be disposed of
according to the will and pleasure of any private person or persons. But there
must be a power, as to make Officers for other things, so for this particular
to receive, keep and dispense the Church's Treasure; this of themselves without
public consent they cannot do. Therefore, though the making of Deacons belong
unto the second part of this Independent power, yet jus dispensandi bona
Ecclesiae publica, is a distinct power of it self. Christ and his Apostles had
a common purse, Joh. 13.29. so had the Church, Act. 6.1, 2, 3, etc. For this
end they had their Collections at set times, 1 Cor. 16.1, 2. This Treasury
belonged to the Church, not to the State, and did arise from the free gifts of
such as were of ability, and well disposed, before there was any Tenure in
Frank Almoigne, as afterward there was.

heterogeneous stuff) I will enquire how far it does extend, what be the limits
wherewith it is bounded, what measure and degrees thereof a particular Church,
as such, by Scripture-Charter may challenge. For this purpose we may take
notice of the subject of Power, which is primary or secondary. In the primary,
it is primitive, total, supreme* In the secondary, it is derivative, partial and
subordinate. The power in both is the same essentially; yet in the one as in
the Fountain, in the other as in several Channels. This seems to be intimated
by that submission required by the Apostle unto the King as supreme, or unto
Governors sent by him, 1 Pet. 2.13, 14. The King is Emperor, who was the
immediate subject of Supremacy; Governors were Presidents, and Vicarii
Magistratus, who are the instruments of the supreme as principal in government.
Coincident with this seems to be that distinction (so frequent with Mr. Parker)
inter statum and exercitium. According to which he defines the government of
the Church quoad statum, to be Democratical, because the power of the Keys is
in the whole Church (which with him is a Congregation) as in the primary
subject. But quoad exercitium to be Aristocratical in the Rulers who derive
their power from Christ by the Church. This shall be examined hereafter. This
difference of the primary and secondary subject is to be observed, lest we make
every one who has power, and is trusted with the exercise thereof, the prime
and immediate receptacle of Church Power from Christ, which is not to be done.

Ecclesiae Regimen est
Internum Externum Universal Particulare formale Objectivum.


The Internal is Gods. The external Universal, as such, Christ does justly
challenge. The external particular formally and properly Ecclesiastical is
committed to particular Churches. The external particular materially
considered, is the Christian Magistrate's due: because the matters of the
Church in this respect are an object of his Civil Power. That distinction of
Cameracensis, potestas est ordinis aut Regiminis, 11 Quaest. in vesperiis Dib.
4. did. 8.
the same with that of Biel, and many other Schoolmen, has some affinity with
this. Quaest. 2.
For, the power of Order with them is the power of a Minister, as an Officer
under Christ of the Universal Church, and is exercised in foro poenitentiali,
or interiori. The power of Government and Prelation (which Defensor pacis
says, the Bishops had per accidens) is the same with this external Government
of the Church, as exercised in foro exteriori, Mat. 18. 1 Cor. 5. Rev. 2.2. or
judiciali, as they term it. All the power of a particular Church, is confined
to matters Ecclesiastical, as such in that particular community, and is
exercised only in foro exteriori. This must needs be so, because the internal
Government of the Church, which by the Word and Spirit immediately rules the
conscience, so, as to cast the impenitent both soul and body into Hell, belongs
to God as God. The external government of the Universal Church as Universal, is
purely Monarchical under Christ; in which respect all particular Churches are
merely subjects; and no ways independent, no nor governing.

Israel. As that was (...), so it is (...). In the Theocratie of Israel, God
was pars imperans, and the absolute Monarch, and reserved to himself the jura
Majestatis. For he made their Laws, appointed their chief Officers, Generals,
Judges: he anointed their Kings, proclaimed their Wars, concluded Peace, and
received last Appeals. Yet in many petty causes and matters of State, and that
often, he trusted their Elders, Officers and Princes, and committed to them
exercise of power and actual government. And their Kings were but a kind of
Vicarii Magistratus under him. So Christ has retained to himself the
government of the universal Church as such: as also the Legislative power of
particular Churches in all Essentials and Necessaries, and has enacted general
Statutes for Accidentals and Circumstantials. He has the principal power of
making Officers, for he determines how many kinds of necessary Officers there
should be: limits their power, prescribes their qualification, sets down their
duty, and gives them their Commission. Their judicial proceedings run in his
name, and their sentence is so far valid on earth, as he shall ratify it in
Heaven. Yet in making of Canons they have power so far, as to declare in
Essentials, to bind in positive Laws and in Circumstantials. In ordaining of
Officers the designation of the persons is theirs. In Jurisdiction, they have
power to hear, examine, take witnesses, apply the controversy or cause to the
Canon, determine and see the sentence executed, and all this in a Sovereign and
independent manner within the circuit of their own Church. And, whereas it may
be said, all this power amounts but to a little, and is confined to a narrow
compass; It Is true, it is but a particle: Yet the Church is more happy, and the
Government more excellent, because it depends so little on man, so much on
Christ. And this power, though diminutive, yet through God's blessing is
effectual, and tends much unto the preservation of purity, piety, unity and
edification: and if well managed, is an excellent means to enlarge Christ's
Kingdom, and further our eternal Salvation. The result of all is this, that
particular Churches are not supreme, but subordinate, both in respect of the
internal Government which is purely divine, and also in respect of the external
universal, which is purely Monarchical under Christ. The Church of Rome doting
upon her universal Head and Vicar General, presupposed and took for granted,
that the community of all Christians in the world were but one visible Church
under, and subject unto one and the same supreme independent Judicatory. This
no question is an error. For, though there be an universal visible Church, yet
it is subject only unto one supreme Consistory in Heaven, but not on earth,
either in a Monarchical, or Aristocratical, or Democratical form, as shall be
hinted hereafter. And, suppose the Pope had been an Ecclesiastical Monarch,
because the Patriarch of the first See in the Imperial City: yet he could not
be universal, but only in respect of the Church within the confines of the
Empire, which did enclose all the other Patriarchates, and was but a little
parcel of the world.

CHAP. VII. Of the manner of acquiring Ecclesiastical Power.
Aaron. It Is first in God the Fountain of all power, and from him derived to
Christ as man and Administrator-general. For so after his resurrection, he said
unto his Disciples, All power in heaven and earth is given me: some measure of
this he by Commission delegates unto the Apostles. Yet that power of theirs as
extraordinary, was not successive, or to be derived to those who followed them
as ordinary Officers of the Church; for it expired with them. Yet there was an
ordinary power of Discipline derived to them, and they never, except in
ordinary cases, did exercise, it but with the Church. This, some say was
acquired, by those words of Christ to Peter, To thee will I give the Keys of
the Kingdom of Heaven, etc. Mat. 16.19. This power was given to Peter, many of
the Ancients say, as representing the Church; others think it was given him as
Head of the Church; others as representing the Apostles, from whom it was
derived to the Bishops; or else, as others tell us, to the Elders of the
Church. But of this hereafter: But whatsoever power the Apostles might have
either severally or jointly considered; it is certain, that Christ derived it to
the Church, whereof the Apostles were Members, yet extraordinary Officers. The
Church acquired it, therefore by free donation from Christ, when he said, tell
the Church, and afterward, whatsoever ye bind on earth shall be bound in
Heaven, Mat. 18.17, 18. By this Church is meant no Vtopian, aerial or notional
body, but such a society of Christians brought under a form of Government, as
may and can exercise this power, as the Church of Corinth, Ephesus, Antioch,
Jerusalem, or any of the Churches of Asia.



Power Ecclesiastical is acquired by lost immediate designation of Christ,
Apostles.
mediate institution, and that justly, unjustly




Seeing none has this spiritual power, except given from God, therefore it
must needs be acquired as it is derived:

It Is derived immediately to Christ as man, the Apostles as his delegates.

Christ as man by his humiliation unto death, the death of the Cross, acquired
an universal power over all persons in all causes spiritual. And he received it
upon his Resurrection, and upon his Ascension, being solemnly invested and
confirmed, began to exercise the same. The Apostles being extraordinary
Officers under Christ, received their extraordinary power, which was both
intensively and extensively great, from Christ. And, 1. For the lost sheep of
Israel before Christ's death. 2. For all Nations after the Resurrection. 3. More
fully and solemnly invested after Christ's Ascension, they began to act: and
that both in an ordinary and extraordinary way, and that in Discipline, as
shall appear hereafter. As they were extraordinary, they could not, as ordinary
they might have successors.

Jews. After that we find several Churches consisting of Jews and Gentiles.
After that a Church, as taken from a Christian Community, is once made up of
persons, a multitude of persons associated, and endued with a sufficient
ability to manage the power of the Keys, in that visible body politic,
presently it acquires this power by virtue of Christ's Institution in these
words: Tell the Church, etc. as before. For in that very Rule, he gives to
direct us how to deal from first to last with an offending brother, he
institutes the external government of the Church, and both erects and also
establishes an independent tribunal. After a Church is once constituted, and
this power acquired it is exercised either by a general Representative, or by
Officers: both these must be invested with power before they can act. And these
acquire their power by delegation, or by being constituted Officers. By these
means the power may be acquired justly.

Yet it may be possessed or exercised unjustly. It Is usurped when any arrogate
it, or take upon them to exercise it without just warrant from the Gospel.
Therefore, 1. When a multitude of Christians, who have no ability to manage it,
shall erect an independent judicatory, they are Usurpers. 2. When one Church
challenges power over another. 3. When Presbyters alone, or Bishops alone
engross the whole power Ecclesiastical, both of making Canons, and of
Jurisdiction and constituting Officers. 4. Magistrates, who as such, take upon
them spiritual power. 5. But the greatest Usurper is the Pope, who usurpeth a
power both intensively and extensively far greater than is due.

turn into a faction and betray their trust, they lose their power as
Representatives. 4. All Officers are divested when for some just cause, they
are deposed or degraded, but this belongs not to this part.

CHAP. VIII. Of the disposition of Power Civil, and the several forms of
Government.


2. Briefly declare the several ways of disposing Majesty, and the several
forms of Governments.

3. Inquire into the Constitution of the Commonwealth of England.

4. Deliver some things concerning our condition in these late times.



2. That Majesty is then disposed, when it is placed and ordered in a certain
constant subject, which thereby may be enabled and bound to protect and govern.

3. That to be disposed in this or that subject, in this or that manner, is
accidental to Majesty, though to be disposed is essential to a Commonwealth.

4. From the different ways of disposing this Power arise the different kinds
(as they call them) of Commonwealths. For from the placing of it in one or
more, arise Monarchical, Aristocratical and popular States.

5. Majesty being the same in general in all States, it may be disposed several
ways and in several degrees, in one or more. Hence arise the difference of one
Monarchy from another: one Aristocracy from another: one popular State from
another.

6. Though it may be a Question, whether the disposing of Power in one or more
can make a specifical difference, yet Monarchy and Polyarchy are taken for
different species of Commonwealths essentially different.

Majestas disponitur.
pure in uno despotice hinc imperium Despoticum Regale
monarchicum Despoticum Regale

regaliter
pluribus optimatibus hinc Aristocratia Democratia
plebe hinc Aristocratia Democratia

miste in pluribus hinc Status popularis. omnibus hinc Status popularis.


The knowledge of this Scheme depends upon the difference and distinction of
the parts and members of a Community. For besides those which are but vertually
members, there are such as are sui juris, independent upon others: and these
are divided into three Ranks. As 1. Such as are only free. 2. Such as are of
the Nobility. 3. Some that are super-eminent. The two former are called in
Latin, Plebs and optimates. And amongst these optimates there may be very great
difference: as we find a Pompey or a Caesar amongst the Romans: a Duke of
Briganza amongst the Portugals, who inherited a vast Estate in Lands. These are
called the Tres ordines, the three States or Ranks of the whole Body of the
People, with us, King, Peers and Commons. The super-eminent are few, the Peers
more in number, yet not very many: the Commons are the greatest multitude by
far, and make up the main body of the Society. Yet with us, of these there be
several degrees and subdivisions. Amongst the Commons, we find the Freeholders
and the Gentry, and a great disparity in both. Amongst the Peers there is a
difference, 1. In respect of the manner of acquiring of this Dignity: and so
some of them are such by ancient tenure, amounting to so many Knights-fees:
some by Writ, some by Patent. These are called in Latin Barons Feudatarii,
rescriptitii, diplomatici. There is another distinction with us of Lords; for
some are Temporal, some Spiritual. The highest of these amongst us are those of
Royal Extraction: In France the Princes of the Blood. In some Countries, as in
Denmark, and some say in Poland, there be Peers and Lords, which hold in
Allodio, and these are independent upon the King in diverse respects: such also
the Princes of Germany be for the most part. And in those States where such are
found, the Government usually is Aristocratical. These Kings, Dukes and
Monarchs became such at first, either for the antiquity of their Family and
their great Estates, or for their super-eminent wisdom and virtue, or for
their rare exploits in War or Peace. For such as are Generals and great
Commanders in wars, prudent and successful, much beloved by Soldiers, may do
much; dethrone Princes, set up themselves, and if it will not be fairly given,
they will forcibly take the Crown: and sometimes they may deserve it, and prove
the fittest to wear it. These are the three Ranks and Orders of the People.

Purely in one, Purely in more.
in one, and then that the State is called a Monarchy. Yet it may be disposed
in more than one, several ways. 1. More absolutely. 2. More strictly limited.
An absolute Monarch, whether Elective or Hereditary is such, as has a full
power over his subjects goods and persons as his own: so that the people have
neither propriety in their goods, nor liberty of their persons. They are but
his servants and little better than slaves: such Pharaoh's Subjects, when
Joseph had purchased their stocks, their Lands, their persons for the Crown,
seem to have been. This Government is absolutum dominium, and therefore termed
Despoticum and herile Imperium. And such a Monarch seems to be that which by
Aristotle is called (...). There be Princes invested with Majesty, who
challenge the Legislative power unto themselves, will by a Proclamation or
Edict command the goods of their Subjects, and imprison their persons at will
and pleasure. These though they be limited by the fundamental Constitution, and
their Oaths, are in the exercise of their power as absolute as the former. This
kind of Government may do well where the Subjects are turbulent, insolent and
unruly, or of a base and servile spirit, or rude and savage. But where the
people are ingenuous, tractable, and of a better disposition, it is very
unreasonable: for, it will either cause Rebellions, and Seditions, or much
debase their spirits. This kind of Monarchy is apt to degenerate into a Tyranny
of one person. Yet if this kind of Sovereign be wise, just and virtuous, the
people may live happily under his protection. Yet such a power, and so
unlimited is not fit to be trusted in the hands of every one. And if it be
hereditary, woe to the people that live under it.

Yet this power may be trusted in the hands of one, yet so as that it may be
allayed, limited, and justly and wisely poised, and the Sovereign as a King.
The word (...) in Hebrew signifies a Governor in general, (...) in Greek is a
word of great latitude, and so is Rex in Latin, and also Sultan, in the Arabic
and Mauritanian Language. Yet some are such imperious Dictators and Masters of
words, that the word King must needs signify an absolute Monarch. That it
often signifies a Monarch and one that has the title of Majesty, there is no
doubt. But the bare word or title not distinctly inform us of the power, or the
manifold differences of Kings; which must be known another way, as by the
constitution of those particular States, where the chief and most eminent
Governors have that title. For there is a great difference and that in respect
of power, between the Kings of Spain and France, and the Kings of Poland,
Swethland and Denmark. Neither does the King of England in this respect exactly
agree with any of them. But if the word cannot, the definition surely of a King
should determine his power. Yet neither will the common usual definition do it.
For thus he is commonly defined. A King is a Monarch, What a King is.
who governs free men justly according to the Laws, to the good of the
Commonwealth. The Genus is, that he is a Monarch. And if such in strict senc^,
as such, he can have neither Superior nor Peer in his Kingdom. The specifical
difference is taken from the Subject, the rule, the end of his Government. For
his proper act is Regere to govern. The subjects of his Government are Freemen.
The Rule is just Laws. The end the public good. Abstract the specifical
difference, and lay the word King and Monarch aside, and it agrees to all
Governors Civil whatsoever. For Civil government being grounded upon the
eternal moral Law, Love thy Neighbor as thy self, and more particularly upon
the fifth Commandment, no person or persons invested with Sovereign power can
be defined any other way; and neither their power nor the exercise thereof is
good, further than it agrees, with this definition. And the more their
government swerves from this Rule, the more of the Tyrant is in them: and if
the violation of it be more than their observation, and that habitually too,
then they are really Tyrants, in exercitio. For denominatio fit a part
praedominante. But I have wondered, why Authors have made this the specifical
difference of a King, which certainly it cannot be. Yet this definition leaves
many things doubtful. For, it determines not what liberty is, and whether it
can be perfect without propriety. Nor does it tell us, what these Laws are
according to which he must govern: whether the Laws of God only, or the Laws
also of men: and if of men, whether the Laws of constitution or administration;
if of administration, whether they must be made by himself alone, or by some
others without him, or with him. For, if the Laws be made by him alone, he is
an absolute Despotical Sovereign; if by others, either with him or without him,
he is not such. For there may be a King, at least in name above Law, and a King
by Law, and such as cannot command or bind the meanest Subject, nor judge him,
but according to Law. Such a King is not a pure Monarch, which I now treat of.
Therefore a King that is a pure Monarch differs from a Despotical Sovereign in
respect of his Subjects, and the measure of his power, and according to this
definition in the exercise of it. The Subjects of the one are free, and have
propriety of person and goods, the Subjects of the other have neither. The
power of the one is more absolute, and of larger extent, or rather more
intensive. The exercise of the power of the one is bounded by just Laws; the
power of the other is not limited or directed by Laws; and so tends not so
much to advance the weal of his Subjects as his own greatness; and in this
respect can be no lawful and good Governor; if he act according to his
absolute and arbitrary power, which God never gave him. And Despotical
Sovereigns, if wise and just, will do as Trajan did, that is, act according to
the Rule of Justice and of a limited power, though they be not bound by man to
do so.

Israel the first King was not right, the fourth too bad; and after the Kingdom
was divided into the Tribe of Israel and Judah, in Judah we find few like
David, many very wicked: in the Kingdom of Israel not one good. Yet the Laws
both Civil and Ecclesiastical were made to their hands, and that by God
himself. Sovereign power is a weighty burden, and requires much strength, and
excellent abilities. Moses himself cannot bear it alone: he has need of one
hundred and Seventy Elders, and the same endued with the spirit of government
to be his assistants. If a Sovereign be imprudent, or weak of understanding,
not able to judge of good counsel, or negligent, or timorous, or wilful, or
destitute of good Agents, and Instruments for Administrations, the Government
begins to decline even in most peaceable times, and the Subjects become
suddenly unhappy. But if he be Wicked, Vicious, Insolent, Impetuous, Cruel, he
instantly becomes a Tyrant, and then both Church and State begin to suffer
much: Religion is corrupted or suppressed and persecuted, the Wicked are
predominant, and the best under Hatches. Yea, though the Prince may be of a
good Disposition, yet facile and flexible, devoid of Wisdom and Courage, and
also destitute of good and faithful Counselors, and beset with wicked Men, how
easily is he misled, involved in many Troubles, and in the end brought to
Ruin. Sometimes a few cunning Politicians act him as a ^hild, drive on their
own Interest, and neglect, yea, pervert the public Good. How much more if the
Monarchs be Children, or Idiots, as some be? If in such a model God raise up a
David, a Solomon, a Jehosaphat, an Ezekiah, a Josiah, the People may be happy,
and have great Cause to be thankful for so great a Blessing.

There is another way of disposing Majesty than the former, and that is, when
it is fixed

Purely in more than one,

And that is twofold, in obtimatibus, plebe.


When it is disposed in few, and the same more eminent, it is called an
Aristocraty, so called from the quality of the persons who govern. For they are
(...) optimates, primores, praecipui, the most eminent in the Community, and
above the common Sort or Plebean Rank; for they are not only formaliter, but
eminenter cives, as you heard before. Their eminency arises from their noble
Extraction, as being descended from noble and ancient Families, or from their
great Estates, or from both, or from their excellent Virtues. And such, as in
whom all these concur, are the fittest for Government. Amongst the Romans
these were called Patricii. This Order of Peers, which may be so called, in
relation of one unto another amongst themselves, is sometimes confined to
certain Families, as they say it is in the Rhagusian and Venetian States, and
with a permission or prohibition to marry in inferior Families, or there may be
way made open for the Adoption of other persons for their eminent Virtues,
though of meaner Rank. For virtus vera nobilitas. Such were the Patricii
minorum Gentium amongst the Romans. And though political Virtues, as Wisdom and
Justice do best qualify them for the place, yet it is requisite they have good
Estates, or sufficient Allowance, otherwise they will oppress the people, or be
unfit to attend the public Service. Yet such as are born of noble and ancient
Families have some advantage, because they many times inherit great Estates,
are more honored by the People, have the benefit of the best Education,
sometimes participate some measure of the noble Spirit of their Ancestors,
whose rare Examples may do something too. These, though physically many, yet
morally, are but one person collective. They may have a president, and such as
the Duke of Venice: And his Privileges, Honor, State and Dignity may be
Paramount, and he may have the precedence, yet no negative Voice nor Power
above the rest. For the Power, and all the particular Rights of Majesty are in
them all jointly: And when they in any business of State do differ, the major
part carries it, and the rest submit. This may be an excellent Government, when
all or the greater and predominant party are Wise and Just, and follow some
certain Rules of the Constitution, and seek the public good, as all other
Sovereigns should do. If there be not care taken in the Succession, that the
best may succeed the best, the body will corrupt and degenerate into an
Oligarchy, which is then done, when either they agree to advance their own
private Interest, to the neglect of the public; or if they be divided, one
party bears down another, and a few prevailing engross the Power, and Usurp far
more than is due, and oppress the People, and so prove a number of Tyrants.
When the richest engross the power to themselves, it is called a Timocraty. If
the Succession into places vacant, either by death, or some other way be by
Election, an excellent qualification prerequired, some strict order for the
admission should be observed, least unworthy persons enter by Favor, Money or
some Indirect way. And in this particular the State of Venice seems to excel.
Neither must any of them be suffered to swell and rise above the rest, as many
ways they may do; especially if they be Men of excellent parts and successful,
and be trusted with too great a command in the Administration. For some wise
Men have observed, That the unlimitted Commission granted Pompey at the first,
for the Pyratick War, laid the Foundation of those bloody Civil Wars which
followed.

Majestas pure disponitur in Plebe. Plebs signifies the inferior rank of
People, which for number far exceed the rest. Among these, besides Artificers,
Husbandmen, and such as are for Trade and Traffic, there may be some
Merchants of great Estates, some of more noble Descent and competent Revenue,
yet far short of such Eminency as is required in Peers or Princes; which this
kind of Government cannot brook. Yet it may be so ordered, as that the exercise
of the Power may be trusted in hands of some just, wise and experienced
Persons, which either must govern by course, or be removed, least trusted too
long, they engross the power to themselves, or to some few Families, or to a
Faction predominant. For this kind of Government is very subject to Faction,
Disorder and Tumults. The name of it is a Democraty; in which there is the
greatest Liberty, not only because they are free from Peers and Princes, but
because every one may be a Magistrate, and proceed in such a way as opens to
that end. Yet because in such a State there be few Men of Learning, Wisdom,
Experience in matters of State, most of mean Education, and many so taken up
with their own private Affairs, it can hardly continue long without some
Alteration, if not Ruin. It presently degenerates into an Ochlocraty, and when
such, there it cannot stay long before it become an Anarchy. It Is a Curse and
heavy Judgment of God to live in such a Government, according to that in the
Prophet. And the People shall be oppressed, every one by another, and every one
by his Neighbor: the Child shall behave himself proudly against the ancient,
and the base against the honorable, Esa. iij.5. The Philosopher reckons up
four several kinds of this Democratical Form: and there may be many more, some
better, some worse. Of the Tumults and Intestine Dissentions amongst these
Plebeans, Histories tell us much. But this is a subject which is not very
profitable, and I list not to enlarge upon it.

Majestas disponitur mixte in pluribus, omnibus.


There is another kind of disposition different from the former, and it is
called a mixed Government. The reason of the name few know, because they little
understand the thing. It Is not called so, as many think, because the Jura
Majestatis are divided and given some to the Peers, some to the people, and
some in some States to the Prince. For this tends to confusion, and does not
well suit with the Nature of Sovereign Power. Therefore it is the cause of many
Quarrels and Dissentions. But it is called mixed, because either three or at
least two of the States are mixed together, so as that the Sovereignty is
jointly in them all, and in the whole; and of these there are two Sorts. For
some time there is no Prince in the Administration, and then it is in the
Commons and the Peers; not in Peers and in Commons severally; but in both
jointly. Sometimes it is in omnibus, in Prince, Peers, Commons. Yet these in the
Administration may have their several parts and different manners of acting.
Therefore we must not judge of States according to the manner of
Administration, though the Administration will give great light and help us to
understand the Constitution. This kind of Government is called a Free State, a
popular State, a Republic, or the Republic, and may be the best State of all
others, where Majestas is tota in toto, yet there may be several kinds of this
manner of Government, which by the Philosopher, as some think, is called,
(...), The Polity. Machiavel informs us, That Experience of the Inconveniences
of pure States put men on work to find out this, and for the most part it may
be so. If either of the two, or any of the three States be predominant in the
Administration, the State is denominated from the prevailing part. For where
the Prince has the Title of King, and is predominant in the Exercise of the
Power, it is called a Kingdom, or Monarchy; where the Peers, it is an
Aristocraty; where the Commons, a Democraty; and yet if it be a right mixture,
it can be none of these: And in this particular many are deceived. For where
the whole Power is wholly in the whole, there Populus, that is, King, Peers and
Commons, are the proper subject of Majesty in the Constitution; by and in
which, if any be predominant, it cannot be a Free State. Such a Government the
German Empire and the State of Venice seem to be. Yet in this latter, the great
Council, which, some tell us, consists of Peers, is counted and judged to have
the supreme Power. Yet, if we may believe Machiavel, the Families out of which
they are chosen, were, at the first Constitution, the whole People. The
Lacedaemonian State is thought by many to be mixed, and some say the mixture was
ex Democratia praedominante and Aristocratia diminuta, yet this is very
improper and cannot be true. The State of Rome seems in the time of the Kings
to be a Monarchy: After that an Aristocraty in the Senate, and the Patricii.
But when Plebs did jubere Leges, then it was a Democraty in the judgment of
many. Yet upon diligent search it will be found otherwise. For though the King
was the chief Pontiff, and did call the Assemblies, had the chief and sole
command in War (for they gave him (...), yet Halicarnassaeus lets us know, That
this Form was taken from the Lacedaemonians, where the Kings had not absolute
Power, they were not (...), but were limited by their (...), or great Council,
and amongst the Romans by their (...), that is, their Senate. They must not do
what they will, but what the Senate did determine. Yet we shall often find this
mixture very imperfect or very much altered in tract of time from what it was
at first. To say nothing of Platonic and Vtopian Commonwealths, which are not
practicable, nor people capable of them, the sum of all this Head is this,
That God has given to Men in their several Communities, a power to protect the
Just, and punish Offenders according to wise Laws and just Judgment, and also a
power to preserve themselves, and justly maintain their own Right against all
Enemies and Invaders. Yet he has left them at Liberty to dispose of it several
ways, and trust it in the hands of one or more, who, if they once take it upon
them, must exercise it and be just. For he that rules over men must be just,
ruling in the fear of God, 2 Samuel xxxiij.3.

England, which has long been governed by Kings and Parliaments. There was
indeed a time, even after the Saxons were settled in this Nation, when there was
no King, but Forty Lords, who at length chose a King, which should have no
Peer: And there was a time when there were many Kings. And after that we find
one King and Parliaments, and this before the Conquest. For this model of ours
began in the time of the Saxon Kings, and was brought to perfection, some say
before; some say in Edward the Confessor's time. What the power of these
Parliaments, and of these Kings were, is the great Question. For that once
known, the Constitution will be evident. There was a Power of Kings, and also
of Parliaments severally, and a power of them jointly considered, we find the
real Majesty in the People, and personal Majesty in King and Parliament
jointly; and a secondary personal Majesty, sometimes greater, sometimes less in
the Kings, in the intervals of Parliament. But to observe a method, and proceed
more distinctly, I will, 1. Presuppose some things. 2. I will say something of
the Kings. 3. Something of the Parliaments severally. 4. Something of them both
jointly. 1. Therefore I will suppose the Government of England to have been by
King and Parliament before the Conquest, and to have continued so till our
days: And whosoever will not grant this, must either be very ignorant, or very
partial. 2. I will take for granted, That there have been extraordinary cases,
wherein the Rules of the Constitution either have not, or could not be
observed. 3. This is also true, that sometimes when they might have been
followed, yet either the constitution of the Parliament, or the carriage of the
Kings was such, as that they have violated the same. 4. Wise and intelligent
men will not deny, but that in our days the Government was so altered and
corrupted, that the first constitution was hardly known, and it was a difficult
thing either to reform it, or reduce it to the ancient form.

Henry 8. might without any Act of Parliament, have designed by will which of
his Children should succeed him. And Queen Elizabeth might have nominated
either the King of Scots, or any other besides him for her Successor. Some may
demand, what right she had to nominate, or any other after her death to
proclaim her Successor. One answer to this demand may be, That her wise Council
did forsee, that this was an effectual, if not the only way to prevent greater
mischiefs and effusion of blood, which in all probability might have followed,
if this course had not been taken. And in an extraordinary case, some
extraordinary thing, tending to the public good, may lawfully be done. Yet
this is not to be made an ordinary rule, and followed as an ordinary Example. A
third way of acquisition is by election and consent of the people. Thus the
first King, as the Mirror tells us in express words, was elected. So were the
Saxon Kings till Edward the Confessor, the last King of the Saxon Race. So was
William the second, Henry the first, Stephen, John. The manner and form of the
Coronation, which contains in a few words much of the Constitution, determines
the Succession to be by Election. Those words of Fortescue to the Prince, Non
habes potestatem regiam, sed a populo effluxam, imply so much. The Conqueror
himself, who, as a Bastard could not inherit the Crown, confesses, that he
possessed not the Crown Jure haereditario. To this purpose the old book of Caen
is alleged. These things are above me and out of my element, therefore to be
judged of by the learned Antiquaries in Law. But suppose it be granted to be
elective, yet it is elective in a certain line; for such has been the practice
for a long time, which is conceived to be more convenient. Yet the Author of
the due Rights of the Kingdom, says, That if a King had such Children so
qualified, and so educated, that they were above others in virtue, wisdom, and
true worth (or at least caeteris pares) they were the most likely Candidates
for the Crown.

Roman Emperors acquired their power by election, and yet it was absolute, as
is pretended and very great. And here I do not intend to say any thing of his
excellent Dignity; his Scepter, Sword, Throne, Crown, Robe, Titles, the Honor
due unto them; for these are not so material as the Prerogatives of the King of
England. Prerogatives, says Sir Roger Owen, are the Flowers, which by time
immemorial the Commons of this Realm have granted the Kings thereof. If this be
true, he has no Prerogatives, but such as are granted him, and that by the
Commons of England. But Judge Crook is no flatterer, he speaks plainly, and
says, he knows no Prerogatives the King has but this, that he cannot do
wrong. This may be understood either as it agrees to all Sovereigns, or as to
the Kings of England in a more special manner. It Is true, that no Sovereign,
though absolute and Despotical can do wrong. For, Id quisque potest, quod jure
potest. The meaning is, they ought not to do wrong; for to do wrong is contrary
to the Laws of God, whereby they hold their Crowns; and also to the very end,
for which God instituted civil Government. Yet there is a more special reason
why the Kings of England can do no wrong, because they are Kings by Law; they
cannot bind by their personal commands, but by their Regal, which are not
Regal, if not Legal. Again, he does all things like an Infant in his minority
by his Ministers of State, to whom he can grant no Power or Commission to act
but according to Law. Therefore if any wrong be done, as much is, it is done by
them, and they, not the King, are chargeable with it, and questionable for it.
Yet he has power, and great power, and it is not the less, but rather the
greater and more like unto Gods, because it is limited by Law. He Summons
Parliaments, makes Officers, conferrs Honors, sends and receives Ambassadors,
and gives them answer, makes Leagues with other States, and other things
formerly mentioned, when I spoke of the second king of personal Majesty. Yet,
if we may believe Bracton, he has all this from the Law. For Lex facit Regem,
and he is but trusted with the exercise of it for the protection of the people,
and the execution of the Laws: in which respect it seems to follow, that if the
Law be above him, they who make the Laws must needs be above him.

What the King cannot do.
he cannot refuse to call them, either when the Laws, or the ardua Regni
require them, he cannot exercise the Militia but according to the Laws, neither
can he make or repeal Laws without the Parliament; he cannot command the Purse,
he cannot alienate the Crown or the Crown-Revenue, nor dispose of the Crown as
his own hereditary Fee; diverse other things there are above his power. Yet the
Kings of England have challenged and exercised far greater power, than the Laws
and Constitution gives them. But that was matter of fact and cannot found a
Right. We read that King Richard the second was charged, as with other things,
so with these two: 1. That he said the Laws were in his head and his breast:
that is, he had the Legislative power solely to himself. 2. That he denied to
approve the Laws made by the Parliament, that is, he challenged a negative
Voice. In both these, Arnisaeus undertakes to maintain his cause as just, and
that he did but challenge his due. Lib, de authoritate principum in populum
semper inviolabili, Cap. 4. Yet all his whole answer is but petitio principii.
For presupposing the King of England to be an absolute Monarch, which we know
he is not, he takes upon him to answer the whole charge, which he might easily
do, if he take for granted, that which he can never prove, nor English Men,
especially Antiquaries in Law, will never grant him; that he wrote against
Rebellion and Treason, and maintained the just and lawful authority of Princes,
he did well, but that he should write as a Pensioner to the King, and so
presumtuously judge of the Constitution of a Foreign State, whereof he was
sufficiently ignorant, we English Men cannot well brook. So Bodin being
informed by Dellus (who I think, was Sir Thomas Dale, a prudent and experienced
Statesman, and far better acquainted with the Government of his own Country
than he was) that the Kings of England could not make or repeal a Law without,
but only by the Parliament, he wondered, and notwithstanding his Information, he
presumptuously determines the Kings of England to be absolute Monarchs. So much
he doated upon his imperfect notion of Majesty and absolute Power. Mr. Cambden,
though a learned Antiquary, yet not in the common Law, speaks doubtfully in
this point, and does not well, though perhaps prudently express himself. His
words are, Quod Rex habet supremam potestatem and merum imperium apud nos. Yet
afterward, speaking of our Courts, he gives to the Parliament the supreme and
sacred power, in making, conferring, repealing and interpreting the Laws, and
in all other things, which concern the good of the State. If he meant that the
King had it jointly with the two Houses, it is tolerable; yet if so, 1. His
former expression was not good. 2. Neither is that latter assertion of his,
when he says, the Parliament is summoned ad arbitrium Regis, when the King
pleases.

Cambden gives a tolerable description of it. It Is a Representative of all
England, invested with the highest power of Legislation, and all other acts
that concern the common good. This is the substance of the matter, though not
given in his express terms. And here I will not say any thing of their
Election, Incorporation, manner of proceeding after it is once constituted, and
begins as a formal Parliament to act. Some have conceived it to be one of the
most orderly Assemblies in the World, Parliament best Assembly.
which is an argument of the great wisdom of our Ancestors, who first molded
it, and brought it to perfection, yet it may be corrupted and ill constituted,
and then Corruption optimi est pessima. The Election in our times is not well
ordered; for if it were, the very quintessence of the wisdom and virtues of all
England might be extracted, united, and act in that Convention. But men are
ready through want of understanding to undo themselves, by choosing
insufficient and unworthy persons. Parliament Members qualified.
The first constitution certainly required a qualification in the persons to be
Elected. For we trust them much, even with our Estates, Liberty, Lives and
Religion for the outward profession. It Is not fit to trust these in the hands
of any sort of Men, but such as shall be wise, faithful, just and sincerely
affecting the public good. Wittena Gemote.
The Saxon name Wittena Gemote implies this; for it signifies the meeting of
wise men, and is the abridgement of all the Folk-motes in England, and of the
wisdom of all England: and now of all England, Wales, Scotland, Ireland. If
they should be wise men, wisdom includes all virtues. If we consider this great
body as distinct from the King, it is said to consist of two Houses; which some
call the upper and the lower. This the Commons did not like, did not
acknowledge. The two Houses, or the House of Commons, and the House of Peers
may be tolerable: and I do not know they ever excepted against the expressions.
Many ungrateful and unworthy persons, to their own wrong and prejudice, What
the House of Commons is.
have much depressed the House of Commons, and are not ashamed to say, such is
their ignorance, that it is but of late standing. Yet it is the chief part, and
almost the whole Representative: the Peers to them are but inconsiderable.
Whatsoever is concluded there does most concern them, and the heaviest burden
lies on them. And though by Commons, some may understand only the Plebeian
Rank, yet there we find in that House men of as good Birth, Estates, and as
eminent virtues, as many of the Lords be. What the House of Commons is may be
more easily known, but the nature of the House of Lords is somewhat hidden. For
in it we find Lords Spiritual, as Abbots, Bishops, and these by Tenure; we find
in it also Lords Temporal, as Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Viscounts, Barons. And
all these under the name of Lords, Peers, Barons, though Barons, Proceres,
Nobiles, do sometimes signify other persons. For we read of the Barons of the
Cinque Ports, Barons of the Exchequer, the eight Barons of Cheshire, and the
Barons of Burford in Shropshire. We find Peers sometimes taken in another
sense: and to include the Commons. And the truth is, if the whole assembly be
considered as one Representative, they are all Peers, and in all acts should be
taken so to be. These Peers become such three ways, as I observed in my answer
to Mr. Hobb's. For they are aut Foedales, aut rescriptitii, aut diplomatici,
Barons by Tenure and ancient prescription since the time of William the Elder,
or by Writ, or by Patent. It is not for me to debate, much less to determine
the Controversies about these Lords, as, 1. Whether they be essential parts in
a distinct House from the Commons of the Parliament, or no: seeing Acts and
Ordinances, and the same valid, are said to be made without these Lords. not
any by the Lords without the Commons. The End of calling the House of Lords.
2. What these Lords may do, or for what end they are called. For some say,
they sit there as Judges of the King together with the Commons. For though the
King in his Politic capacity cannot do wrong, yet in his Personal he may. This
Horn and Bracton, with other of the old Lawyers, will tell us: in whom we may
read of the Torts and wrongs done by the King, and of judging him, as also the
Queen and the Prince. 3. Seeing by the Writ of Summons they are called to
deliberate and consult, Consilium impensuri, not ad faciendum and
consentiendum, as the Commons are, whether they be there only as the King's
Counselors. 4. Suppose them to be the King's Counselors, whether they be such
without or with the Commons. 5. Whether they have any share in the Legislative
power, or if they have, whether in the same House, or in a distinct House and
Body with a negative to the Commons, or not. 6. When this transmitting of Bills
to the House of Lords began, which some say, to be after the Barons Wars. For
it was not so from the beginning. 7. Whether the Lords and not the Commons have
power to administer an Oath. What Barons called to Parliament.
We read in Sir H. Spelman's Glossary, in the word Baro, that no Barons were
called to the Parliament, but such as held of the King in Capite. 2. That all
these were not called, but the chief of them, as Earls who possessed twenty
Knights Fees, and Barons which had to the value of thirteen Knights Fees, and a
third part of one. 3. That because these were too many, some of them were
called to Parliament, some omitted: and only such as were called were counted
Barons, the rest not. 4. This being taken ill, the Barons caused King John
adigere, to covenant under the Broad Seal, to summon severally by so many
Writs, the Archbishops, Abbots, Earls, and the greater Barons of the Kingdom.
5. Yet Henry the Third so little regarded that compact, that he called and kept
a Parliament, with an hundred and twenty Spiritual, and only twenty five
Temporal Lords, though he had numbered two hundred and fifty Baronies in
England. 6. Edward the First omitted diverse of those, whom Henry the Third had
summoned. So that it will be a very difficult thing to rectify or reduce unto
the first institution this House, as distinct from that of the Commons. For it
should be known, 1. What kind of persons must constitute this other House. 2.
What their Privileges be. 3. What they must do, which the House of Commons may
not, must not do.

Power of Parliament without the King.
By all this, something of the nature of the Parliament may be known. But then
what is the power of this assembly, either severally considered without the
King, or jointly with the King? And that they may make Orders and Ordinances
pro tempore will be granted, and also, which is far more, if the King have no
Negative voice, the Legislative and Judicial power is in them, and their
ultimate Resolves and Dictates in all matters of Counsel must stand. And if so,
then reason will conclude; that if the King refuse to be personally or
virtually present, and to act with them, they may do any thing for the good of
the Kingdom without him, which they may do jointly with him. Yet because Laws
and Judgment are ineffectual without execution, therefore the King, being
trusted with the execution, was required to give his consent, Why Kings Consent
required.
that he might take care of the Execution. For to that end was he trusted with
the Sword of Justice and War, that he might protect the people, and see that
Laws and Judgments be executed. If we consider the Parliament as consisting of
King, Peers and Commons jointly, it is the first subject of Personal Majesty,
and to it, First subject of Personal Majesty.
and it alone belongs all the Jura Majestatis personalis. They have the power
Legislative, Judicial, Executive, to exercise it in the highest degree; and may
perform all acts of administration as distinct from the Constitution. They are
the highest assembly for Legislation, the highest Counsel for advice, the
highest Court for Judicature.

Roger Owen tells, That the Parliament cannot do all things. For, What the
Parliament cannot do.
1. Many Acts are Voted for errors in matter of fact, and for contrariety in
words, and sometimes they have idle and flattering proviso's. 2. A Parliament
has not power to ordain that a Law shall not be abrogated for the space of
twenty years, for a latter Parliament may repeal their Acts. 3. That a
Parliament cannot Enact, that, if there were no Heir to the Crown, that the
people should not be able to choose a new King. 4. It cannot change the form of
our Policy from a Monarchy to a Democraty. 5. It cannot take away diverse
Prerogatives annexed to the Crown of England, or that the King should not be
able to dissolve the Parliament at will and pleasure; yet in another place he
tells us, that he cannot dissolve the Parliament at will and pleasure; and
again, he is not above the Parliament, because he cannot be above himself; and
in Parliament he is Maxim Rex. He further informs us, that the common Law is
the King's Inheritance, and how the Parliament may wither away the Flowers of
the Crown. The true reason, why the Parliament cannot do some of these things,
nor others not mentioned by him, is, because they have not real but personal
Majesty. They cannot alter the Government, nor take away diverse things
belonging to the Crown, because they did not give the Prerogatives of the Crown
at the first; Who gave Crown Prerogatives, and Parliament-being.
the Commons of the Realm gave them, as he confesses. The form of Government
was first constituted by the Community of England, not by the Parliament. For
the Community and people of England gave both King and Parliament their being:
and if they meddle with the Constitution to alter it, they destroy themselves,
because they destroy that whereby they subsist. The Community indeed may give a
Parliament this power, to take away the former Constitution, and to frame and
model another, but then they cannot do this as a Parliament, but as trusted by
the people for such a business and work: nay, they may appoint another assembly
of fewer or more to do such a work without them. They may set up a Consilium
sapientum, which may determine what matters are fit to be proposed to the
Parliament, and in what order, and also contrive a Juncto for all businesses,
which require expedition and secrecy, which may act without them: whether the
Parliament it self can do such things or no, may justly be doubted? What may be
done in extraordinary cases is one thing, what may be done in an ordinary way
another. When he says, that the Parliament cannot change the form of Policy
from a Monarchy, he presupposes our State of England to be a Monarchy, yet if
he distinguish not between the Constitution and the administration, he may be
guilty of an error. For it is not a Monarchy, but only in respect of the
Executive part in the Intervals of Parliaments. Our Ancestors abhorred absolute
and arbitrary Monarchs: therefore before they did establish a King, they made a
bridle to keep him in, and put it upon him. This is plain from Bracton,
Fortescue, the Coronation Oath, and the Mirror.

England was. Kings of England no absolute Monarchs.
It was no absolute Monarchy, that is plain enough. Neither was it a State of
pure disposition but mixed. Neither were the Jura Majestatis divided, some to
the King, some to the Lords, some to the Commons, it was of a far better mould.
The personal Majesty primary was in King, Peers and Commons jointly: in the
whole assembly as one body. this may appear several ways. as 1. From this, that
it was a Representative of the whole Nation, and as it was a general
Representative of all England and no ways else, was it invested with this
personal Sovereignty. It must represent the whole Community, all the Members
thereof, of what rank or condition soever, not only the Laity but the Clergy
too: these are words used in our Laws, and good enough, though disliked by
many. The Clergy and Ministry of England were never represented by the Knights
of the Counties before our times: neither could the Parliament, without the
personal presence of some of themselves impose Subsidies, much less
Ecclesiastical Canons upon them. They are as free English men as any other, and
by the Laws of the Land have their privileges and immunities distinct from
those of other men's, which are now taken from them: and it is an hard case that
they may have none of their own faculty and capacity, as their proper
Representatives to maintain them and speak reason for them. They are willing
enough to part with any thing formerly they had, if not agreeable to Scripture.
2. To prove this mixture, the King's Coronation Oath might be alleged: for he
swears to corroborate the just Laws and Customs, quas vulgus elegerit, where
two words require some explication. 1. Vulgus. 2. Corroborare. That we may know
what they mean. Vulgus some think does signify the Commons, and then the
Lords, as of a distinct House, can have no share in the Legislation, except as
some tell us they were represented by the Knights of the Counties, whom with
the rest of the Freeholders they did anciently elect, and contribute to their
Charges whilst they sat in Parliament. Vulgus in Latin is the same that Folk in
Saxon, and now remains in English; from whence Folk-mote the City or
Shire-meeting, as the Parliament is the great meeting of all the Counties in
England. In this place it must be the Representative of the whole Community of
England in one body, all the members of the Wittena Gemote, as united, and
distinct from the King. The word Corroborare does not signify to give the
essence to the Law, as though it were not a Law before, or not a Custom; but it
signifies to guard, keep, defend, observe the just Laws and Customs in the
administration, and to see them executed according to judgment. It may be the
same with (...) in Greek; which does not give the being to a Will and
Testament, for it must be a Will before it be confirmed and so made effectual;
Confirmation is extrinsecal and accidental, not essential to the Will or
Testament. The reason why the Kings did swear to corroborate the just Laws and
Customs made, approved, chosen by the people, was because that upon the
dissolution of the Parliament, the sword remained in his hands for to see the
Laws executed, which were ineffectual, would lie dead, be in vain without
execution. These words explained, the matter to be observed is, that if by Laws
and Customs we understand the rules of administration, not only as including a
binding force, but also as to be made effectual, then it follows by the tenor
of that Oath, that the Legislative power, which is the foundation and rule of
all acts of administration, was in King, Peers and Commons jointly: this is a
mixture, and a free State. 3. This mixture will farther appear from the manner
of enacting for that was the manner in our days. Be it therefore enacted by the
King's most excellent Majesty, by and with the assent and consent of the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in this present Parliament Assembled,
and by authority of the same. Neither is this new; for the substance of it is
ancient, as Sir Edward Coke does manifest in the cause of the Prince, as Duke
of Cornwall. The Collection of the Statutes will manifest it for four hundred
years. For what if other terms were used, yet they were in sense the same.
Neither did this begin in the Reign of Richard the Second, or Henry the Third.
King Edward the Confessor's Modus tenendi Parliamentum will confirm the same,
to which my Lord Chief Justice Coke tells us, the Conqueror bound himself.
Though Sir Roger Owen thinks this book but a Pamphlet, yet my Lord Coke, as
good a Lawyer, and Sir Henry Spelman as good an Antiquary as he, were of
another mind, and thought better of it. Nay, it is not only thus in making Laws,
but also in judgments which pass into an act. And this kind of Judgment is the
highest, from which there lies no appeal. This is the nature of the
Constitution so far as my poor understanding is able to judge.

distempers, did foresee this, and gave us warning from those words of our
Savior, Except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish, Luke 13.3. Yet no
warning given either by our watchmen from the Scriptures, Cause of England 's
Miseries.
or the judgments of God upon Germany and the neighbor Nations round about us,
whom from our own shores we might behold wallowing in their own blood, would be
taken. And even then when there was no danger from any enemy without, and we
were secure, as enjoying the sweetest and most happy peace that could be
expected on earth; God looked down from Heaven with indignation, and as though
he had sworn to be avenged on such a Nation, and so ungrateful a people, he
sent a spirit of giddiness amongst us, and set the Egyptians against the
Egyptians, and made us Executioners of his own Judgment upon our selves: for
from our selves our miseries did arise. For after a first and second
pacification between England and Scotland, the long continued Parliament began
to reform both Church and State, but found the corruptions so generally
diffused and deeply rooted in the whole body, that there was a greater fear of
ruin, than hope of Reformation; and this some of our wise Statists had formerly
observed, was likely to be the issue. They acted vigorously at the first, but,
as some wise men thought, too hastily and too high, and seemed somewhat to
incline to an extreme. In the mean time no man suspecting, no man fearing it,
brake out that bloody barbarous massacre in Ireland, wherein two hundred
thousand English Protestants are said to be murdered in one month. In this the
actors were Irish Papists, and the sufferers English Protestants. This could
not quench the fire of dissension in England, which began to manifest it self
in the Parliaments Militia opposed to the King's Array, which proceeded to a
bloody battle at or near Keinton; which continued till the King's party was
wholly subdued in England, himself put to death, his posterity dispossessed of
the Crown, Ireland reduced with the ruin of almost all the chief and ancient
Families of the same, and Scotland vanquished. In all our sad divisions which
happened from first to last, and are not wholly yet ended to this day. Two
things are worthy the serious consideration of wiser men than I am. 1. What
party for time past has been most faithful to the English interest. What
observable in our sad Divisions.
2. What course is to be taken for to setle us more firmly for time to come.
For the first we must understand what the English interest is. The interest of
England is twofold, Civil and Ecclesiastical: for we are English men and
Christians. The Civil interest is salus populi Anglicani, there is no doubt of
that, for the peace, safety, liberty, happiness of our dear Country is the end,
whereat we are all bound both by the written and natural Laws of God to aim.
The interest Ecclesiastical is the Protestant Religion and the perservation of
the substance thereof. Prelacy, Presbytery, Independency, much less
Antipaedobaptism and other Sects, are not essential, but accidental to it. This
being the interest of England, How to judge of our Divisions.
we cannot judge of the faithfulness either of the King's or Parliaments party
by the quality of the persons of either side. For there were both good and bad
on both sides, who had their several grounds of adhering to this or that party,
and their several ends. and neither their grounds nor ends good. Nor can any
man justify all proceedings and actings of either side both had their errors.
Nor must we judge of them according to their protestation, for both could not
by such contrary means attain the same end; as both sides protested to
maintain, the King, the Parliament, the liberty of the Subject, the Laws and
the Protestant Religion. Neither in this particular must the Laws of the
English Constitution and Administration be the rule: for both acted not only
above the Laws, but contrary to the latter of them at least. For no Laws could
warrant the Parliament to act without the King, or the King without the
Parliament: much less was it justifiable that there should be in one Kingdom
two, not only different, but contrary commands supreme, and from different
heads and persons. This was directly against the very nature of all
Commonwealths, which have only one first mover, and one indivisible supreme
power to animate and act them.

What charged on the King.
Many things are charged upon the King, as acting against the English interest
as Civil, as that he dissolves Parliaments without just and sufficient cause;
that he intermits Parliaments for sixteen years together; that having signed
the Petition of Right, he acts contrary to it, imposes Ship Money, calls a
Parliament, signs the Act of Continuance, deserts it, calls the Members from
it, calls another Parliament at Oxford, challenges a negative Voice to both
the Houses, raises a War against it, though he was informed, that this tended
to the dissolution of the Government, that whosoever should serve to assist him
in such Wars, are Traitors by the fundamental Laws of this Kingdom, and have
been so adjudged in two Acts of Parliament, 11 Richard 2. and 1 Henry 4. And
that such persons ought to suffer as Traitors. These with other particulars
charged upon him, seem directly contrary unto the civil Interest of the
Kingdom. Again, to Marry a Popish Lady, upon Articles directly contrary to the
Laws of England, and the Protestant Religion established by Law, to entertain
Twenty eight Popish Priests with a Bishop, to tolerate Mass in the Court, to
receive Three Agents from the Pope one after another, Pisano, Con, Rosetti, to
maintain the Queen Mother, to engage the generality of the People of England,
to retard the relieving of Ireland, to admit diverse of the Popish Irish
Murderers and Rebels into his Army, to call our English Forces, sent to
relieve the poor distressed Protestants of Ireland, out of that Nation, and
employ them against the Parliament of England, to suffer some of the Heads of
the Irish Rebels to be so near his Person, to endeavor to bring in the Duke of
Lorrain with his Forces into this Nation, to contract with the Irish Rebels
upon condition to enjoy their Religion, to furnish him with Ten thousand Irish
Rebels, to strengthen his party in England, with diverse other acts, like unto
these, is conceived to be, not only inconsistent with, but plainly destructive
of the English Protestant Interest. And if this be true, it must needs be so.
Yet it might be said, that the King endeavored to maintain his own regal
Power, the Episcopacy and Liturgy established by Law, and that he did not
oppose the Parliament, but a seditious party in the Parliament and other
Sectaries, whose principles were destructive both of all civil and also
Ecclesiastical Government; and without the judgment of able Lawyers and learned
Divines, he did not undertake the War, either against Scotland or England, or
any other. It Is true, that of those who adhered to the King, and liked not the
Parliaments proceeding, there were some conscientious persons, who judged the
King an absolute Monarch, and did not like many things done by that party, yet
they thought it the Duty of Subjects to suffer, and that it was no ways lawful
to resist. But the Casuists say, That Ignorantia excusat a tanto non a toto,
their Ignorance might make their Crime less, yet no ways free them from all
Guilt. It was not Invincible; they might easily have known that the King of
Enland was no absolute Monarch, seeing he could not impose any Subsidy upon the
Subject, nor make or repeal a Law without the Parliament; neither could he by
his Letters or personal Command revoke the Judgment of any Court. And though
they might be Civilians, or read Foreign Writers, which take our Kings for
absolute Sovereigns, yet no ancient Lawyers, no Parliaments did declare them to
be such. Nay, they might have known, that they themselves, obeying the King's
personal Commands, disobeyed him as King, and that serving him in the Wars,
they were guilty of High Treason against the Kingdom, and against the King's
Crown and Dignity. Of these Royalists, some have been high and cruel against
their Brethren the Parliamenteers, and have censured them, and do yet condemn
them both in Words and Writings, as guilty of most horrible Treason and
Rebellion, which others will undertake to prove the censurers themselves deeply
guilty of. Wise and learned Men, no whit inferior to them, do certainly know,
that as they could not maintain their cause by dint of Sword, so neither can
they make it good by dint of Argument. One of their learned Casuists delivers
this as a positive truth; Disobedience to King unlawful.
That to disobey a lawful Sovereign is such an act, as that no circumstances
can make it lawful, no not the Glory of God, nor the saving of many Souls, nor
preventing the Ruin of a Nation. This is high. Diverse, who read this in his
Books, conceive, that in this he touches the Cause and Controversy between
King and Parliament: I cannot charge him with any such thing. But let his
Application be what it will, I will consider his Proposition in it self, and
will suppose it to be grounded upon that divine Maxim, We must not do evil
that good may come. For that which God has made sin, nothing can make lawful.
But then the Question is, What he means by Sovereign, what by disobedience to a
lawful Sovereign? If he mean by Sovereign one invested with supreme Power, and
an absolute Monarch, it is clear enough the Kings of England were not such. For,
1. They had no Legislative Power, which is the greatest without this
Parliament. 2. That his personal Commands bound no Man: for he could command
nothing but according to the just Laws and Customs, quas vulgus elegerat. 3.
The late King himself, in his Answer to the Nineteen Propositions, confessed,
That the Parliament had a share in the Legislative Power. It Is true, they had
the Title of Sovereign and Majesty, but in another sense than many take it. As
for the second Term, Disobedience, it might be twofold: 1. In respect of
absolute Sovereigns. 2. In respect of the Kings of England. In respect of the
former, a lawful Sovereign may command unlawful things, and contrary to the
Laws of God; and in this case, their Commands may, nay, must be disobeyed. 1.
If they command things lawful in themselves, yet they may command them so as to
be unlawful. A man is bound to love Father and Mother by the Law of God, and to
do so is not only lawful but necessary. Yet if this love come in competition
with the love of Christ, it is plainly unlawful. Therefore I will be so
charitable as to think, he understood the proposition of disobedience to lawful
Commands of lawful Sovereigns, otherwise he says nothing, but his proposition
is false. 2. In respect of the Kings of England, their Commands are personal or
legal: His legal Commands, if agreeable to the Laws of God, ought to be obeyed,
and his Subjects are bound to submit unto his legal Power; for other Power, as
King, he has none. But as for his personal Commands, they bind no Subject, as
a Subject; and if they be contrary to the Law, in obeying them, we may be
guilty of Disobedience to the Law; nay of Disobedience to the King, as King;
nay, guilty of Treason against the Kingdom, and the Kings Crown and Dignity.
And methinks such learned Men should not be ignorant of these things.

As for the Parliament, Parliament accused.
it was charged with taking upon them the Militia, seizing upon the Navy,
securing the Ports, making of a new Broad Seal, creating of Officers,
abolishing of Episcopacy and Liturgy established by Law, by which they lost
many of their Subjects, calling in the Scots, proposing a Covenant to the
people upon high terms, and many other things, and all these without the King,
nay contrary to the King's Command, who had so graciously condescended unto
them, in granting many things unto them prejudicial, as he thought, acquitted.
to his Prerogatives and the ancient Rights of his Predecessors, especially
the Acts of continuance and of the Triennial Parliament.

1. For the Militia, it was alleged, The King promised it, and the Lawyers and
learned Counsel informed them, That if the King in such a time should neglect
it, they might take it, and exercise it themselves without him; and it is
reported, that the very same parties, who had given this Advise to the
Parliament, after they were come unto the King, did counsel him to set on foot
the Commission of Array in opposition to the Parliament's Militia.

2. For seizing the Navy, Ports, and creating of Officers, in a Declaration of
the Lords and Commons upon the Treaty at Oxford, is showed the necessity of
doing so, and the antiquity of that practice: for they instance in many
Parliaments, which have done the like and more too. It was no new thing. And
though his Majesty affirmed these things were his by Law, yet it was not his
but by way of trust, for the defense, not the destruction of the Kingdom.

3. For the Broad Seal, there was a necessity of making a new one, seeing that
the former was surreptitiously against Law and Right, carried and conveyed
away. Neither had the King, as separate and divided from the Parliament, any
right unto it.

4. The abolishing of Episcopacy and Liturgy, is conceived, might be justly
charged upon the Scots, who when the King and so many great Ones had deserted
the Parliament, would not firmly adhere unto them, but upon such terms.
Otherwise the reformation of Bishops and Book of Common Prayer was far more for
the Protestant interest than Presbytery, which was rather inconsistent with it.

5. The calling of the Scots was said to be done in extremity, and grounded
upon the National League, according to which they were bound of themselves to
have assisted the Parliament, as some thought and judged.

6. The Covenant is said to be more from the Scot than the English: and what
the design of the first Contrivers in it might be, was known to few who took
it. It proved to be of bad consequence (whether in respect of the nature of the
Covenant, or some other cause may be doubted) for the Parliament of Scotland
thought it a sufficient ground for Duke Hambleton to invade England, and the
English House of Commons judged them Rebels and Traitors, who should join with
him or assist. Such is the frailty, inconstancy and pravity of men.

7. As for the high demands of the Parliament, it is alleged, No King ever did
such things, or gave occasion to make such demands, and he did but grant that
which was reasonable, and necessary for the time, and less than former Laws
required; so that except, as separated from the Parliament, he was an absolute
Monarch, his denial of their demands was not consistent with the Constitution
of the Kingdom.

Presbyterian (who much, though not in all things inclined to the Scot) and the
Independent began to clash. So the state of the controversy seemed to be
altered. For both these Parties at the first professed themselves enemies only
to Popery and arbitrary Government, The cause changed.
which all true English Protestants were bound to oppose, and by the Laws of
the Land might justly do it. But neither Presbytery nor Independency could be
for our true interest, but rather against it. The truth is, they were not
unanimously resolved what they should build up, though they agreed well enough
in pulling down. And surely it is not wisdom to pull down and raze to the ground
an old House, which being repaired might serve the turn, before they had a new
one, and the same better, ready to set up, or rather finished to their hands.
Yet this was not all the difference between the Parties: but after the Conquest
of Hambleton, and all the Royal party rising and ready to join with him, yet
some of them, who were real and cordial, and did really join together, laying
aside for the time the difference of Presbytery and Independency in subduing
the Adversary, were willing to join with the King upon certain terms in the
Isle of Wight. Treaty at the Isle of Wight.
They thought that such an agreement, if it might be made, was the only way to
settle us in peace. Others conceived, that such an agreement, if once made, was
destructive of all former designs and proceedings: and that if the King was
guilty of so much blood, and other crying sins, as the Parliament, and
especially the Kirk of Scotland had charged them withal, then to agree with
him, was to destroy the English interest, and bring innocent blood upon
themselves and the Nation. Therefore in an order for a solemn Thanksgiving made
by the Kirk, one particular mercy to be remembered in that Service, was, that
the Treaty with the King in the Isle of Wight did not take effect. From this
fearful guilt, if justly charged upon the King and his party, some would dare
to conclude, That they who attempted to make an agreement with the Enemy so
guilty, could not be so faithful as those, who refused all such reconciliation,
and endeavored to take away all causes of future danger. Yet if these latter,
after a full and final ruin of the malignant party, as they called them,
should not proceed impartially to reduce the Government to the primitive
Constitution, and labor to settle the Protestant Religion for the substance,
and the good Laws of the Commonwealth, they might prove more faithful in
destroying, than in building and laying the Foundation of our future happiness.
For to pull down one arbitrary Power to erect another, and neglecting the
substance of the Protestant Religion, to protect Sectaries, and erect new
models of their own brain, can be no act of fidelity. I will not enter upon
particulars, nor reflect upon any person or persons: for my intelligence is not
so perfect, as to know the secret designs and hidden motions of several
parties; which if I did know, I might the better regulate mine own judgment in
this point, though I could not satisfy others. Therefore I will leave all to
the judgment of the Eternal God, and pray for future peace, and humbly request
him for to bless and prosper all such as with an upright heart have
endeavored, and do still labor to establish a wise and just Government. And I
further desire all those, whom God has preserved and blessed with great
success, to make a right use of God's mercies, lest in the end they suffer the
same or like judgments, as God by them has executed upon others for their
sins. Though it be material to know who have been most faithful, and by whose
means under God for the present we enjoy peace and the Gospel, yet it may be of
more moment, and also more useful, to take notice of the errors, mistakes and
miscarriages both of Parliament and Army from first to last. For by the
knowledge hereof we gain some advantage, and wise men may easily understand how
to avoid the like, and to prevent such miseries for time to come as we have
suffered in time past.

2. To observe God's proceedings, and the order which he has observed in all
our confusions, and the end, whereat he aims, and the duties he expects after
so many judgments executed.

3. To consider what Families and persons God has punished in these sad times,
and for what sins: and if we after so great success fall into the same sins, we
must expect the like punishments.

4. Not to mention the great alterations in the Dominions of Spain, Turkey,
China of late days, let us consider in brief the strange works and proceedings
of the Almighty with us in this corner of the world. The (...) works (...) God
among us.
To this end, let us take a short view of the Wars. 2. The Parliaments. 3. The
King. 4. The Civil Government. 5. The Church. 6. Our present condition.

1. The Wars are Civil or Foreign: Civil in England, Ireland, Scotland The
Royal Standard of England marches into Scotland, where an Army is ready to
oppose. Yet no blow given; no blood shed. After this, we see two potent Armies
in England, and only a little skirmish at the first, a pacification is made,
the National League concluded, both the Armies disbanded. But after this, no
man fearing it, a bloody massacre of two hundred thousand in the space of one
month, besides many thousand slain and butchered, afterward begins the Tragedy
in Ireland; Forces are sent to revenge that blood, and thousands of the bloody
Irish are sacrificed to expiate the former murders. At length a Civil War is
commenced in England, the same very bloody, continues long, many thousands are
slain, the Sword rages in every corner, the cry goes up to Heaven. The
Parliament desiring not only to defend it self, but to relieve bleeding
Ireland, is brought very low, is ready to submit, calls in the Scot, recovers,
prevails, beats the King's party in the field, reduces all their Garrisons,
and obtains a total Victory in England. Ireland almost lost is recovered again,
first in field-battel, then by reducing all their Garrisons. And in that
Kingdom from first to last, millions are slain, the ancient great Families cut
off, and the Land for the greatest part made desolate; which was a dreadful
judgment of the most just Judge of Heaven and Earth. Scotland, where the fire
began to smoke at first, escaped long, at last felt the bottoms and cruelty of a
bloody War managed against them by Montross, who at first was one of their
Covenantiers. Yet this fire is quenched. They invade England twice, and are
twice scornfully foiled and shattered to pieces in England, and at length
wholly subdued by our English Forces in Scotland, and remain subject to our
Power to this very day. Never so many fearful Judgments executed, never so many
bloody Wars in so short a time can we read of in all our former Histories.
Before these Wars are ended, they beat the Netherlanders, the most potent
people by Sea in the World.

2. Parliaments, which are the great Bulwark of the Kingdom, had been
intermitted for sixteen years; at length, when no man did expect, one is
called, but suddenly dissolved. Yet the Scots entered with a puissant Army into
the Kingdom, made a necessity of calling a second, which is summoned, confirmed
by an act of continuance, acts high, makes great demands, continues long. Yet
it is deserted by the King and many of the Members, opposed by an Army, defends
it self, undertakes the King in England, Scotland, Ireland. It maker a new
broad Seal, having formerly seized upon the Navy and the Ports, recruits it
self by new Elections. Then they fall out with the Army, after that they are
divided amongst themselves. In the end follows the seclusion of many of the
Members, and the remnant act, and by the Army and the Navy does great things,
but at last even this remnant by this Army is totally routed and dissolved.
This is that long-sitting Parliament, which some say, might have been good
Physic, but proved bad Diet. Never Parliament of England varied more, never
any more opposed; never any suffered more, never any acted higher, never any
effected greater things. It made an end of Kings, and new modeled the
Government.

3. The King deserting the Parliament, set up his Royal Standard, and is
opposed, fought, beaten, finally and totally conquered, delivered by the Scots
into the Parliaments hands, is confined, secured as a guilty person, tried,
judged, condemned to death, executed. His Family and Children banished, and
disinherited of the Crown, wander in foreign Countries, and many great Ones
suffered and fell with him. Many foreign States stood amazed, when they saw the
potent Prince and Monarch of three Kingdoms, reigning in greater power and
splendor than ever any of his Predecessors, cast down so suddenly from the
height of his excellency, laid in the dust, and brought to nothing.

4. The Civil Government was much changed from the primitive Constitution,
neither could the Petition of Right help much, because the King and Ministers
of State would not observe it, but acted contrary unto it. So that it was
arrived almost at the height of an absolute Monarchy. But as the winding of a
string too high is the breaking of it, so it fell out with Monarchy. 1. The
Parliament first require an explication of that Act for Liberty, afterward
limit the Regal Power, curb it, assume it, exercise it, and in the end take it
wholly away. Some indeed of the Lords and Commons declare, That they had no
intention to change the fundamental Government, by King, Peers and Commons, and
perhaps really intended what they spoke, yet they could not perform: for that
very frame was taken asunder and abolished. Upon which followed three several
models one after another. The 1. By the act of alteration. The 2. By the new
instrument. The 3. and last by the humble petition of advice, and yet we are
not well settled. So difficult it is after that a Constitution is once
dissolved, to establish a new frame. So that it may be truly said, that never
King acted so much against a Parliament, never Parliament prevailed so much
against a King. Some were for the State of Venice: and that form of Government
as the most perfect model for England. Some intend levelling; some did judge it
best, that the General should have continued only General for a while, and to
head only the godly party: a strange fancy and conceit.

5. As for the Church, many of the English began to look toward Rome, many
came home unto the Church and turned Papists. Innovasions were daily made in
Doctrine and Discipline, and Prelacy seemed to advance with the Royal Power.
But this great Parliament puts a stay to all; begins to reform, and in
reforming incline to an extreme. They take away Episcopacy Root and Branch,
abrogate the Liturgy, make some alterations in the Doctrine; compose a new
Confession of Faith, a Directory for worship, and begin to settle a
Presbyterian Discipline. Yet that in the very rise was opposed by the
Dissenting Brethren, and never could be fully and universally so imposed, as to
be received. Hereupon, contrary to promise, the Golden Reins of Discipline were
loosed, a general Liberty taken, and swarms of Sects appear, profess, and
Separate. Errors, Heresies, Blasphemies do almost darken this Church, and
overspread the same. Never from the first receiving of Christianity in this
Nation, was there so great a change in Religion known to be made in so short a
time.

6. Yet, after all these bloody Wars, and greatest Alterations in Church and
State, the substance of the Protestant Religion continues; the Universities
stand, Schools remain, Learning flourishes, Sabbaths are observed, Ministers
maintained; never better Sermons, never better Books. The Orthodox Christian is
confirmed. Matters in Religion are not so much taken upon trust and tradition,
as formerly. Arts and Languages advance, the light of the Gospel shines. The
Laws abide in force, Justice is administered, peace enjoyed, the Protestant
Interest in foreign parts maintained. England is become a warlike Nation,
furnished with gallant Men both by Sea and Land, is courted by great Princes,
is a terror to our Enemies, a protection to our Friends* and if we could agree
amongst our selves, it is an happy Nation. Yet all this is from the wonderful
wisdom of our God, who knows how to bring Light out of darkness, good out of
Evil, and from his Exceeding mercy who has heard the Prayers of a remnant of
his people in behalf of this Nation, to which he intends good, if our sins do
not hinder. And for my part I will not cease to Honor, and to pray for such,
as from their hearts have endeavored our good, and especially for such, which
God has made so eminently instrumental for our present happiness. Such as are
trusted with great power, and employed in great business, are many times
perplexed with great difficulties, and especially in distracted times. And if
they do something amiss, we should not harshly Censure, much less envy them,
but rather pity them and pray for them: and remember our own frailty, and that
if we had been in their place, we might have done worse.

But to draw unto a Conclusion of this long Chapter, Sect. 22. What may be the
best way of settlement.
and not to offend the Reader; let us consider what may be done to finish and
perfect any thing begun tending to our settlement. Far be it from me to presume
to prescribe any thing to wiser men, who have seriously considered of this very
thing already. Yet I may be bold to deliver mine own Opinon with humble
submission to my betters: and if I err, I may have the greater hope of pardon,
because I shall speak as one unbiassed, and aiming with a sincere heart at the
public good of the English Church and State, which, though fearfully shaken
and shattered, are not yet destroyed* And 1. This is certain, that there are
but two reasons of our unsettlement: 1. Ignorance. 2. Wilfulness.


For we either know not how to settle, and what the best means are, which most
effeually conduce to that end. Or else we are wilfully divided, and no way will
serve the turn but our own. The first is the cause of our difference in
Judgment, the second of our disaffection: and without an unity of the whole,
or at least of the major part, the business will hardly be effected. For, we
are not in any immediate capacity of a general Unity, till time has wasted and
consumed some of our divisions, and also the bitter enmity and rancour, which
continues in the Spirits of many to this day. Therefore our settlement must
begin in generals, and necessaries, and proceed by degrees. 2. The Foundation
to be laid, is, first to find out the ancient Constitution before it was
corrupted too much, and understand the great Wisdom of our Ancestors, gained by
long experience in the constitution of this our State. This may be done by some
experienced Statesmen, and Antiquaries in Law, and that as well, if not better
out of Parliament, than in Parliament. For a Parliament it self must have some
Foundation and certain Rule of their very being, before they can act steadily
and regularly, and not spend their time of every sev^^al Parliament in molding
their Government a new. It Is a vain and presumptuous imagination, to think that
we have attained to a greater measure of Wisdom than our Ancestors attained
unto. And let us not undo what is already done, if it be consistent with the
best model. 3. Let no man think that the public interest, either
Ecclesiastical or Civil, of England, is the interest of any one person or
Family, or any few persons or Families, much less of any Sect, Party, Faction.
It cannot be denied, but whilst the Succession of our Kings was limited to a
Family, the succession was more certain. For so the next successor was more
easily known, and competition, which in this case is so dangerous, was more
easily avoided. Yet even this could not prevent the difference between the
Houses of York and Lancaster. And when the issue of Henry 8 failed, we had been
in greater danger, if the King of Scots had not been a Protestant, and one who
was conceived would prove firm to the English Protestant Interest. But when
this limited succession shall prove (as it may do) inconsistent with the
public interest, its not so much to be regarded. For, why should the honor or
privilege of one Family, prejudice the universal safety of a Nation. We know
that vast Empires and Kingdoms have by an unlimited Election continued long.
And that which might help much in this Case, is that policy of the German
Empire in the Interregnum to have an administrator General. 4. In modelling the
Government, we must have a special eye unto the Constitution, that it be such,
as that it may, not only be consistent with, but effectually conduce to the
promoting of peace and righteousness in the administration of the State, and
also to the advancement of the Christian Religion in the Church. And I conceive
our ancient Government for these ends was excellent: and did also preserve and
regulate the liberty of the people, and also wisely limit the supreme
Magistrate. 5. The Parliament being a general Representative of the whole
Nation, and now of three, and trusted with our liberty, estates, lives,
Qualification of Parliament members.
and in some measure with the Religion we profess, should consist, and be made
up of eminent and wise men. Therefore the Election of them for the manner,
should be more regular and orderly in respect of the Electors, and better
limited and more strictly tied to a right Qualification of the Persons elected,
which should neither be unworthy nor unfit. It may indeed fall so out, that in
these irregular, and sometimes tumultuous Elections, some wise and eminent
persons may be chosen, and the same may prove predominant and leading Members
in that great Assembly; but this is but a chance, and no certainty nor use of
right reason in it.

6 When a Parliament is once assembled and begins to act, What to be looked
into by a Parliament first.
if there be any thing that concerns the preservation and continuance, either
of the being of the State, or of the Substance of the Protestant Religion, that
must be first dispatched, and the next the punishment of crying Sins, which are
the Ruins of States.

7 As for Religion, so far as it concerns the State; it is fit that there be
some general Rule both of our Profession and Worship: but the Rule of
profession must be brief, and grounded upon plain Scriptures, and so near to
ancient Confessions, as that no rational Christian, who acknowledged the
Scriptures to be the Word of God, could or would scruple. The Rule of Worship
also must be plain and Clear. Let nothing be imposed upon all, which any
rational Christian, as such, may not recive without scruple. As for Discipline,
as I have begun, so I will go on in the next Chapter. But these things have
been, and will be considered by far wiser men, therefore I will not enlarge.

Besoldus have observed, that as there may be two persons who make but one
Monarch, so there may be one King of two, or more distinct and several
Kingdoms. This latter disposal was debated much in Calvin's case by the Sage
Judges of the land: in which debate, some of them, especially Chancellor
Egerton, did little less than make the King an absolute Monarch, and the two
Kingdoms in effect one: but the Parliament was of another mind. And the matter
was far above their Courts and Cognizance; the union could not be determined,
but by the Parliaments of both Kingdoms, neither could this be done by them, if
the union made any alteration in the Constitution of either Kingdom. In respect
of mine intention, this Chapter is very large, in respect of the matter very
brief: and my desire is, that others would more seriously and impartially
enquire into this subject, so far as it concerns our own Constitution, which no
doubt may be found out, and if it prove defective may be perfected, if men were
peaceable, and sought the public good.

CHAP. IX. Of the disposition of Ecclesiastical Power: and first, whether it be
due unto the Bishop of Rome.
Jura Majestatis, and the right disposal of them in a fit subject: and
concerning the nature of Civil power, the manner of acquiring and disposing of
it, I have already spoken; and also of Ecclesiastical power and the acquisition
thereof: now it remains, I say something of the manner of disposing the power
of the Keys in the right subject. This is a matter of great dispute in these
our times. Therefore, when I expected to find all clear, because a Jus divinum,
grounded on the Scriptures, was pretended on all hands, I found it otherwise.
As, when one of our Worthies had disemboked the Megellanick straits, and was
entered into that sea, they call Pacificum, he found the word Pacifick really
contradicted by violent storms: so it falls out here, I hoped to have landed in
a Region of perpetual peace, but I was found in a Terra del Fuego, a land of
fire and smoke; like unto Palma, one of the seven Canary Islands, where, in
September 1646, or thereabouts, a fire first raged fearfully in the bowels of
the earth, and at length brake out, and ran in five several fiery, sulphurious
streams into the main: In like manner, this power of the Keys runs in five
several Channels, but very turbulently and impetuously. For the Pope, the
Prince, the Prelate, the Presbyter, the Plebean rank, do every one of them
severally challenge it; and nothing under a Jus divinum will serve the turn.
Therefore I will,

1. Examine their several Titles.

2. Deliver mine own judgment.

3. Add something of the extent of a particular Church.

Pars subdita.

The first title is, that of the great Roman Pontiffe, who perhaps will storm,
and that with indignation against any, who shall presume to examine it. This
Bishop is the greatest Prelate and Clergyman in the world. And as old Rome
from a poor beginning, and a few people, became the Imperial City of the world;
so this Prelate, from a poor pesecuted Minister of the Gospel, attained to this
pitch of glory; and contrary to the example of Christ and his Apostles, lives
in so great splendor, pomp and State terrene, that the Princes of the world
cannot parallel him: and for the power, which he does exercise and challange,
he his far above them. His Court is very magnificent, and cannot be maintained
without a vast Revenue. Some say, that he is that second beast which came out
of the earth, and had two horns of a Lamb, but spoke as a Dragon, and
exercises all the power of the first beast before him, etc. Rev. 13.11, 12.
His name is Satanos, his number 25. He assumed the title of Universal Bishop
about the year of our Lord, 666. So that his number in the name, in the radical
sum, and in the time of his appearance, is 666. And for orders sake, I might,
1. Observe the power. 2. Relate the several reasons, whereby the title to this
power is confirmed. 3. Examine whether they be sufficient or no? 1. The power,
which is challenged, is transcendent and very great, and that not only
extensively, but intensively too, it is such as men never had, and therefore
could never give. And therefore, though he came out of the earth, yet he
derives it from Heaven. To be the first Patriarch of the Imperial See will not
serve the turn: neither will he be content to be a man and fallible, he must be
infallible. Neither will this satisfy him, he must be the visible Head of the
Universal Church, universal Bishop and Monarch over all persons, all Churches,
in all Causes Ecclesiastical. Nay, this Power is so extensive, that he must
have something to do in Heaven, and much to do in Hell. He must be above all
General Councils. They cannot Assemble, Conclude, Dissolve without his power.
He must be President; all Canons and Judgments which they pass without him, are
of no force, and only what he approves is valid. His very Letters must be Laws,
and if he please of Universal Obligation. His Reservations and Dispensations
are very high, his judgments irreversible; he receives last appeals from all
Churches in the World; he Judges all, is Judged of none. His power to execute
is strange, and his policy wonderful. He has plenitude of power
Ecclesiastical. Yet this will not suffice him; he has acquired temporal
Dominions, and is a secular Prince. And because his Territories are not large,
he has found out a way to possess himself of the Sword, and all temporal power
in ordine ad spiritualia, must be his.

this they dare not expressly affirm, yet the papal power which is challenged,
is such. 3. That if Monarchy be the best, then surely the Government of the
Church is Monarchical, for that being instituted from Heaven, must needs be the
most perfect. 4. That the first Monarch visible of the Church was Peter. 5.
That Peter was made such by Christ, and received a power to transmit it to
others, and appoint his Successors. 6. That he fixed his See at Rome, and made
the Bishop of that City his Heir, so that he is haeres ex ass. 7. That so soon
as any person is legally elected Bishop of that See, he is ipso facto, the
Universal Monarch, and the proper subject of plenitude of all Ecclesiastical
power. 2. The Epithetes, the Elogies, the Encomiums of the Bishop and the Sea
of Rome, are collected out of ancient Writers, and marshalled in order, and
they make a goodly show: and who dare say any thing against them. 3. Yet
because these are not of divine Authority, therefore they search the holy
Scriptures, and find it written that Peter was the only person and Apostle, to
whom Christ gave the Keys of Heaven's Kingdom, and he must bind and loose on
earth; and what he shall so do on earth, shall be made good in Heaven. If this
will not serve the turn, Christ says to Peter, and to no other Apostles, If
thou love me, feed my Flock, my Lambs, my Sheep, and to feed is to govern, and
the Flock, Lambs, and Sheep, are the Church.

of eminent piety and learning, which were found in it as being the seat of the
Empire. And such things might be true of that Church then, which do not agree
unto it now. 3. It Is found by the searching of the ancient Manuscripts, that
some things have been foisted into the Books of these ancient Authors in favor
of that Church. For they, who could (even before the fourth Century was ended)
corrupt the Copy, if not the Latin Original of the Nicene Council, and put in
a Canon for to warrant receiving appeals from Africa, which was not found in
the Greek Original, are not much to be trusted. 4. Suppose many or all of those
ancient commendations, which were proper should be true, yet they will not
amount to that plenitude of power which in after times was exercised, and to
this day is challenged by the Bishops of that See. 5. None of those honorable
testimonies are of Divine authority, or firmly grounded upon the Scriptures.
And what the Scriptures give them, that we will not deny them. 3. As for their
arguments from Scriptures, I have wondered that any rational man should ever use
them, as they are by them applied to the Pope. To argue, That because Christ
said to Peter, to thee I give the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, and if thou
love me, feed my Sheep: therefore the present Bishop of Rome is the Head and
absolute Monarch of the Universal Church, and invested with plenitude of power,
is very irrational. There is such a vast distance between these Scriptures and
the conclusion, and so many mediums to be used before they can come at it, and
the same so uncertain, that no man, that will make use of his reason, can
assent unto the conclusion; when all is said, that can be said, in behalf of
this Universal Vicar from these Texts. If we should maintain our cause against
them by such arguments, they would reject us with scorn and indignation. Let
his party plead and plead again, for his Universal and transcendent power, I am
sure of one thing, that if he loved Christ as Peter professed he did, and had a
mind sincerely bent to feed his Flock, he would never challenge, much less
exercise such vast power. That Christ left a power sufficient to the Church, we
verily believe, but that he delegated so great a power, or delegated it unto
him, we utterly deny, and have great reason for it. Yet, because we will not
submit unto his papal Majesty, we must be condemned as Schismatics and
Heretics, deprived of all hope of Salvation, as having no Communion with that
Church, whereof he is Head, and lodged in Hell, the lowest Hell. And all this
is done upon the weakest grounds that ever rational man did use. But we appeal
to Heaven, where Christ will be our Advocate, and plead our cause, and carry it
too. If it were needful, I would single out the chiefest arguments used by them
of Rome to maintain this Title, and answer them distinctly. But this is done
already by many worthy and learned men. Therefore I will take it for granted,
as that which has been made good and evident, that the Pope is not the first
and proper subject of the power of the Keys.

CHAP. X. Whether the Civil State have any good Title to the Power of the Keys.
Henry 8. did not only refuse to submit unto the Roman supremacy, but took it
to himself, and became within his own Dominions, over all persons, in all
causes, as well Ecclesiastical as Civil, supreme Head and Governor. So the
Priest by the Prince was divested of a considerable part both of his power and
also his Revenue. But whether he could be the proper subject of this spiritual
Power, or make good his Title to it, was much doubted, and that by many. As
King, he was but caput regni non Ecclesiae: and as such, he might have some
Civil, but no Ecclesiastical Power at all. Yet though it was called
Ecclesiastical yet it was not such, Grammatice sed Rhetorice, not properly, but
by a Trope, a Metonymie of the adjunct for the Subject circa quod. For the
power of a State Temporal is only Civil, if properly and formally considered;
yet the Civil Sovereign had always something to do in matters of Religion,
concerning which it may make Laws, pass Judgment, and execute the same; yet the
Laws, the Judgments, the Execution were Civil, not strictly Ecclesiastical.
Therefore such as maintained the Regal Supremacy in Ecclesiasticals, were so
wise as to say, that it was Non assumit Rex vel jus clavium vel censurae, sed
quae exterioris politiae. Tort. Torti. page 318. Rex qua Rex, habet primatum
Ecclesiasticum objective, qua Christianus effective: qua Rex actu primo, qua
Christianus secundo Mason. de Minist. Angl. l. 3. page 312.
but materially and objectively in the Crown. In which sense it was always due
to Civil Powers, as Civil, as appears from Deuteronomy. 13. and many other places of
Scripture: as also from many Examples, not only of the Kings of Judah, but of
Ninivy, Babylon, and Persia. That many of these Heathen Princes, and also of
the Kings of Israel did abuse this power, for the establishment or exercise of
a false Religion, and Idolatry, is no argument to prove they had it not, but
that they did not use it aright (...) circa sacra, did always belong, and that
by divine institution to the Civil Higher Powers.



1. That as there is no people so barbarous but profess and practice some
Religion, so there is no State or orderly Government, but acknowledges some
Deity or Divine Power, upon which they conceive their public Peace, Safety,
Prosperity, and good Success does depend: as we may by the very Scriptures, and
also by other Histories be informed. For every Nation had their public gods,
besides their Family-tutelar Deities. It Is true, though by the light of Nature,
considering the Glorious works of Heaven and Earth, they might have known the
true God, yet they changed the Glory of God into a Lie, or false God, and
conceived that to be a God which was no such thing.

2. The supreme Governors of these States had a special care to order the
matters of that Religion which they publicly received. They made Laws,
appointed Priests for the Service and Worship of their Gods. This is also
evident from Scripture, and from other Histories too. This ordering of Religion
as public, was always held a right of the public Power.

3. Yet they had no power to establish, or observe any Religion or Worship, but
that which God had instituted according to the Laws of Nature, or divine
Revelation; if they did, they abused their Power. For that very power, as from
God, was nothing but jus ad recte agendum, a right to do right in matters of
Religion. If they did otherwise, they abused their power, they lost it not. And
if an Heathen Prince or State should become Christian, they acquire no new
Right, but are further engaged to exercise their power in abolishing Idolatry,
and establishing the true Worship of the true God. This may be signified by the
Titles of Nursing-Fathers of the Church, Defenders of the Faith, Most
Christian, Most Catholic King. All which, as they signified their Right, so
they also pointed at their Duty, which was to protect the true Church, and
maintain the True, Christian, Catholic Faith.

4. Though Regal and Sacerdotal power were always distinct and different in
themselves, yet they were often disposed and united in one Person. Thus
Melchisedeck was both King and Priest, Thus Romulus was Prince, and the chief
Pontiffe. For he is said (...), Halicar. Antiqu. Romans lib. 2. The succeeding
Kings took the same place. After the Regal power was abolished, it was an high
Office. When Rome became Imperial, the Emperors took the Title of Supreme
Pontiffe, and some of them, after they became Christian, retained it. Yet still
as the Powers, so the Acts were distinct. For Melchisedeck as King, ruled his
People in Righteousness and Peace; as Priest officiated, received Tithes, and
blessed Abraham. As they were sometimes united, so they were divided. For God
entailed the Sacerdotal power upon the house of Aaron, and afterward, the
Regal power upon the family of David. Neither did Christ or his Apostles think
it fit to make the Ministers Magistrates, or the Magistrates Ministers. Yet in
this Union or Division you must know, that this Sacerdotal and Ministerial
power was not this Civil power of Religion, which always belonged to the Civil
Governors, even then, when these two powers were divided.

5. If Civil powers stablish Religion and that by Law, call Synods, order them,
ratify their Canons, divest spiritual and Ecclesiastical persons of their
temporal privileges, or restore them, yet they do all this by their civil
power, by which they cannot excommunicate, absolve, suspend, much less
officiate and preach, and administer Sacraments. In this respect, if the civil
power make a civil Law against Idolatry, Blasphemy, Heresy, or other scandal,
they may by the same power justly punish the offenders by the sword, and the
Church censure them by the power of the Keys.

6. This jus Religionis ordinandae, this power of ordering matters of Religion,
is not the power of the Church, but of the State; not of the Keys, but of the
sword. The Church has nothing to do with the sword, nor the State with the
Keys. Christ did not say, tell the State, and whatsoever ye bind on earth
shall be bound in Heaven, etc. Neither did he say of the Church, that she
bears not the sword in vain. Therefore, he must needs be very ignorant or
very partial, that shall conceive that the State is the (...) of the power of
the Keys.

England were acknowledged (over all persons, in causes as well Ecclesiastical
as Civil all, supreme head) and because that word Head was so offensive, it was
changed into Governor. For the clearing hereof, it is to be observed,

1. That by these words, it was intended to exclude all foreign Power both
Civil and Ecclesiastical, especially that which the Bishops of Rome did
challenge, and also exercise within the Dominions of the Crown of England.

2. That the Kings and Queens of Enland, had no power supreme in making Laws
and passing judgments without the Parliament. Therefore by supreme Governor,
was meant supreme Administratour, for the execution of the Laws in the
intervals of Parliament. In this respect, the Canons and injunctions made by
the Clergy, though confirmed by royal assent, without the Parliament, have been
judged of no force.

3. That by Ecclesiastical causes, are meant such causes as are materially
Ecclesiastical, yet properly civil, as before. For matters of Religion, in
respect of the outward profession and practice, and the Parties professing and
practicing, are subject to the civil power. For by the outward part the State
may be disturbed, put in danger of Gods judgments, and the persons are
punishable by the sword, even for those crimes. Yet neither can the sword reach
the soul, nor rectify the conscience, except per accidens. That by
Ecclesiastical, is not meant spiritual in proper sense, is clear, because the
Kings of England never took upon them to excommunicate or absolve, neither had
those Chancellours, that were only Civilians, and not Divines, power to perform
such acts. Yet they received their power from the Bishops, and it was counted
Ecclesiastical.

4. In respect of these Titles, those Courts which were called Spiritual and
Ecclesiastical, derived their power from the Crown. And the Bishops did correct
and punish, disquiet, disobedient criminous persons within their Diocese,
according to such authority as they had by Gods word, and as to them was
committed by the authority of this Realm. These are the words of the Book of
Ordination in the consecration of Bishops. The words seem to imply, that they
had a mixed, or at least a twofold power: one by the word, as trusted with the
power of the Keys; the other from the Magistrate or Crown, and that was civil.
Such a mixed power they had indeed in the high Commission. Yet though this may
be employed, yet it may be, they understood that their power by the word of God,
and from the Crown were the same. The act of restoring the ancient jurisdiction
to the Crown. 1 Eliz. 1. does make this further evident. For it is an act of
restoring the ancient jurisdiction in Ecclesiasticals especially, to the Crown;
for that is the Title. Where it must be observed, that the power was such, as
the Parliament did give.

2. That they did not give it anew, but restore it.

3. They could not, had no power to give it, if it belonged to the Crown by the
Constitution, but to declare it to be due; upon which Declaration the Queen
might resume, that which the Pope had usurped and exercised.

4. It Is remarkable, that not the Queen, but the Parliament, by that act did
restore it: as the act of the Oath of supremacy was made by a Parliament, which
by that act could not give the King any power at all, which was not formerly
due. In respect of Testaments, temporal jurisdiction, Dignities, Privileges,
Titles as due unto the Church by humane Constitution and donation, all
Ecclesiastical causes concerning these, were determinable by a civil power. How
tithes are a lay-fee or divine right, has been declared formerly. Hence it
does appear, that the Oath of Supremacy was not so easily understood, as it was
easily taken by many: and the Oxford Convocation, I believe, but that they had
already sworn, could have found as many reasons against it as against the
Covenant, especially if it had been new, as the Covenant was. Many wise men at
the first did scruple it, and some suffered death for refusal. Amongst the rest
Sir Thomas Moor, a learned and a very prudent man, could not digest it; and
though he might have an high conceit of the Papal Supremacy, yet that might not
be the only reason of his refusal, but this, because he knew the Crown had no
Ecclesiastical power properly so called. Though this was not thought to be the
true, but only the pretended cause of his death: For in his Vtopia, he seems to
dislike the Indisputable Prerogative, which was a Noli me tangere, and to touch
it so roughly, as he did, might cost dear, as it did. Yet I have taken the Oath
of Supremacy in that sense as our Divines did understand it; and I was, and am
willing to give to Caesar the things that are Caesar's.

to Divine Law, yet they have no power of the Keys, which Christ committed to
the Church. For if we consider all the power exercised in matter of Religion by
David, Solomon, and the pious Kings of Judah: by the Christian Emperors and
Princes; by the Kings of France and England, it was but civil. Neither is the
power of our Parliaments any other. For though they make Acts concerning the
public Doctrine and Discipline, yet these are but civil. They are not
Representatives of the Church, but of the State, whether the Convocation was an
essential part of the Parliament, or a full representative of the Church, I
will not here debate. I find some great Lawyers which deny both. And if their
denial be true, then England had no general Representative of the Church in
latter times. As for Erastians, and such as do give all Ecclesiastical power of
Discipline to the State, and deny all power to the Ministers, but that of
dispensing Word and Sacraments: it is plain, they never understood the state of
the Question; and though a Minister, as a Minister have no power but that of
Word and Sacraments: yet from thence it will not follow, that the Church has
not a power spiritual, distinct from that of the State in matters of Religion.

CHAP. XI. Whether Episcopacy be the primary subject of the Power of the Keys.
instituted at the first. The Definition and Institution, seem rather to belong
unto the second part of Ecclesiastical Politics, where I shall entreat of
Ecclesiastical Officers; and the constitution of them. Yet I will here say
something of both in order to the Question, though I be the briefer afterward.

Primitive Bishop.
The Primitive Bishop is twofold.

1. A Presbyter. 2. A President or Superintendent.
1. A Presbyter in the New Testament is a Bishop. For the Elders of Ephesus,
were made by the Holy Ghost Bishops or Superintendents over God's flock, Acts
20.28. And the qualification of a Bishop, 1 Timothy 3.1, 2, 3, etc. is the
qualification of an Elder, Tit. 1.5, 6, 7, etc. For whatsoever some of late
have said to the contrary, yet Presbyter and Bishop were only two different
words signifying the same Officer. And this is confessed by diverse of the
Ancients, who tell us, that the word Bishop was appropriated to one, who was
more than a Presbyter, in aftertimes.

2. A Bishop signified one that was above a Presbyter in some respects, as a
Moderatour of a Classis, or President of a Synod. But such a Presbyter might be
only pro tempore for the time of the Session; and after the Assembly dissolved,
he might return to be a bare Presbyter again. For to be a Moderatour or
President, was no constant place. The word in this sense we find seldom used,
if at all.

2. A President was a kind of Superintendent, with a care and inspection, not
only over the people, but the Presbyters too within a certain precinct: and
this was a constant place, and the party called a Bishop, and by Ambrose and
Austine, with diverse others, called primus Presbyterorum, and these were such
as had no power, but with the Presbytery jointly, His Power.
and that without a negative voice. And the Presbytery might be a
Representative, not only of the Presbyters strictly taken, but of the people
too. For we may read in Cyprian and other Authors, that these Bishops in more
weighty matters of public concernment, did nothing without the counsel and
consent, not only of the Presbyters, but the people. This I call a primitive
Bishop, not only because he is ancient, but also because the place or office is
agreeable to the rules of Reason, of Government, and the general Rules of the
Apostles concerning Order, Decency, Edification. Hierarchical B. B.
There is also an Hierarchical Bishop, who may be only a Bishop, or an
Archbishop, and Metropolitan or a Patriarch; and these challenge the power of
Ordination and Jurisdiction: and in Jurisdiction, include and engross the power
of making Canons. This kind of Episcopacy is ancient as the former. This last
Bishop is he, upon whom Spalatensis and many others do fix: and though they
grant that he should do nothing without the Counsel of the Presbytery, His
Power.
yet they give him full power without the Presbytery, which they join with him
only for advice. The English Bishop is in something different from all these,
as shall be made evident hereafter. From these distinctions it is apparent, that
the word Bishop is equivocal, and must be defined several ways according to the
several significations, which is easily done by that which has been said
already.

between the twelve and the seventy, which imparity they say, continued in the
Bishops succeeding the Apostles, and the Presbyters succeeding the Disciples:
but these will satisfy no considerate man. For though it be granted, that
there was some imparity, yet, 1. The mission of both was immediately from
Christ. 2. It was for the same work to preach the Gospel, and do Miracles in
confirmation of the same. 3. They were limited and confined to the Jew. 4.
There was no imparity of power and jurisdiction of the one over the other: both
were immediately subject to Christ. 5. That some of the Ancients say, the
Bishops succeeded the Apostles, and Presbyters, the seventy Disciples can
hardly be true, or any ways made good. Seeing therefore this mission of both
was immediate, and for Doctrine, and not for Discipline, it cannot reach the
power challenged and grounded upon it. The School of Sorbonne was of this mind,
and say, it was a ground of the Hierarchy. But if it was a ground, Hierarch.
Jure Humano.
it was but very infirm, for the Hierarchy was but introduced jure humano non
divino, as may and will be made evident. Others wave this, and make the
institution Apostolical; yet in this they differ. For some say it was from the
Apostles as Apostles, and immediately inspired, and in this particular, and
then it is Divine indeed. Others tell us, it was from them, as acting by an
ordinary and Ecclesiastical power. Again, it may be grounded upon some
Apostolic Precept of Divine, Universal, and perpetual Obligation, or upon
their Practice and Example. The former, the Convocation at Oxford in their
Scruples against taking the Covenant, dare not affirm; and indeed no such
Precept does appear. Again, the Precepts of the Apostles were either General or
Special. And if there be not some special divine Precept for this institution,
it cannot be of perpetual Obligation, nor necessary. Epiphanius confuting the
Heresy of Aerius, if he be consistent with himself, must needs be of this
mind, because he affirms, that the businesses of the Church, may be fully
dispatched and performed by Presbyters and Deacons without a Bishop. Hierome
makes Episcopacy an humane Constitution, and not Divine. In this, some excuse
him: but Spalatensis says, he cannot be excused: Medina charge him, and
other of the Fathers with the Aerian Heresy. As for those words of his: Quid
facit Episcopus excepta ordinatione, quod non faciat Presbyter; they may seem
to reserve a power of Ordination as proper to the Bishop; and in this Respect,
Episcopacy may be of a divine Constitution. Yet Marsilius understands by
Ordination, the constitution of the Church, not the ordination of Ministers.
And there is great reason to think so, because otherwise his words are directly
false, and known to be so, if meant of Ordination of Presbyters by imposition
of hands: for long before his time, the Bishops did many things, which a
Presbyter could not do: neither could a Bishop Ordain without Presbyters. If
they had this Power to themselves alone, and that by divine Donation, Hierome
must plainly contradict himself. If Hierome meant the Hierarchical Episcopacy,
which then in many places was the only Episcopacy, then it is most certain, that
that was not from God, but man; not from divine, but humane Constitution. And
the Hierarchical subordination, seems to be ordained directly to avoid Schism,
which that learned man says, was the Occasion of that Episcopacy.

Spalatensis, therefore I will single him out, and consider the force of his
Reasons, which are insisted upon by others to this day. And here we must
observe,

1. That the Bishop which he maintains is Hierarchical, and one invested with
the Power of Ordination and Jurisdiction.

2. That his intention and design, is to prove him to be of Divine Institution.

3. To this purpose he alleges several Scriptures, and he seems to find the
fundamental Charter in these words of our Savior: As my Father sent me, so I
send you, etc. John 20.21, 22. Where I will observe,

1. His interpretation of the words.

2. His supposition of imparity between the twelve Apostles and seventy
Disciples.

3. Examine whether the Texts antecedent or consequent, or the words themselves
do favor him.

1. Therefore he determines the agreement between his Fathers mission of him,
and his Mission of them to be this. De Repub. Eccles. lib. 2. c. 3. sect. 7, 8,
9.
That as his Father gave him power to ordain, and constitute them in a superior
rank of power and Jurisdiction, and the seventy Disciples of an inferior Order:
so he gave them Power likewise to appoint their successors in a twofold rank.

1. Bishops with a full Apostolical ordinary power.

2. Presbyters, without any such power of Ordination and Jurisdiction, for so
he means.

2. In this Exposition, he presupposes an imparity of power, but very
absurdly. For he gives the Power of Ordination and Jurisdiction to the Bishops
alone, but none at all to the Presbyters. And whereas imparity is a difference
only in degrees, he makes the difference of the Bishops and Presbyters to be
essential and specifical. But of this before: and if any desire to see more,
let them read the Doctors of Sorbonne concerning this particular in their
tract, De Ecclesiastica and Politica potestate.

Thus you have heard, 1. His Exposition. 2. His Supposition.


Now it follows we enquire, Whether either of them have any warrant, or so much
as color from the Context, Antecedent, or Consequent. The Antecedent favors
him not: For ver. 19. it is said, not that the Apostles, but Disciples were
together: and the Seventy are called Disciples, and some of them might be
there, and his words directed to them; and if this be so, the very foundation
of the argument from this place is rased. Neither does the words following help
him, but are point blank against him. For verses 22, 23. it is said, He breathed
upon them, and says unto them, Receive ye the Holy Ghost, whosoever sins ye
remit, they are remitted, etc.

Where, 1. Many by the Holy Ghost, understand spiritual power, or power of and
from the Spirit.

2 This power is not a power of Ordination, or Jurisdiction in foro exteriori,
but a power of Remission and Retention of sins, in foro interiori and
poenitentiali, as the Schoolmen and Casuists speak.

3. They remit and retain sins by the Word and Sacraments. Therefore in the
ordination of Presbyters, both in the Pontifical of Rome and our
Ordination-book, these words are used, and after them are added with some
ceremony, this passage, Be thou a faithful dispenser of the Word of God, and
his holy Sacraments. And again, the Bible delivered into the hands of the party
ordained, Take thou authority to preach the Word of God, and to administer the
Holy Sacraments.

4. This is the power of the Keys promised, Matthew 16.19. which place he
himself understands of Conversion by the Word.

5. This is the essential power of a Presbyter, as a Presbyter.

sent the Apostles to do any such thing. As and So, are notes of similitude
indeed: and therefore his Fathers Mission of him, and his Mission of the
Apostles, must agree in something. And so they do, 1. He was sent, so were
they. 2. He received the Spirit, so did they. 3. He was sent to preach and do
miracles, so were they. 4. His Mission was extraordinary, so was theirs, Sicut
est nota similitudinis, and (as a Lapide says) may signify similitudinem
Officii, principii, finis, miraculorum and amoris; yet none of these can serve
his turn. Therefore, says Grotius, and that truly, (...) aliquam, non
omnimodam similitudinem significat. Gerrard upon the same words, as used by our
Savior, Joh. 17.18. multiplies the analogy, and makes these two missions agree
in fifteen particulars: yet he never thought of this. Christ, as he observes,
was sent: 1. To redeem. 2. To preach the Gospel; so they were sent not to
redeem, but to preach, and did succeed him, not in his sacerdotal, but
prophetical Office, by the Word and Sacraments to apply the Redemption, not as
Priests to expiate sins. Seeing therefore the analogy is not universal, nor any
ways by the Context, antecedent or consequent, or the Text it self determined
to this particular, but to another, as is apparent; therefore his Exposition is
frivolous, his Supposition false, and the Text no ground of an Hierarchical
Episcopacy.

Yet he proceeds to prove this imparity from examples: Sect. 7.
1. Act. 8.14.
Of Peter and John sent to Samaria, that by imposition of hands, as of Bishops,
they whom Philip had converted, as a mere Presbyter, might receive the Holy
Ghost. 2. From Barnabas, sent as a Bishop, as he takes for granted, to Antioch,
to confirm the believing Jews, converted by the dispersed Saints, in that Faith
they had received. But will it follow, that Peter, and John, and Barnabas were
Bishops invested with the power of ordination and jurisdiction, because they
were sent by the Church of Jerusalem, not to ordain or make Canons, or censure,
but by imposition of hands and prayer, give the Holy Ghost, and confirm the new
Converts of Samaria and Antioch? how irrational and absurd is this? 3. He
instanceth in Timothy, left by Paul at Ephesus, and Titus left by him at Creet
to ordain Elders, and order other matters of those Churches, not fully
constituted and perfected for Doctrine, Worship and Discipline. But let it be
granted, that they had power of Ordination and Jurisdiction; yet 1. It will not
follow from hence, that because they had it, therefore Presbyters had it not.
Nor 2. That they had it without Presbyters, where Presbyters might be had. Nor
3. That they had it as Bishops, which is the very thing to be proved. 4. The
plain truth is, that they had it in those places, and for that time, as
commissioned and trusted by the Apostle, to do many things in that Church,
according to the Canons sent them by the Apostles, which they had no power to
make themselves. Dr. Andrews taking all Apostolical power to be divine; affirms
Episcopacy to be a distinct order, and of divine institution, and grounds
himself upon the testimony of Irenaeus, Tertullian, Eusebius, Hierome, Ambrose,
Chrysostom, Epiphanius, and Theodoret: who all write, that Ignatius,
Polycarpus, Timothy, Titus, and others were made Bishops, and of a distinct
Order above Presbyters by the Apostles themselves. Yet 1. If he mean by
Apostolical, whatsoever is done by the Apostles, then many things Apostolical
are not Divine, much less of Divine Institution and Obligation. For many things
were done by them in matters of the Church by a mere ordinary power. 2. The
testimony of all these Fathers is but humane: and according to his own rule
cannot be believed, but with an humane and fallible Faith; Et quod fide divina
non credendum, fide divina non agendum. 3. If he meant, that those had power of
Ordination and Jurisdiction as Bishops, he contradicts himself, affirming, that
this power of the Keys, was given immediately by Christ not to Peter, not to
the Apostles, but to the Church, and the Church had it, to the Church it was
ratified, the Church does exercise it, and transfer it upon one or more, qui
ejus post vel exercendae vel denunciandae facultatem habeant, Tortura Torti* p.
42. So that none can have it, but as delegates of the Church, not as Bishops or
Officers.

Asia: and he affirms these were Bishops. But 1. So they might be and yet only
Presbyters. 2. Suppose they were more then Presbyters, and super-intendents at
least, it does not follow they were Hierarchical Bishops: For if they were, it
must appear from some divine Record, or else how can I certainly believe it. 3.
Let them be Hierarchical Prelates, yet it must be made evident by what warrant
and institution, they became such. The institution must be grounded, either
upon the practice or precepts of Christ or his Apostles: yet all these grounds
have been formerly examined. But 4. Does any man think that these Letters and
Messages were sent only to seven Persons, who were Bishops? Its evident and
clear as the Sun, they were directed to the whole Churches to the Ministers,
which are called by the name of Angels, and to the people. For the whole Church
of Ephesus, of Smyrna, and of the rest is commended, or reproved and charged
with diverse sins, and threatened with such punishments as must fall upon all.
After all these proofs from Scripture, recourse is had to Antiquity and
Universality, as sufficient grounds of a prescription, which is a good kind of
title. But 1. In divine things, especially such as are of ordinary and
universal obligation, Antiquity and Universality without a Divine Institution
will not serve the turn. 2. The Hierarchy prescribes as much, and as high as
Episcopacy, invested with power of Ordination and Jurisdiction, as proper to it
self, yet its confessed to be only of humane institution. 3. What is it, how is
it defined? What Divine Institution can be made evident of that, which they say
is so universal and ancient? 4. Who are the witnesses, by whose testimony this
Antiquity and Universality is proved? They are, besides some of later times,
but few, and all within the Roman Empire, many of them Bishops themselves, and
some of them bitter Enemies one against another. They are not one of an hundred
amongst the Bishops, not one of a thousand amongst others. Yet the Church in
the Apostles times, was enlarged to the ends of the Earth. And as then, so now,
there were in every Century thousands that did never write, or if they did,
they wrote not of Episcopacy; and many of them might be as great Scholars, as
those whose books are extant. 5. There was a special reason, why there might be
Bishops and the same Hierarchical in the principal parts of the Roman Teritory,
as shall be touched hereafter. 6. Suppose these Bishops to have the power of
Ordination and Jurisdiction, yea, the whole power of the Keys, which includes
the Legislative in making Canons, can any man prove, that they had it always in
all places: and if so, that they had it severally in their several precincts,
and not jointly with their fellow Bishops, as Representatives in Counsels, and
also with Presbyters and others too. Its well enough known, that other besides
Bishops had their suffrage in Synods. Ludovicus, Arabelensis. Lewis,
Archbishop of Arles, President in the Council of Basil.
Arles, President of the Council of Basil, proves stoutly that Presbyters have
their Votes; and without them he could not have carried the cause against
Panormitan and his faction.

Zouch, Dr. Mucket, Dr. Cosens the Civilian his Tables, with him (who calls
himself Didoclavius) upon him. By all whom we may understand, English Bishops.
1. It was not the primitive Episcopacy. 2. It was clearly Hierarchical; for we
had Bishops, and two Archbishops of York and Canterbury, the one the
Metropolitan of England, the other of all England. The Bishops took their Oath
of obedience to the Archbishops, as appears by the book of ordination. They
did arrogate the power of ordination to themselves, though Presbyters did in
the ordination impose hands with them, and some of them confessed, they had it
only with the Presbyter jointly. Yet we know how that by others is eluded. 3.
Not to say any thing of their Titles, Dignity, Revenue, Baronies annexed to
their Sea; their place in the house of the Peers in Parliament, and their
privileges, they had cast off in effect, not only the people, but Presbytery.
For though the Presbytery had their Clerks, both in the Convocation of York,
and also at London, if the Parliament sat there; yet they took upon them in the
end to nominate these Clerks, and deprive the Ministers of their right of
Election. What Dean and Chapters were.
As for the Deanes and Chapters, which should have been eminent Persons, and
chosen by the Presbytery in every Diocese to represent them, they were
degenerate from their original Institution; and the Bishops, who should have
done nothing but jointly with them, did all things without them. They in
effect, though unjustly engrossed the whole power of Administration. 4. Yet
this is observable: that 1. They could make no Canons but jointly in one
Assembly. 2. That jointly amongst themselves, without the Presbytery, they had
not this power. 3. That no Canons were valid without the Royal Assent. 4.
Neither by the Constitution was the Royal Assent sufficient without the
Parliament. 5. That they derived much of their Ecclesiastical power from the
Crown. For by the Oath of Supremacy is declared, that the King of England is
over all persons, even in Ecclesiastical causes Supreme Governor, In which
respect, all their secular Power, Revenue, Dignity, and also their nomination
and confirmation with their investiture is from him. He calls Synods, confirms
their Canons, grants Commissions to exercise Jurisdiction purely
Ecclesiastical. In the first year of King Edward the sixth, by a Statute they
were bound to use the Kings name, not their own, even in their Citations: and
as before, they must correct and punish offenders according to such Authority
as they had by the Word of God, and as to them should be committed by the
ordinance of this Realm: So, that if the Popish Bishops derive their power from
the Pope, and the English from the King, English Bishops not Jure Divino.
neither of them could be jure divino. And by this, the title of most Bishops
in Europe is merely humane, and that in two respects: 1. Because its
Hierarchial. 2. Derived either from an higher Ecclesiastical or an higher
secular power.

they may be subjects, and not primary, they may be subjects of some part, and
not of the whole power? 2. Whether they be such subjects of this power in foro
exteriori. For in foro interiori, the Presbyters have as much as they. 3.
Whether they be such subjects of such power in foro exteriori, quatenus
Episcopi reduplicative? 4. Whether as such, they be such a subject by Divine
Institution? For solution hereof, its to be considered: 1. That except there be
an Universal consent, and the same clearly grounded upon Scripture, both what a
Bishop is, and, 2. That made evident, that his Title is of Divine Institution,
the affirmative cannot be proved, 2. That though a Bishop could be clearly
proved to have the power of Ordination and Jurisdiction, yet it will not follow
from thence, that he is the primary subject of that power. For the negative,
many things may be said: 1. Neither the papal, nor the English Bishop, so far
as the one derives his power from the Pope, and the other from the Crown, can
be the primary subject of this power; the secondary they may be. 2. For such as
derive not their power from Pope or Prince, if they be the primary subject,
they must be such, either severally every one in his several Diocese, or
jointly in a Synod. If severally, then every one is a Monarch in his Diocese,
and so the government of the Church is Monarchical: and every several Bishop
supreme and independent. And if so, where are our Archbishops, Metropolitans
and Patriarchs? And, why do we dispute against the Monarchical Government, and
not grant to Bellarmine and others, that it is Monarchical in general, though
we deny the Pope to be the sole Monarch. If jointly in a Synod, or Council
provincial, or national of one Nation and several Provinces, or several
Nations, or general: then they are not such as Bishops, but either as members
of the Synod, or as delegates. If as members of the Synod, and none can be
members but Bishops, as Bishops; then the government of the Church is purely
Aristocratical, and then its worse then a pure Monarchy, where there can be but
one Tyrant; whereas, in a pure Aristocracy, there are usually many Tyrants, or
at least it proves an Oligarchy. And in this respect, neither can a provincial
Council be subject to a antional, nor a national to a general. If as Delegates
they have this power, as in general Councils they are, then they cannot be the
primary subject. And all these, if they will make their cause good, they must
prove, which they can never do, that none but Bishops have right of suffrage in
Councils. 3. If their title be good it must be grounded either upon Scripture,
or universal and perpetual custom: but from neither of these can it be proved,
as shall appear hereafter. For by Scripture its evident, that the Church was
made by Christ's institution the immediate and primary subject; and so confessed
by Bishops, by many great Scholars, and by general Councils too. The first
Church, which was made such a subject, included the Apostles, who, in their
ordinary capacity, were but parts and members, though eminent members of the
same. 4. If any shall say, that Bishops as Officers of the Church, are the
primary subject of this power, that implies a contradiction, because if the
power of all Officers, as Officers is derivative, and as the Apostles being
Officers of Christ, derived their Apostolical Power from Christ; so if Bishops
be Officers of the Church, they derive their Power from the Church, which is
the primitive subject.

grounded upon general Precepts of Scripture concerning Decency, Unity, Order,
and Edification; but so, that Order, and Decency may be observed by another
way, and Unity, and Edification obtained by other means. But there are many in
these our days, which make Episcopacy invested with power of Ordination at
least, of that necessity, that if Ministers be not ordained by them, they are
no Ministers. They make the being of the Ministry, and the power of the
Sacraments to depend on them: and they further add, that without a succession
of these Bishops, we cannot maintain our Ministry against the Church of Rome.
But, 1. Where do they find in Scripture any special Precept of universal and
perpetual Obligation, which does determine that imposition of Hands of the
Presbytery, does essentially constitute a Presbyter; and that the imposition of
Hands, if it did so, was invalid without an Hierarchical Bishop, or a certain
constant superintendent with them. And if they will have their Doctrine to
stand good, such a Precept they must produce, which they have not done, which I
am confident they cannot do. 2. As for Succession of such Bishops, after so
long a time, so many Persecutions, and so great Alterations in the Churches of
all Nations, its impossible to make it clear: Eusebius himself, does so preface
unto his Catalogue of Bishops, that no rational man can so much as yield a
probable assent unto him in that particular: But suppose it had been far
clearer, yet it could not merit the force of a divine Testimony; it would have
been only humane, and could not have been believed but with a probable Faith.
Nay, Lib. 3. c. 3, 4. Tit. de praescript. adversus haereticos.
Irenaeus, Tertullian, Eusebius, and others, do not agree in the first and
immediate Successors of the Apostles, no not of the Roman Church. For Irenaeus
makes Clemens the third, whom Tertullian determines to be the first from the
Apostles. Yet they all agree in this, that the Succession of Persons, without
Succession of the same Doctrine was nothing. Tertullian confesses, that there
were many Churches which could not show the Succession of Persons, but of
Doctrine from the Apostles, and that was sufficient. And the Succession of
Persons is so uncertain, that whosoever shall make either the being of a
Church, or the Ministry, or the power of the Sacraments depend upon it, shall
so offend Christ's little ones, and be guilty of such a scandal, as it were
better for him, that a Millstone were hanged about his neck, and he cast into
the Sea. The power of saving men's Souls depends not upon Succession of Persons
according to humane Institutions, but upon the Apostolical Doctrine,
accompanied by the divine Spirit. If upon the exercise of their Ministerial
Power men are converted, find Comfort in their Doctrine, and the Sacraments,
and at their end deliver up their Souls unto God their Redeemer, and that with
unspeakable Joy, this is a divine confirmation of their Ministry, and the same
more real and manifest than any Personal Succession. To maintain the Ministry
of England from their Ordination by Bishops, and the Bishops by their
Consecration according to the Canons of the Council of Carthage, was a good
Argument ad hominem; yet it should be made good (as it may be) by far better
Arguments, and such as will serve the Interest of other Protestant and reformed
Churches, who have sufficiently proved their Ministry legal, and by Experience,
through God's Blessing upon their Labors, have found it effectual. But suppose
the Succession of our English Episcopacy could be made good since the
Reformation, it is to little purpose, except you can justify the Popish
Succession up to the time of the Apostles, which few will undertake, none (I
fear) will perform. Diverse reasons persuade me to believe they cannot do any
thing in this particular to purpose, but amongst the rest this does much sway
with me, that there can be no Succession without some distinct and determinate
form of Consecration and Ordination, and except this form be determined by a
special precept of Scripture, it cannot be of divine Obligation. But any such
special precept, which should prescribe the distinct forms of Consecration and
Ordination we find not at all. We have some examples of constituting
Church Officers by Election, with the imposition of Hands and Prayer; yet this
was common to all, even to Deacons. So that the very forms of making Bishops
and Presbyters, as we find them, both in the English Book of Ordination, and
the Pontifical of Rome are merely Arbitrary, as having no particular ground,
but at the best only a general Rule in Scripture, which leaves a liberty for
several distinct Forms. If any, notwithstanding all this, out of an high
conceit of Episcopacy, will refuse Communion with such Churches, which have no
Bishops, and yet are Orthodox, or will account those no Ministers, who are
ordained by Presbyters without a Bishop; let such take heed, least they prove
guilty of Schisms. The substance of all this is, That Bishops are not the
primary subject of the power of the Keys.

CHAP. XII. Whether Presbytery, or Presbyters be the Primary Subject of the
Power of the Keys.
Europe, where Episcopacy has been abolished, Presbytery did succeed; and that
(as it is asserted by many) upon such grounds as will prove it as pure an
Aristocracy as that of Episcopacy was. The parties indeed have been changed,
and instead of Bishops we have Presbyters; and though the former imparity be
taken away, yet the form of Government, which is Aristocratical, remains. I
have formerly heard many complain, that the Bishops had cast off the
Presbyters: and now some do not like it well, that the Presbyters have cast off
the Bishops, yet both do seem to agree to exclude the people, as distinct from
the Clergy, engrossing the whole Power to themselves. These pure Aristocratical
Forms have for the most part proved dangerous, especially in the Church,
because they do much incline unto Oligarchy, and usually degenerate into the
same.

these being known, can according to Christ's Institution be the Primary
Subject of this power. 3. Add something concerning our English Presbytery. 1.
These Presbyters are of two sorts. 1. Some are preaching. 2. Some are not
preaching, but only ruling Presbyters or Elders. The former are trusted with
the Dispensation of the Word and Sacraments, the latter are not. Both have the
same Name, and are Elders, yet differ much in respect of their Ecclesiastical
being. Of the preaching Elder, I shall speak more at large in the second Book
in the Chapter of Ecclesiastical Officers. This word Elder, we do not find used
either in the Old or New Testament in an Ecclesiastical sense, before we read
it in the Acts: and after that we find it used about fifteen times in that kind
of Notion. The first place is Acts 11.30. the last, 1 Pet. 5.1. Except we add
that of 2 John 1. In many of these places, the word does signify a preaching
Elder and Minister of the Gospel, and that most clearly and evidently; and if
in any place it does signify some other Elder, it will be most difficult, if
not impossible to define what he should be. Yet this Elder which is presupposed
to be distinct from the Minister of the Gospel, is said to be an Officer of the
Church; which together with the preaching Presbyter has power of Jurisdiction
in Eccesiastical Causes. To prove that there is such an Elder, and that of
Divine Institution, three places are principally insisted upon; and these I
find discussed, and expounded. 1. In the London Divines. 2. Before them in
Gillaspec. 3. Before him in Gersome, Bucerus, and they all go one way. The
first of these we read, Romans 12.8. He that rules with diligence, that is, let
him that rules, rule with diligence; where, he that rules must be a ruling
Elder distinct from the preaching. But, 1. The word (...) does not properly
signify a Governor, or Ruler invested with power of Command and Jurisdiction,
but a prime person set above, before, over others for inspection, guidance, and
due ordering of Persons, Things, or Actions. 2. Suppose in this place it should
signify one invested with Jurisdiction; how does it appear that it is such a
Ruler Ecclesiastical, as is distinct from a preaching Elder? There is nothing
in the place to evince it. 3. Seeing a Minister of the Gospel is a Ruler in
Discipline, as is by themselves confessed, how may it be proved that the person
here meant is not the preaching Elder, though not as a preaching Elder, but a
Pastor over a Flock? For it must signify him alone, or him jointly with that
other kind of Elder. For if both be Rulers, both must rule well. 4. It cannot
be demonstrated, that the place speaks of Discipline at all. For the place
speaks of Gifts, whereof one person may have many, and his Duty is to exercise
them all for the Edification of the Church.

The second place is, 1 Cor. 12.28. Where the word translated Governments, must
signify this Ruling Officer, distinct from the preaching Elder. But first, We
find the word (...) taken for to signify a Pilot, Acts 27.11. and the same
word in the Septuagint used in the same signification, Ezekiel. 27.28, 29. and
Jonah 1.6. when the Hebrew word is (...) Chobel. In them also I find (...)
Tachbuloth six several times to signify Counsels or Wisdom, and translated in
four of these places (...), Job 37.12 Prove. c. 12.5.
as Prove. 1.5. c. 11.14. c. 20.21. c. 24.6. And though it be true, that Wisdom
and Counsel are necessarily required in a good Governor invested with Power,
yet always they are essential to a good Counselor, and without them he cannot
give good direction. But 2. If we parallel the 28.29, 30. verses, with the 8.9,
10. verse of the same Chapter, we shall find that Governments signify such as
have the gift of Wisdom. 2. Let Governments be Governors, and the same
Ecclesiastical, will it follow that they were ruling Elders distinct from
preaching and ruling Elders? Are there none other kind of Governors but these?
3. This place does not speak of external Government and Discipline, but of the
Gifts of the Spirit, given for the good of the Church. And I never knew
rational and impartial Scholars ground so great an Office upon so weak a
Foundation, and argue from such an obscure place in respect of this Eldership.
Its far from proving any Divine Institution of such an Office, as it does not
so much as imply it.

Tim. 5.17. Let the Elders that rule well, be counted worthy of double honor,
especially those who labor in the Word, and Doctrine. From hence they infer
that there are ruling Elders, which labor in the Word and Doctrine, and others
which do not. This presupposes, that (...) turned especially is taken here
partitively. Yet that cannot be proved. For it may be added rather to signify
the reason why, then the persons to whom, as distinct from other ruling Elders,
double honor is due. For in the Assembly it was alleged, that the participle
in the Original here, as in other places includes the Cause. And then the Sense
is, Let the Elders that rule well, be counted worthy of double honor,
especially because they labor in the Word and Doctrine, which seems to be the
genuine sense: and agrees with that, Esteem them very highly in Love for their
Works sake, 1 These. 5.13. 2. Double Honor, which is Maintenance, is not due to
ruling Elders, who preach not the Gospel. For the Lord Ordained, that they
which preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel; they which do, not they
which do not preach the Gospel, 1 Cor. 9.14. 3. Suppose it could be proved from
this place, that there were ruling Elders distinct from such as preach, How
will it appear from hence, what their place was in the Church, and what their
Power, and what their Work? Yet put all these places together, they cannot
prove the Divine Institution of such an Office, with the power of Jurisdiction
in Causes Ecclesiastical, for we do not find any special precept making this
Office universally and perpetually necessary, binding all Christian Churches to
observe it.

inforo exteriori. That they are not the immediate subject, is evident. 1. From
the same reason why Bishops are not. For Christ gave the power to the Church,
the whole Church, as shall be manifest hereafter; but the Elders are not the
whole Church. 2. If they be the primary subject, then they are such as Officers
or Representatives; but neither of these ways can they be such a subject. The
disjunction is good, except they can give us another consideration, according
to which they may have this power in this manner. The Minor, which is, that
neither as Officers, nor as Representatives can they be the primary subject, is
thus proved: 1. Not as Officers. For the power of an Officer, though Universal,
as these are but Elders of particular Congregations, is always derivative, and
therefore he cannot be the first subject of that power, which is derived from
an higher Cause. Upon this ground, Mr. Hooker takes his advantage against Mr.
Rutherford, and the seven dissenting Brethren against the Assembly. As for Mr.
Hooker, he seems to take for granted, as he endeavors to prove, that
Jurisdiction belongs unto an Officer as an Officer. But this cannot be true, 1.
Because there are Officers who have no Jurisdiction, as Censors, Sheriffs,
Constables, and many other in the State, and Deacons in the Church. 2. Suppose
some Officers have Jurisdiction, yet they are not the first subject of it. 3.
He supposes, as the Dissenting Brethren do, that every Officer is fixed in,
and related only unto a single Congregation, whereas its evident, and Mr.
Parker confesses it, that there may be Officers, which jointly take the charge
of several Congregations both for Worship and Discipline, as in the
Netherlands, and this agreeable to the Word of God. Yet even these, much more
such as are fixed to several particular Congregations, can have no power out of
those Congregations, whereof they take charge, whether severally of one, or
jointly of many. In this respect his Argument is good against such as affirm,
that power of Jurisdiction belongs to Officers as Officers, and in particular
to Elders as Elders. Yet both the Assembly and Dissenting Brethren confound,
and that in the arguing the power of the Ministry, with the power of outward
Discipline, which ought not to be done. But the principal thing is, that
Officers, as such, cannot be the primary subject of power, for that belongs to
them who make them Officers.

yet do not act as Officers, but all jointly act as one Representative of the
whole body. 4. When many Congregations united in one body, for to set up one
Independent Judicatory, do act by a Representative, the whole body of these
Congregations, not the several Congregations are Ecclesia prima, and the
Representative, or Synod is the Ecclesiae orta. 5. That the power of Discipline
does not issue from the power of Teaching and Administration of the Sacraments.
For then none but Ministers should have the power of the Keys, and not any
could be joined with them, because they have their power by Virtue of the
Ministerial Office.

Jus Divinum Regiminis Ecclesiastici do affirm, that the ruling and preaching
Elders are the primary subject of this power, and endeavor to prove it, and
that by several Arguments; all which may be answered by the very stating of the
Question. For they seem to me, for to confound Ecclesiam constituendam and
constitutam, Officers ordinary and extraordinary; calling immediate and
mediate; the Government of the Universal Church, and particular Churches, forum
interius and exterius; Statum and exercitium. Though the matter is clear
enough, yet I will examine two of their Arguments. The first is this: All those
that have Ecclesiastical Power, and the Exercise thereof immediately committed
to them from Jesus Christ, are the immediate subject or Receptacle of that
Power.

But the Church Guides have Ecclesiastical Power, and the Exercise thereof
immediately committed unto them from Jesus Christ.

Therefore they are the immediate Subject, or Receptacle of that Power.



For Answer hereunto, we must understand, 1. What this Power Ecclesiastical in
the Question is. 2. What kind of Subject is here meant. 3. What these
Church-guides are. 4. What immediate Commission from Christ may be; for that is
the medium or third Argument. 1. This Ecclesiastical Power is not that
Universal and Supreme Power which is in Christ; nor the extraordinary Power of
extraordinary Officers, as Apostles and others. It Is an ordinary Power of a
particular Church, and the same as Universal and Independent in respect of such
a Church. It Is a Power in foro exteriori for outward Government. It Is a Power
supreme of making Canons, constituting Officers, and passing Judgment without
Appeal, or from which there lies no Appeal. 2. The Question is concerning the
Subject of this Power, which Subject may be primary, or secondary; here the
primary must be understood. 3. Church-guides, as they understand them, are
ruling and preaching Elders. 4. Immediate Commission from Christ is, when
Christ immediately gives power to any person, and by that Donation designs him
without any act of Man intervening. Thus Paul was designed Gal. 1.1.
an Apostle, not of Man, not by Man, but by Jesus Christ; this immediate
Commission is extraordinary. These things premised make it evident. 1. That the
Terms of the Syllogism are more then three; because the words are so Ambiguous.
2. Suppose the words to be clear, and the terms but three, yet the Minor is
denied. 1. Because by Church-guides are meant Elders, who are ordinary Officers
of particular Congregations, and therefore can have no immediate Commission in
proper sense. 2. Though they should be immediately commissioned, as they are
not, yet the premises are insufficient to infer the conclusion. Their drift and
design is, to prove that they have all their power from Christ alone, and not
from the Church. But they must know, that as they have their Office, so they
have their Power. They have their Office from the Church immediately, from
Christ mediante Ecclesia. For they are chosen, tried, approved by the Church,
and so designed to such an Office by the Church, and can exercise the power of
Discipline as Officers in no Church, but where they are Officers. Again, the
conclusion it self might be granted, if by Ecclesiastical power they meant
Official power, and yet nothing to purpose, because the thing in question is
not proved, nor so much as mentioned in the conclusion. Yet they endeavor to
prove the Minor from 2 Cor. 10.8. where the Apostle speaks of the Authority
which the Lord had given them. But 1. What Authority was this? Interpreters
say, it was Apostolical, and so extraordinary. 2. Whether Apostolical or not,
yet it was their Authority to Preach the Gospel, as appears verse, 16. This is
not the power of Discipline, the thing in question. The rest of the Scriptures
alleged to prove the Minor, speak either of the power of Officers and power
extraordinary, or of the power as Ministers. Only Matthew 18.17, 18. is to be
understood of the power of Discipline, yet that place determines the Church,
not the Elders to be the primary subject; and this is directly against them, as
shall be showed hereafter.

All those, whose Ecclesiastical Officers for Church-Govenment under the new
Testament, are instituted by Christ before any formal visible Christian Church
was gathered or constituted, they are the first and immediate subject of the
power of the Keys from Jesus Christ.

But the Ecclesiastical Offices of Christ's own Officers were so instituted.

Therefore they are the first subject of the Keys.

Cap. 11. p. 183. of the second Edition.



Answer. 1. I find in this Syllogism four terms. For in the Major according to
their own exposition, the Officers were such, as that not only their Offices
were instituted, but that at the same instant made Officers by Christ, before
any Christian Church had being or existence. These Offices and Officers were
extraordinary, p. 184. In the Minor, they include not only these Offices and
Officers, but those of future times, which were not extraordinary. 2. If they
rectify the Syllogism, and understand the Minor only of such Officers, as were
actually in Office before there was any Christian Church, and then they argue a
specie ad genus, and infer a general from a particular. 3. How will they prove
that ruling Elders, distinct from preaching Presbyters, were instituted by
Christ or the Apostles, by virtue of a special precept of universal Obligation.
4. The Question is, not of Official Power, either Ordinary or Extraordinary. 5.
Upon perusal of the Scriptures alleged to make good this argument, it will
appear, they confound Officers and power Extraordinary and Ordinary, the Church
in fieri and facto, power universal and particular.

in foro exteriori; it remains I say something of the English Presbytery, which
was 1. Intended. 2. Upon the advice of the Assembly modelled. 3. Now in some
parts of the Nation practiced according to the book of Discipline. For this end
we must observe.

1. The Nation was formerly, and of old for civil Government divided into
Counties, and the same division now retained for Discipline. For the Parliament
thought it not good to follow the division of Provinces and Diocesses. The
Knights of the several Counties chose certain Ministers for the Assembly, who
with some Members of both Houses give their advice in matters of Doctrine,
Worship and Discipline: which was so far effectual as the Parliament should
approve. The discipline approved is made probationer for three years, declared
and published in nine Ordinances. The first whereof was agreed upon, about Aug.
28. 1644, The last, Aug. 28. 1646.

2. Before this model could be finished, there was much debate and contention,
especially between the dissenting brethren and the Assembly. For though by the
Covenant the Discipline ought to be reformed according to the Word of God, and
the best reformed Churches, yet there was not the agreement which ought to have
been. For both parties pretended to make the Word of God the Rule; yet some
thought the government of the Kirk of Scotland, some that of New England to be
the best and nearest to the Word, and most conformable to that infallible Rule:
So that, though at the instance of our English Commissioners, that clause
(according to the Word of God) was inserted, yet it proved not effectual to
determine the Controversy, because their judgments were so different.

3. In this Model, the first work is to make Officers, and determine their
power.

4. The first Offices were called Tryers, who (upon the division of several
Counties into a certain number of Precincts called Classes; which consisted of
certain secular and Ecclesiastical persons, whose names were certified to the
Parliament) by the Parliament were allowed, and from the Parliament received
their power.

5. These were Extraordinary Officers, and their first, and chiefest work was
upon Election, Examination, and Approbation to constitute Congregational
Eldership.

6. These once constituted, were invested with power; for the exercise whereof,
the Parliament determines. 1. Their Courts. 2. The parties subject to their
power. 3. The causes belonging to their Cognizance. 4. The manner of
proceeding. 5. The Acts of Jurisdiction.

7. As for their Courts, they 1. Make them to be Congregational, Classical,
Provincial, National. 2. Define the number of the persons, how many must be of
the Quorum. 3. They subordinate the Inferior to the Superior, and all to the
Supreme, which was the Parliament. 4. They determine the times of their
Sessions, which of the Inferior Courts were more frequent, of the Superior
more seldom. 5. The order of Appeals is from the Inferior to the Superior.

8. The parties subject to their Jurisdiction, were all in their several
precincts.

9. The Causes were not Civil or Capital, but Ecclesiastical, especially
ignorance and scandal.

10. Their manner of proceeding was upon Information, Summons, Confession,
Conviction by Witnesses.

11. The Acts of Jurisdiction were Suspention, removal from Office or
Sacraments, receiving and restoring. The matter and substance of these
Ordinances, was enlarged and more distinctly and orderly declared in the Book
of Discipline, one thousand six hundred forty eight.

general rules of Scripture; and if exercised constantly by wise and pious Men
might have done much good, especially in preventing ignorance and scandal for
time to come. Yet it had many enemies, as the Prelatical and Episcopal party,
because it was not a Reformation, but an abolition of Episcopacy. The
dissenting Brethren liked it not, because it extended so far beyond the
Congregational bounds, took in whole Parishes, did not require a sufficient
qualification of the Members, and subordinated Congregations, and Inferior
Assemblies to the Superior and Greater. The profane and ignorant were against
it, because it called them to account, and required knowledge and a stricter
kind of life: and this was a commendation of it. Some approved it not, because
it was so like unto, and almost the same with the Kirk Discipline of Scotland.
Many were offended with it, because of the ruling and Lay Elders, as some call
them. Besides, it was set up in the time of the bloody War, and without the
Kings consent, who was a great enemy unto it. Neither were the Statutes of the
former Discipline repealed. Though some did but assert the Jus Divinum of it,
yet that was not made so clear as to satisfy many, no not the Parliament it
self. Though the Ordinances and the book of Discipline require it to be
generally put in practice, yet no man was eligible for an Officer that had not
taken the national Covenant, yet that was not generally imposed or taken: nor
could any but a Covenanter have any Vote in the Election. As the institution of
it was an Act of the Civil Power in the Parliament without the being, so, it
reserved the chiefest power unto it self, and to future Parliaments: and it
would not trust the Ministry or the Elders with it. And there might be several
reasons for it: 1. First, after Reformation began, end ever since our
separation from Rome, the Ecclesiastical power was restored to the Crown. 2. In
times of Popery the Church, and especially the Pope and Clergy, had encroached
and entered too far upon the Civil Power. 3. The general Assemblies of Scotland
were thought too much independent upon the Crown, and to have too great an
influence upon the State. 4. That seeing the Church required the assistance of
the State, it was judged necessary, that it should so far depend upon the State
as it required the help of the State. Yet, if the Discipline had been the pure
and simple form instituted by Christ and his Apostles, there had been no cause
of these jealousies; no need of these policies. By all this its evident, that
the Presbytery of England could not be the primary subject of the power of the
Keys, because they received their institution from the Parliament, which
reserved the chiefest power unto it self. Its true, that there was something
Ecclesiastical in it, yet even that depended upon the Civil Power more than
upon an Ecclesiastical Assembly, or representative, though general.

CHAP. XIII. That the Government of the Church is not purely Democratical, but
like that of a free State, wherein the Power is in the whole, not in any part,
which is the Authors judgment.
formaliter and eminenter* cives Ecclesiae, parts of a Christian Community, The
people and number of Believers thus considered, are rather Plebs, than Populus.
To understand this its to be considered that in a Christian Community there are
neither Optimates properly, not Plebs. There may be and are, as you heard
before, such as are incomplete and virtual members, as Women, Children and
other weak Christians, who are not fit to have any Vote in the Public Affairs
of the Church, much more unfit to exercise and manage the power of the Keys.
There are also complete members, and amongst these some more eminent than the
rest. To place the power in the inferior rank, or to make that party
predominant, is to make the government Democratical. And this opinion is not
worth the confutation, because its not only disagreeing with plain Scripture,
but with the rules of right reason. In this regard they are generally rejected.
Some charge Morellius and the Brownists with this error, but I have not seen
their Books. The Learned Blondel may seem to be of this mind, because he
places the power in Plebe Ecclesiastica. But upon due examination, it will be
found otherwise. Mr. Parker, who asserts the Government in some respect to be
Democratical, rejects Morellius, yet he himself cannot be altogether excused.
For he will have the Government to be mixed, and partly Democratical in the
People, partly Aristocratical in the Officers or Governors. He further
explains himself, and says, its Democraticum quoad Statum for the
Constitution, Aristocraticum quoad exercitium for the Administration and
Exercise of the Power. De. polit. Ecclesiastica. l. 3. c. 7. p. 26.
For he distinguishes between the Power, which is in the whole Church, and the
Dispensation or Exercise thereof, which is in the Governors or Officers: who
he says, have not all the power of dispensation, because the Church reserves
so much as is convenient, and belonging to her Dignity, Authority, and Liberty
given her of Christ. But this is a mistake in Politics and the general Rules
of Government. For a State is mixed or pure in respect of the Constitution, not
the Administration: and the Question is not concerning the secondary, but the
primary subject of power, which the Officers deriving the power from the whole
Church cannot be, for they have it only at the second hand: as he himself
confesses. I will not examine his many arguments, because there is none of
them ad idem, and to the purpose or point in hand: and they all and every one,
as he misapplies them, presuppose an error. For they all should be limited to
the Fundamental Power in Constitution, but here Power of Constitution, and of
Administration are confounded; as also the power of the Church with the power
of Officers.

That the primary subject of the Power of the Keys is the whole Church. For
order sake I will. 1. Explain the proposition. 2. Confirm the same. In the
Explication I will inform the Reader. 1. What I mean by the power of Keys. 2.
What by the whole Church. 3. How, and in what manner I understand the whole
Church to be the primary subject of this power.

1. This power is not the power of Civil Sovereigns, nor of Officers, as
Officers, Civil or Ecclesiastical in foro exteriori, or of Ministers, as
Ministers, nor the Universal Power of Christ, nor the Extraordinary power of
Apostles, or any other Extraordinary Officers, but it is an Ordinary power of
making Canons, of constituting Officers, of Jurisdiction and other Acts, which
are necessary for the outward Government of an Ecclesiastical Community,
committed unto, and conveyed upon the Church by Christ.

2. By the whole Church, is not to be understood the Universal Church militant
and triumphant, nor the whole Church mystical, nor the whole Church militant
and visible of all times, nor of the visible Church of all Nations, existent in
one time, but a whole particular Church visible in some certain place and
Vicinity, that shall be fit to manage the power of the Keys independently: as
the Church of Jerusalem, of Antioch, of Corinth, of Ephesus, of Smyrna, etc.
Those, who determine the Series or order of appeals to ascend from a
Congregation, to a Classis, from a Classis to a Provincial Synod, from a
Provincial to a National, of one Nation to a National of several Nations, or
from that unto an Oecomenical or General Council, extend the whole Church far
further than I do. As for the Papal party, they presuppose all particular
Churches to make but one visible Church, not only for Doctrine and Worship, but
for outward Discipline too: and the Church of Rome must be the Mother and Queen
of all other Churches in the World: yet they differ about the primary subject
of the power of the Keys. Some determine the Pope as Peter's Successor, to be
the visible Head and Universal Monarch of this Church. Others, as the Councils
of Constance and Basil, Cameracensis, Gerson, and the faculty of Paris, give
this power to the whole Church to be exercised in general Councils. Mr. Ellis
does charge some of our own who affirmed this power to be in the Universal
Church with Popery: and Mr. Hooker conceives he has demonstrated Learned and
Judicious Mr. Hudson to be guilty of the same, but he is mistaken, as since is
made evident. These two cannot possibly be reconciled whilst they proceed upon
contrary principles. Mr. Hooker of New England understands by a visible Church,
such a Church as is under a form of external Discipline, and subject unto one
independent Judicatory; but neither Mr. Hudson, nor others of his mind
understand any such thing. There is an Universal visible Militant Church on
Earth: this Church is truly Totum integrale, and also an Organical body; the
Head and Monarch is Christ; all Ministers Officers, all Believers Subjects: the
Word and Sacrament privileges, and every Christian either by Birth or Baptism
according to Divine Institution, is first in order of nature a Member of this
Universal or Organical Body, before he be a Member of any particular Church or
Congregation, and is so to be considered. And many, if not all the places of
Scripture alleged by Mr. Hudson, are truly understood to speak of this
Universal Church: though some of them seem to be affirmed only of the Church
mystical, as such, yet so that in diverse respects they may agree to both. This
cannot be Popery, neither does it presuppose any point of Popery or other
error. The grand error of the Papist in this particular, is, to affirm that
one Church particular is above all Churches in the World, not only in dignity
but in power, so that all particular Churches must be subject unto her, and her
Bishop invested with universal Jurisdiction. To subject the Universal Church
Militant in one body to Christ, can have no affinity with this. And to subject
every particular Church to the Universal, exercising her power in a
Representative, is no such error, nor so dangerous as that of the Sovereignty
of Rome. And though there be no such thing, because the distance is so great,
that the Association is impossible, yet the Pope and his party did abhor to
think of it. That Question about visible and invisible is but a toy to this.
The Church therefore, which is the subject of the Question is, a Church, a
particular Church, a whole particular Church. Yet there is a particular Church
primary and secundary: primary is the Church considered as a community, and a
secondary Church by way of Representation. The primary is the proper subject of
real power, the Representative of personal. Whether this Church be
Congregational, or of larger extent shall be examined hereafter.

3. Thus you have heard. 1. What the power is. 2. What the subject is. Now 3.
We must consider in what manner this power is in this primary subject. Its not
in it Monarchically, nor Aristocratically, nor Democratically, or any pure way
of Disposition, but in the whole, after the manner of a free State or Polity.
For there Universi praesunt singulis, singuli subduntur universis, so its here.
All jointly and the whole does rule, every several person, though Officer,
though Minister, though Bishop, if there be any such, is subject to the whole,
and to all jointly. And in this Model the power is derived from the whole to
the parts, not from the parts to the whole, though this Community should
consist of ten thousand Congregations. This power is exercised in the highest
degree by a Representative general, in an inferior degree by Officers or
inferior Assemblies: Upon this principle, though in another manner, the
Councils of Basil and Constance did proceed against the Pope, as being but a
part, though an eminent part, as the times were then of the Church. Yet this
proposition is not so to be understood, as though this Church were the first
Fountain and Original of this power, for she is not; she derives and receives
it from Christ, as Christ from God. But she is the primary subject in respect
of her parts and members.

Parker and many others, for to manifest the Original of Church Discipline,
which I conceive are not so pertinent. 2. I will most of all insist upon the
words of Institution. 3. I will enlarge upon those places which speak of the
exercise of this power; that from the manner of administration we may
understand the constitution. The two places are, Matthew 16.19. and John 20.22,
23. The first is concerning the promise, the second concerning the donation of
the power of the Keys, as they are by many expounded. The words of the promise
are these, I will give unto thee the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, etc. Many
and different are the interpretations of this place, as given by Writers, both
Ancient and Modern; Popish and Protestant. The difference is in two things
especially. 1. What this power should be. 2. To whom it was to be given. The
power with many is the power of Discipline in foro exteriori, with others the
power of a Minister, as a Minister. 2. The person to whom this power is here
promised no doubt is Peter; but under what notion Peter must be considered, is
here the Question. Some will have it to be Peter as a Monarch and Prince above
the rest of the Apostles, including his Successors, the Monarchical Bishop of
Rome. Some will have Peter here considered as the mouth and representative of
the Apostles, and in them, of all Aristocratical Bishops as their Successors.
Some will have him to represent the Ministers, some the Elders; some the Church
it self. And these again divide, and cannot agree, whether this Church here
meant be the Universal Church, or a particular; if Universal, whether Universal
mystical, or visible; if visible, whether this be the Church it self, or a
Representative of the same; if Representative, whether it must be represented
by Bishops only; or by Bishops and Presbyters; or by Presbyters alone; or by
Bishops, Presbyters and People. If a particular Church, whether it be
Congregational, or Diocesan, or some other: so that from this pronoun THEE, we
have Chemical extractions of all sorts of Governments, Ecclesiastical, pure and
mixed, Monarchical, Aristocratical, Democratical: of all kind of Churches, as
Universal, National, Congregational: of all kind of Governors, as Popes,
Bishops, Presbyters, the People. Yet I conceive this place is not meant of
Discipline, but rather of Doctrine. The Church is the Universal, against which
the gates of Hell shall not prevail; the Keys are the Word and Sacraments,
accompanied with the power of the Spirit. As building is conversion and
edification, so binding and loosing admission into, or exclusion out of this
Church. The Architect and chief Master builder is Christ, as he is the
principal Agent in binding and loosing. His Servants and co-workers are
Apostles and Ministers of the Gospel, amongst whom Peter was most eminent
amongst the Jews, Paul amongst the Gentiles. For Christ used Peter first to
convert the Jews, Acts 2. then to convert the Gentiles, Act. 10. And Paul
labored more abundantly than them all. The binding and loosing in Heaven, was
the making of their Ministry by the power of the Divine Spirit to be effectual.
To this purpose D. Reynolds, Spalatensis, Causabon, Cameron, Grotius with
diverse of the Ancient, and Mr. Parker himself, who notwithstanding applies
this, to the power of Discipline, intending thereby to prove the power of the
Keys to be Democratically in a Congretional Church. Yet let it be supposed
that Peter, as receiving the Keys, does represent the community of Believers:
Or if as such he represent them, how will it appear that this Church or
community is a single Congregation? Or, if it be such a single Congregation,
how will it follow from hence that the power is in this Congregation
Democratically? Mr. Parker should have considered that there is a great
difference. 1. Between Peter, as professing that Christ was the Son of the
living God (for as such he was only a Disciple admitted by Christ into his
Kingdom) and Peter receiving the Keys (for as such he was above a Disciple,
and has power to admit others into this Kingdom) not as a Disciple, but as a
Minister of the Gospel.

John 20.22, 23. The words of Christ, the Donour are these, Receive ye the Holy
Ghost, whosoever sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them, and whosoever sins
ye retain, they are retained. These have been alleged, as by him, so by others
to prove. 1. The power of the Keys in foro exteriori. 2. That this power is in
the Bishops alone. 3. That the Priests have power upon auricular confession to
absolve: and here they ground their Sacrament of Penance, and their sacerdotal
power in foro poenitentiali. From hence some of ours have endeavored to prove
the parity of Apostles, and so of Bishops against the Popes Supremacy: for here
they find the power promised only to Peter by name, given to all the Apostles.
For to understand these words the better, we must observe in them Donation, and
in it the Donour, the Donee, the Power, the Acts of the Power, the ratification
of these Acts. The Donour or Person giving is Christ: the parties receiving
this power immediately are Apostles, as Extraordinary Servants and Officers:
the thing given and received was the Holy Ghost, that is, Ability and
Authority, Divine and Spiritual, necessary and requisite for the place: the
Acts were remitting and retaining, the same with binding and loosing, Mat.
16.19. The ratification of these Acts, was the making them effectual by the
concurrence of the Divine Spirit. For these Acts could not be Spiritual and
Divine, and so powerful upon the Immortal Souls of Men, nor the Apostles so
much as Ministerial and Instrumental Agents in this work without a Divine Power
and Confirmation of the Supreme Judge, making their Sentence valid and
executing the same. Hence that sweetest Joy and admirable Comfort of those who
are Remitted, and the Terrors and Torments of those that are Condemned. These
Acts are performed by the Word and Sacraments, and the Application of the
Promises or Communications to particular Persons; which Application is made
either more at large to a Multitude at one time, or to single Persons upon some
Evidence of their Qualification; and it may be made infallibly so far as God
shall direct infallibly, or fallibly, for want of clear Evidence, in which Case
the Sentence must be passed conditionally by Man, though absolutely by God. All
this is nothing to external Discipline, or if it should extend so far, the
party remitting and retaining are not the Church; but the Officers of the
Church, and the Officers of a Church not under a form of outward Government,
but under another Consideration. An Ecclesiastical external Commonwealth does
presuppose an Ecclesiastical Community, and the same consisting of Believers,
and the same united and associated for Worship and Divine performances tending
to Eternal Salvation: and those thus Associated may have Communion in Divine
Things and Actions, and their Pastors with their Flocks, before any form of
Discipline be introduced or settled, and these Believers may by Word and
Sacraments receive Heavenly Comfort, and attain Eternal Life without such
Discipline, and before it can be established amongst them, and so I hope it is
at this time in this Nation, with many a faithful servant of God, who by the
benefit of a good Ministry, with God's Blessing upon their Labors, are truly
converted, and continue, and go on in a state of Salvation as happily, as many
who are under a form of Government. And here it is to be observed, 1. That
though the Apostles were extraordinary Officers infallibly directed by the Holy
Ghost, which Christ gave them, yet ordinary Ministers lawfully called and
succeeding them, if they preach their Doctrine truly, have a promise to convert
and save the Souls of sinful Men. 2. That the Work of these ordinary Ministers
is not only to feed the Flock of Christ already gathered, but to convert and
gather Sinners unto Christ; and this not by the Rod of Discipline, but the Word
of God, which is the Power of God unto Salvation. 3. This gaining Souls to
Christ is not the gathering of Churches out of Churches, and Christians out of
Christians to make a party of their own, under pretense of a purer Reformation,
but it is a far more excellent Work and of another kind, tending directly to an
higher end. 4. After a Minister becomes a Pastor of a Flock, and has relation
unto them as his Flock, and they to him as his People, he must needs have some
Power over them, and they must be subject unto him, and obey him in the Lord,
and he has power to remit Sins; to shut and open, and what he does in this
kind, according to his Commission, will be made good in Heaven. Yet these Acts
of his are not Acts of External Discipline, but of his Ministerial Office, as
he is a Servant to Jesus Christ. This I speak not against Discipline, which if
agreeable to the word of God is a great Blessing; but against all such, who
under pretense of this or that form of Church Government, disturb the Church,
and discomfort and discourage many a precious Saint of God. The end of this is
to manifest, that these places of Scripture, Mat. 16.19. John 20.22, 23. are no
grounds whereon to build Church Government.

Mat. 18.17, 18. Tort, Tor. p. 41.
De exteriori foro ibi agitur, Exterioris fori jurisdictio illo, nec alio loco,
fundata est. That Is the only place for the Institution and no other says Dr.
Andrews, in that most learned and exact piece far above his other Works. To
understand this place we must observe, 1. The Parties subject to this Tribunal.
2. The Causes proper to that Court. 3. In what manner and order Causes are
brought in and prepared for Judgment. 4. The Judge. 5. The Acts of Judgment
upon Evidence of the Cause. 6. The Ratification of these Acts, and so of the
Power. 7. How this Ratification is obtained, and the Judgment made effectual.
1. The party subject to this Tribunal is a Brother. If thy Brother offend thee,
verse 15. This may be explained from 1 Cor. 5.11. But, now I have written unto
you, not to keep company, if any man that is called a brother be a fornicator,
or covetous, or an idolater, etc. There are covetous Persons and Idolaters of
the World, verse 10. and Fornicators and Idolaters which are called Brethren:
The former are without, the latter within the Church. The former are subject to
the Judgment of God, but not of the Church, the latter are subject to the
Judgment of the Church, Do not thou judge them that are within. So that the
Subjects in this Commonwealth are Brethren, Disciples, such as profess their
Faith in Christ.

2. The Causes are Spiritual and Ecclesiastical, and must be considered under
that Notion. For it is a Trespass, an Offense committed by a Brother, as a
Brother, against a Brother as a Brother; whether it be a wrong against a
Brother, or a sin, whereby a Brother is offended, grieved, displeased. For, if
a Brother be a Fornicator, or Idolater, etc. he must tell the Church and not
the State; he must be made as an Heathen or Publican, if he will not hear the
Church, this is no Sentence of the State or Civil Judge, it is made good in
Heaven, so is not the Judgment of the Civil Magistrate; It must be the Judgment
of a Brother as a Brother within the Church, which the Church, as a Church,
must judge, and in the name of Christ, not of the Civil Sovereign, and the
Party offending must be delivered up to Satan, not to the Sword. Yet one and
the same Crime may make a person obnoxious, both to the temporal Sword of the
Magistrate, and the spiritual Censure of the Church, and may be justly
punishable and punished by both, though some of our English Lawyers have
delivered the contrary, who might ground their Opinion upon Ecclesiastical
Supremacy of the King, For though the Laws of England might determine so, yet the
Laws of God and Christ do not.

3. The manner and order of proceeding, is, 1. Privately to admonish; and if
that take effect, to proceed no further. 2. If upon this the party will not
reform, he must be charged, and convinced before two or three Witnesses; and if
he shall persist impenitent, then he must be convented before the
Ecclesiastical Tribunal upon Information and Accusation; and the same once made
good, and evident, the Cause is ripe and prepared for Judgment.

Tell the Church, where we must know, what this Church is. The word in the
Greek is (...), and we find it used in the Old Testament about seventy times by
the Septuagint, who so often turn the Hebrew (...) by that name. Upon perusal
of the places we shall find that it signifies Assemblies, and of many kinds, as
good, bad, holy, profane, greater, less, festival, civil, military,
Ecclesiastical and Religious, occasional, standing, orderly, confused,
ordinary, extraordinary. It Is observable, that very seldom (some say but once,
as Psalm. 26.5.) it signifies a wicked and profane Society. Sometimes, not
often, it is a Military body. But most of all by far (a few Texts excepted) it
notes an holy and religious Convention or Assembly. For sometimes it is a
National Polity of Israel under a sacred Notion; and very often a religious
Assembly for Prayer, Fasting, Dedications, renewing their Covenant with God,
Praises, Thanksgivings, and such like Acts of Worship, so that the word seems
to be appropriate unto Religious Assemblies; and though it signify other
Societies, yet these most frequently and principally. And this is confirmed
from the New Testament, where its used a hundred and eleven times at least, and
in all these places signifies an Assembly or Society Religious, except in Acts
19.32, 39, 41. where it signifies both a tumultuous, and also an orderly
Assembly, or Society, or Convention, as a civil Court of Judgment, which
signification is here applied by our Savior to a Spiritual Judicatory for
Spiritual Causes. Though this be a special signification, yet it signifies the
number and Society of Believers and Disciples, who profess their Faith in
Christ exhibited, and this is this Church-Christian, and the People of God. Yet
it signifies this People under several Notions, as sometimes the Church of the
Jews, sometimes of the Gentiles, sometimes the Universal Church, sometimes
particular Churches, sometimes the Militant Church, either as visible or
mystical, sometimes the Church Triumphant, sometimes a Church before any form
of Government be introduced, sometimes under a form of Government; so it is
taken and supposed by our Savior here. Grotius his Conceit, that our Savior
in these words alludes to the manner of several Sects and Professions, as of
Pharisees, Sadduces, Essenes, who had their Rules of Discipline, and their
Assemblies and Convention for the practice of them, may be probable. Yet
without any such Allusion the place is plain enough from the context and other
Scriptures. Erastus upon the place is intolerable, and most woefully wrests it;
so does Bishop Bilson in his Church Government, and is point blank contrary to
D. Andrews, who in his Tortura Torti, does most accurately examine, interpret,
and apply the words, and most effectually from thence confute Bellarmine. One
may truly say of that Book, as he himself said of Austin's Treatise De Civitate
Dei, it was opus palmarum. For Civil, Common, Canon Law, Politics, History,
School Learning, the Doctrine of the Casuists Divinity, and other Arts, whereof
he makes use, it is one of the most learned and accurate of any put forth in
our times. By his Exposition of this Text, he utterly overthrows the immediate
Jus Divinum of Episcopacy in matters of Discipline, and Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction. He plainly and expressly makes the whole Church the primary
subject of the Power of the Keys, in foro exteriori. Therefore suppose the
Bishops were Officers by a Divine Right, as he endeavors to prove (though
weakly) in his Letters to Du Moulin, yet at best they can be but the Churches
Delegates, for the exercise of that Power. And it is observable, that diverse of
our Champions, when they oppose Bellarmine's Monarchical Government of the
Church, peremptorily affirm the Power of the Keys to be in the whole Church,
as the most effectual way to confute him, yet when they wrote against the
Presbyterian, and the Antiprelatical party, they change their Tone, and Tune.
But to return unto the words of Institution, 1. The word Church here signifies
an Assembly. 2. This Assembly is an Assembly for Religion. 3. The Religion is
Christian. 4. This Assembly is under a form of External Government. 5. This
Government presupposes a Community, and Laws and Officers Ecclesiastical.
These presupposed, it is a juridical Assembly, or a Court. 6. Because Courts are
Inferior, Superior, and Supreme, it signifies all, especially Supreme. 7. It
determines no kind of Government but that of a free State, as shall more appear
hereafter. 8. Christ does not say, Dic Regi, tell the Prince or State; nor Dic
Petro, tell Peter or the Pope, as though the Government should be Monarchical,
either Civil or Ecclesiastical; nor Dic Presbytero, tell the Elders; nor Dic
Apostolis and Episcopis aut Archiopiscopis, that the Government should be
purely Aristocratical; nor Dic Plebi, that the Government should be purely
Democratical; nor Dic Synodo, tell the Council general or particular. But it
says, tell the Church, wherein there may be Bishops, Presbyters, some Eminent
Persons neither Bishops nor Presbyters: There may be Synods, and all these
either as Officers, or Representatives of the Church; and we may tell these,
and these may judge, yet they hear and judge by a power derived and delegated
from the Church, and the Church by them, as by her Instruments, does exercise
her Power. As the body* sees by her eye, and hears by the ear, so it is in this
particular, but so, that the similitude does not run on four feet, nor must be
stretched too far. This being the genuine Sense favors no Faction, yet admits
any kind of Order, which observed may reach the main end. For this we must
know, and take special notice of, that Christ will never stand upon
Formalities, but requires the thing, which he commands, to be done in an
orderly way. Yet it is necessary, and his Institution does tend unto it, to
reserve the chief Power in the whole Body, otherwise if any party, as Bishops,
or Presbyters, or any other part of the Church be trusted with the power alone
to themselves, they will so engross it, as that there will be no means, nor
ordinary jurisdiction to reform them. Of this we have plain Experience in the
Bishops of Rome, who being trusted at first with too much Power, did at length
arrogate as their own, and no ways derived from the Church, and so refused to
be judged. For if the Church once make any party the primary subject of this
power, then they cannot use it to reduce them. Therefore, as it is a point of
Wisdom in any State to reserve the chief power in the whole Community, and
single out the best and wisest to exercise it, so as, if the Trustees do abuse
their power, they may remove them or reform them; so it should be done in the
Church. If any begin to challenge either the whole, or the Supreme power as
Officers, many of these, nay the greater part of them may be unworthy or
corrupted, and then the Church is brought to straits, and must needs suffer.
Some tell us, that the King of England by the first Constitution was only the
Supreme and Universal Magistrate of the Kingdom, trusted with a sufficient
power to govern and administer the State according to the Laws: and his chief
work was to see the Laws executed. Yet in tract of time they did challenge the
power to themselves as their own, and refused to be judged. Yet in this
Institution, if Peter, if Paul, though Apostles do offend, much more if
Patriarchs, Metropolitans, Bishops, Presbyters, do trespass, we must tell, not
Peter, not Paul, not an Apostle, not a Bishop, not any other but the Church. No
wit of Men or Angels could have imagined a better way, nor given a better
expression to settle that which is good and just, and prevent all parties and
factions, and yet leave a sufficient latitude for several orderly ways to
attain the chief end.

Grotius thinks, that our Savior in them did not intend Excommunication. Many
take it for granted, that to be censured and judged an Heathen and Publican, is
to be cast out of the Church and excommunicated. And from these two words
Heathen and Publican, diverse, and amongst the rest Vignierus de excommunicatine
venatorum.
Quinquecclesiensis, and D. Andrews do observe a twofold Excommunication. The
one is the greater, and that is to be as an Heathen; the other the less, which
is to be as a Publican. The Heathen was out of the Church, the Publican was
not. The Heathen might not, the Publican might come into the Temple; the
Heathen were strangers to the Commonwealth of the Israel, and were Loammi the
Publican, being a Jew, was in the Church, but like a scandalous Brother.
Whether this distinction be here intended or no, it is certain, 1. That there
are degrees of Ecclesiastical as well as Civil Penalties. 2. That by this being
as an Heathen and Publican, is meant an Ecclesiastical not a civil punishment,
in matter of Religion. 3. Both were deprived of Ecclesiastical Communion. In
the text, If he will not hear the Church, let him be to thee as an Heathen and
a Publican: Three things are to be observed, 1. The Penalty and the Execution.
2. The Sentence to be Executed. 3. The Crime or Cause. The Execution is to
account him as an Heathen and a Publican, which is not to take away his House,
Lands, Goods, Civil Liberty, Life: but to separate from him, and have no
Communion with him in matter of Religion and Spiritual Society, and to testify
their dislike of him by shunning his company. 2. The sentence is the judgment
of the Church, whereupon this Separation and Non-communion is grounded. For,
the Church must judge and pass the sentence, before we can have any sufficient
warrant for refusal of society. 3. The crime or cause must be made evident
before the Judge pass Sentence: and it is not only the trespass or offense, but
impenitence manifested to the Ecclesiastical Judge. Not to hear the Church is
for the guilty Brother; not to confess and reform upon the Churches public
admonition. This puts him in an immediate capacity of condemnation and
punishment. But more of Ecclesiastical censures in the second Book.

Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth, shall be bound in Heaven, etc. which are
added, as Hillary says well, in terrorem metus maximi, to strike a terror
into the hearts of all such as shall make themselves liable to the censures of
the Church. Yet they are not only for terror, but for the sweetest consolation
of the penitent absolved by the Church; and so also for the encouragement of
the Church to proceed in Discipline against the greatest. For though she has
not the sword, nor any coactive force to imprison, fine, banish, put to death,
and the profane and worldly wretches do not fear her censures, yet her
censures shall be executed from Heaven, and be more terrible than any
punishments inflicted by sword of civil Sovereigns. This Ratification includes
two things: 1. That when this judgment is once past according to the Rules of
Christ, the supreme Judge does approve and decree it to be irrecoveverable. 2.
That he will by a Divine and never failing power execute it; so that neither
can any appeal, or complaint of a nullity make it void, nor any contrary
strength or force hinder the execution. In this respect, Hillary says, its
Judicium immobile, and cannot be reversed; Hierom, that its corroborated and
cannot be infringed. Tertullian, that its Prejudicium ultimi judicii, and
stands good, as that ever shall.

ver. 20. For its not to be done in their own name, or by their own power: but
they must assemble and proceed in Christ's name, and in his name give the
definitive sentence. According to this Law the Apostle gave direction in
Christ's name to gather together, and with the power of Jesus Christ to deliver
the scandalous person to Satan, 1 Cor. 5.4. So that Christ will be present with
them, direct them, and assist them, and the work shall be more his, than theirs.

Paul, and he most of all in his first Epistle to Timothy) declaring and
delivering them without any other joined with them. The exercise of this
Legislative power, we find in that famous Synod held at Jerusalem, Acts 15. The
difference of the interpretations of this text is no less than of the former.
For some question, whether it was a formal Synod, having power to bind, or only
an Assembly for advice. Some make it, not only a Synod invested with a binding
force, but judge it to be a most excellent pattern for all Synodical Assemblies
in time to come: yet these are not certain, whether it was general in respect
of all Churches then extant. But let it be a Synod, having a binding force, its
doubted how the Canons could bind other Churches, who sent no delegates to
represent them and Act for them? Whether did they bind, because it was a
general Council in some consideration, or because the Apostles were in it, and
acted as Extraordinary Ministers of Christ invested with an Universal power
over all Churches: or because they were received afterward in every particular
Church: or because the matter was determined in Scripture, and out of it
declared to be the mind of God, which seems to be implied in these words, It
seemed good to the Holy Ghost and us, ver. 28. For all Canons should be so made
as to be clearly grounded upon some special or general precepts of Scripture,
which were revealed by the Holy Ghost: for they should bind more in respect of
the matter, and the reason upon which they are grounded, than in respect of the
multitude of Votes. For one good reason from the Scriptures is more binding
than the consent of all general Councils in the World. Another Query there is,
why this Controversy should be determined at Jerusalem, and not at Antioch, or
any where else: whether it was, because that was the Mother Church, or because
the Apostles were there at that time resident, or because other Churches were
not so fully constituted: or because there might be there representatives from
all other Churches: or because they, who sprang the Controversy at Antioch,
came from Jerusalem, and pretended the Authority of the Apostles, and of that
Church; and because it was agreed at Antioch to refer the cause to the Apostles
and Elders at Jerusalem? Besides all these, there is another doubt concerning
the Members, which did constitute this Synod, whether the Apostles only, or the
Apostles with the Elders, or besides these the Brethren as distinct from them:
or whether if all these were of the Synod, the Elders, and Brethren had any
decisive voice or no? But to leave these doubts; Its certain out of the Text.
1. That upon a controversy raised at Antioch by some, who came from Jerusalem,
it could not be after much disputation there ended. 2. That it was agreed that
Paul and Barnabas with others of them should go unto Jerusalem, to the Apostles
and Elders about this Question. 3. When these Delegates came to Jerusalem, they
were received of the Church, the Apostles and Elders. 4. Upon this, and them
acquainted with the controversy, the Apostles and Elders came together to
consider of this matter. 5. In this Assembly, after much disputation, both
Peter and James gave strong reasons, why Circumcision and the Ceremonies of the
Law should not be imposed upon the believing Gentiles. 6. Upon these convincing
reasons it pleased the Apostles and Elders and the whole Church to send special
Messengers and Letters concerning the definitive sentence of the Council unto
Antioch. 7. The Synodical Letters, were written in the name of the Apostles,
Elders and Brethren in this style, It pleased us, and seemed good unto us.
Diverse particulars are here observable: as 1. That we do not read that Paul
acted any thing as a Judge in this controversy jointly with the rest of the
Synod, and perhaps the reason might be, because he was considered as a party:
for no man, not an Apostle should be judge and party in the same cause. 2. That
the Apostles did not act as immediately inspired in this particular, and
according to any extraordinary, but an ordinary Ecclesiastical power; for there
was much disputation. 3. They did not suddenly and instantly proceed to vote
the matter: but they met to consider of it, and debated and disputed much
before they determined. 4. The determination was not grounded upon the
multitude of Votes, but upon Divine Revelation and Scripture, though not
expressly, yet by way of consequence, as appears both from the words of Peter
and of James. 5. That which is the principal thing for which this Text is
alleged, is this, that the controversy is not refered to one Apostle, as to
Paul alone, or Peter alone, or James alone, but to the Apostles jointly: and
not to them alone, but to the Elders, nor to them and the Elders alone, but to
them with the Brethren, and the whole Church. 6. That all these gave their
consent; for it pleased the Apostles and Elders, and the whole Church. If Peter
alone had been made Judge, then the Pope, if only the Apostles, then the
Bishops; if the Elders alone, then the Presbytery; if the Brethren alone, then
the People would have challenged every one severally the Legislative power in
Synods to themselves alone. Lastly, by this we learn upon what occasion, such
great Assemblies are requisite, if not necessary; we might add, that they
convened by the permission, not commission of the Civil Power.

Acts 1.15. For, 1. Upon the death of Judas, one of the sacred College of the
Apostles, a place was void. This was the occasion. 2. Peter conceives, that
another must be surrogated and succeed him in that place. 3. In an Assembly of
an hundred and twenty, as a Chairman he proposes the matter. 4. Acquaints
them with the occasion of a new Election, and lets them understand the
necessity of it, saying, There must one be Ordained as a Witness with us of
Christ's Resurrection. The reason he concludes from these words of Psalm. 119.8.
His Office, Charge, or Bishopric let another take. By which words God
signifies and commands that upon the death of Judas, another must take the
Charge with the rest of the Apostles. 5. Upon this the Assembly proceeds
without any Conge-disler, or Lience from any other, to the Election, and
propose two, Justus and Matthias, both well qualified, and in that equality,
that they knew not whether to prefer. 6. Because they could not determine
whether was the fitter, nor upon a Determination give a Commission to make an
Apostle; therefore by prayer and lot they refer and commit the cause to God,
who chooses Matthias. In this Election diverse things are considerable, 1. That
if Matthias and Justus were of the number of the seventy Disciples, as it is
very probable, if not certain, there was an imparity between the twelve
Apostles and seventy Disciples in respect of their place; yet what this
imparity was, and whether it should continue in the ordinary Officers of the
Church succeeding them, is not here expressed. 2. That the Election of the
highest Officer in the Church, even of an Apostle was committed to this
Assembly, as fit to judge of his Qualifications. 3. That none should take upon
them to elect a Minister or Officer of the Church, who is not able to judge of
his fitness for the place. 4. That God gives none any power to elect or ordain,
and constitute any a Minister, Officer, or Representative of the Church, who is
not duly qualified for to do the work of the place, for which he was elected.
Justus and Matthias must be able with the Apostles to bear witness of the
Resurrection of Christ. 5. The principal thing for the point in hand to be
observed, is, that neither Peter, nor any of the eleven, do take upon them to
elect or design any person, or persons by themselves alone, but commit it to
the whole Assembly: and the whole Assembly elected, prayed, cast losts. 6. That
though these persons very eminent and full of the Spirit, could and might
design the persons, but not give the power of Apostleship. To this Head belongs
the constitution of Decons, Acts 6. Where we read of the occasion, and in some
sort of the necessity of this Office. For 1. The Apostles knew there was a kind
of necessity of such an Officer as a Deacon, and it was no ways fit to distract
themselves in serving of tables, and neglect the great business of word and
prayer. 2. That they call the multitude together. 3. They propose the matter
unto them, and signify what manner of persons Deacons should be, and commit
the election of persons amongst them rightly qualified to them. 4. They elect
persons fit for the place. 5. They present these persons. 6. The Apostles pray
and lay hands on them. Whether they used any form of words in this imposition
of Hands we do not read. The thing principally to be considered in this
business, is, that the Apostles themselves alone do not take upon them to choose
and constitute these Deacons. To this may be added, that Paul does not take
upon him to send the charity and benevolence of the Corinthians, collected for
the poor Saints at Jerusalem, but refers it to themselves, to approve by
Letters such as they would use as their Messengers, 1 Cor. 16.3.

Corinth, or rather a command of the Apostles binding them, as having that
power to exercise it, reproving them in that they had not done it already in a
particular case, and giving directions how it should be done. Out of the
Apostles directions, 1 Cor. 5. we might pick a model of Church Government: for
there we have an Ecclesiastical community under a form of Government, and that
is the whole Church of Corinth. 2. We have the members of this community, and
they are the sanctified in Christ Jesus, and such are called to be Saints. 3.
We have the relation of these one to another, they are Brethren, yet every
particular brother subject to the whole Church. 4. We have the power of
Jurisdiction, and the same in the whole body. 5. We have the power of
Excommunication, and by consequence of absolution and other Ecclesiastical
censures, and these in the whole Church, which is reproved, because they do not
exercise it upon so great an occasion, and for so great a cause. They are
commanded to purge out the old leaven, and to cast out and put from amongst
them that wicked person, because they had power to judge. 6. The persons
subject to this Jurisdiction, is every one that is a brother of that Church. 7.
We have the causes, which make these persons and brethren of that Church,
liable to censure, and they are scandals, whereof we have a catalogue, whereby
we may understand by analogy others not expressed. 8. We have the form of the
sentence of Excommunication, which must be solemnly passed in a public
Assembly convened, proceeding and passing Judgment in the Name of Christ. 9.
In this Judgment we have the Apostle passing and giving his vote by Writing
with the rest of that Church. 10. We find that neither the Apostle, nor they
can judge them that are without, but they are reserved to Gods Judgment. 11.
We have the end of Excommunication which here is twofold: 1. In respect of the
party Excommunicated. 2. Of the Church and his fellow members. In respect of
the person Excommunicated, the destruction of the Flesh by some punishment for
a time, that the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord. In respect of the
Body of the Church, the preservation of the same from infection of the old
leaven of malice and wickedness, that so, not only single persons, but the
whole Society may be continued pure. This is the rule of Excommunication; the
rules of absolution we find, 2 Cor. 2. where we may observe, first the person
capable of it; and it is such an one, as having been punished by many, and the
punishment proves sufficient, because by it he is grieved, humbled for his sin,
in danger to be swallowed up with over much sorrow, and by Satan to be tempted
to despair: in a word, when the party is penitent, and he appears really to be
so. 2. The nature of Absolution, which is to forgive, and confirm our love unto
him. 3. This sentence of Remission and Reconciliation must be pronounced in the
Person of Christ. 4. The Persons who must pass this Sentence and see it
executed, are the same who Excommunicated him: who here were Paul and the
Church of Corinth. 5. The end of this Act of Judgment, which is to comfort and
restore the party Penitent; yet in this you must conceive all this is to be
done in an orderly, and not in a confused and tumultuous manner both for the
Time, the Place, the Order of Proceeding, and the Persons who manage the
Business, and denounce the Sentence. For these things must be committed to some
eminent Persons, who are fit for such a work. For though all must agree, yet
some must exercise the Power in the Person of the Church. We might further
Instance in the seven Churches of Asia. For Ephesus, though reproved for her
falling from her first love, yet is commended for her severity against the
Nicolaitans, Rev. 2.6. The Church of Pergamos is blamed for suffering such
amongst them as taught the Doctrine of Baalam, and the Nicolaitans: so is the
Church of Thyatira, because she suffered that woman Jezabel, who called her
self a Prophetess, to teach and seduce Christ's Servants to commit Fornication,
and to eat things Sacrificed to Idols. This was the remisness of Discipline and
neglect of the exercise of the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction; wherewith not only
(though perhaps principally)* the Angels but the whole Churches are charged.

The Church the Subject of the Keys.
is the whole Church:

This appears, From the Institution acording to which we must Tell the Church.
The Church must bind and loose. 3. Her Judgment shall be ratified in Heaven.
Exercise thereof in Legislation. by the whole Church. Constitution of
Officers. by the whole Church. Jurisdiction. by the whole Church.



If any shall say, that the power is in the Apostles or Bishops, or
Superintendants lawfully constituted, its true: if that its in the Presbyters,
its so: if that its in the Brethren or People, it cannot be denied. Yet if any
will argue from these places, that its in the Bishops alone, or in the
Presbyters alone; or in the Brethren alone; or in the Officers or
Representatives of the whole Church primarily, it cannot be true. If any say
its in the whole Church primarily, in the Officers and Representatives
secondarily for Exercise, that is the undoubted Truth, and must needs be
granted. In all the former examples of the exercise of this power, its very
remarkable, and specially to be noted, that where there was a Church, with
which the Apostles (who were far, and very far above all others who did succeed
them) might act, they would not act alone, but jointly with the Elders,
Multitude, Brethren; and the reasons hereof are obvious. 1. Because they would
follow and observe Christ's Institution. 2. Give example for future times. 3.
They know that, as they, when their Faith was weak, did strive amongst
themselves for priority and superiority, so there would many come after them,
who would contend what person, or persons, or party should be greatest. Yet
notwithstanding all this its certain, that where the Government of a Church is
not regular, or a form of Discipline is not settled, God in his infinite mercy
supplies these defects by an Orthodox, Pious, Faithful, Painful Ministry, As in
the Fundamental Office of Christ.
which is the Fundamental Office of Christ, and the means of Conversion and
Salvation of Men's Souls. And though we have certain clear Rules for the
generals and necessaries of Discipline; yet, as in extraordinary cases the
Apostles did not observe them: so neither in the like cases are we strictly
bound to do otherwise. If any desire the Testimony of former times and the
practice of Ancient days, Fathers, Councils, Histories might be alleged, as
they have been by many Learned Men of Latter times; but of any one Person
Blondel has done most. Dr. Andrews is punctual and peremptory in this right
disposal of this power in the proper subject. For, after that he had spoken
first of the Institution, then of the Exercise, he thus concludes, and that
most pithily, Res ipsa, rei ipsius promissio, ratihabitio, usus denique
Ecclesiae datur, ab Ecclesia habetur and confertur in sive unum, sive plures,
qui ejus post vel exercenda vel denunciandae facultatem habeant. For this also
he alleges the Council of Constance, Cameracensis, Cusanus, Gersom, and the
School of Sorbone. Tortura Torti, page 42. The Congregational party must needs
acknowledge this in general. For this is it which Mr. Parker, which Mr. Hooker
of New England go about to prove; but their way is certainly too Democratical,
though Mr. Parker grants, that their Government in respect of the Exercise is
Aristocratical: yet that expression is no ways good. For if in proper sense any
State Ecclesiastical or Civil, be Aristocratical, then the Optimates, or such
as answer unto them must needs be the primary Subject, and the rest, even
Officers, are Subjects, and derive their power from the Aristocratical party.
But perhaps he means, that the whole Church, which he considers as
Democratical, singles out the best and fittest to be Governors, and trusts them
with the exercise of the power, and from them the Government is denominated
Aristocratical. But in this sense all States should be Aristocratical.

to which all particular Polities may differ one from another.
Church Government what.
5. Church Government, as here handled, is nothing else but the application of
these general and essential Rules to a particular Community and Society of
Christians, whereby they may be continued in Unity, Piety, and Peace, and
mutually further one another in the Way to Heaven. 6. These ends may be
attained by a fathful godly diligent Ministry, without any form of outward
Discipline. 7. Yet a form of Discipline established will much further, help and
strengthen the Ministry in this Work, and effectually conduce to the attaining
of these ends, keep Christian Societies closer together, and make them far more
permanent, firm and powerful. 8. Every Christian in any Society Ecclesiastical
is bound by his very Baptism, without any further Federation, to submit unto
these general and essential Rules once applied. 9. That in erecting a
Church Discipline, there must be a special care taken of two things chiefly: 1.
Of the Constitution, that it be agreeable, especially in essentials, to
Christ's Institution, otherwise men may refuse, and that justly to submit unto
it. 2. Of the Administration that it be committed to the wisest and the best,
who are most fit to manage it. 10. Because many of the Ministers are not
qualified for this business, and there are many, no Ministers of eminent piety,
learning and wisdom, I see no reason why only the Clergy or Ministry, and
every one of that Profession, should alone be trusted with the power of
Administration, and these eminent persons excluded. Where do we find the Spirit
promised only unto Ministers and Bishops? Do we not know, and by experience,
that excellent Gifts, and amongst others the Spirit of Wisdom and Government
are given to others, as well as to some of them? Nay, how many unworthy and
unfit persons do we find entered into the Ministry? And with us, besides
others, the causes thereof are, because Presentations and Admissions are
granted for carnal relations, favor, gifts, good turns; and also because that
Parishes are not fitly united and divided, and the maintenance in many places
of great charge is very poor. Otherwise I know no reason why the Congregational
Party should so much exclaim against Parishes. For the work of Ministers is not
only to edify Believers, but also to endeavor the conversion of Heathens and
Publicans, especially in their particular Assignations. For, if these division
parochal were duly made, Parishes might be very fit Assignations for the work
and maintenance of the several Ministers, and the same agreeable to the general
Rule of Decency and Order. 11. In the Constitution and Administration of
particular Churches, neither the practice of Christ nor his Apostles, much less
of the Primitives times can be any binding Rule. For 1. Christ and the Apostles
did many extraordinary things, which we neither may, nor can do. 2. Divine
Precepts, either general or special, are the only Rule which we are bound to
follow. 3. They did many things as the present times, and the condition of
persons and places required, which may not be done by us or any other, except
we have the same power, and in the like case. 12. In the Constitution of a
Church, or in the Reformation of the same, much and dangerously corrupted, many
things may be lawfully done, which under a well-setled Government will prove
very unlawful. For though, where there is no outward form of ordinary Vocation
and Ordination established, that which Volkelius maintains against Swinglius,
for one that is vitae inculpatae and idoneus ad docendum, to take upon him the
charge of a Minister, and do Christ what service he is able, may be lawful. Yet
to do so, where there is an Eutaxie in a settled Church must be unjust, because
amongst other things, such an one shall trangress the Rule of Decency and
Order. 14. Though Christ and his Apostles did deliver unto us all the essential
and fundamental Rules of Church Government, and we find them in the Scripture,
yet many accidentals were left to sanctied reason to be directed to the general
Rules. And in this respect, we must make use of our Christian prudence, both in
modelling and reforming of Christian Churches. But if we stand upon these Rules
of prudence in accidentals and circumstantials, as of Divine Institution and
Obligation, we cannot be excused. 15. Though there may be several orderly ways
and means to attain the chief end of Church Discipline, yet those are the best,
which most observe the essentials of Government, and the general Rules, and are
most effectually conducing to that end. 16. Seeing therefore there may be
several and different means in respect of accidentals, and they severally may
attain and reach the end, it is the duty of us all, 1. To unite our selves in
the bond of Charity. 2. Observe the fundamental and essential Rules of
Government, which are clearly known. 3. With a meek, humble and pure heart seek
out such particulars, as are not yet made clear unto us, and wherein we may
differ for the present, till at length we may satisfy one another.

CHAP. XIV. Of the extent of a Particular Church.
pars subdita, which is the second integral part, as of a State, so of a
Church, should first have been spoken of. In this point I find a threefold
difference: for some extend this Church, which is the primary subject of the
power of the Keys, very far, and make it to be the universal Church of all
Nations: Others confine it to be a single Congregation: A third party will
admit of a Diocese, or a Province, or a Nation, and be contented to stay there.
This Question, if we understand it, presupposes Union and Communion. There is
an Union and also a Communion in Profession and Worship, an Union Mystical, an
Union in Government external, which we call Discipline. An Union in Profession
and Worship there is and ought to be of all Orthodox Christians in the World.
For they all profess the same Faith, and worship the same God in Christ, hear
the same Word, celebrate the same Sacraments. It Is true, they do not, neither
can they so meet in one place, as to partake of the same individual Ordinances;
for there is no necessity of any such thing. Yet, whosoever shall refuse to
join in the same individual Worship of the same God in Christ, according to the
Gospel, when it may be done, as when one converseth with Christians in some
remote parts, he cannot be free from Schism. For all refusal of Communion with
Christ's Saints and Servants, Who guilty of Schism.
without just and sufficient cause is a Schism. So if any party or persons shall
not admit of other Christians only upon this account, because they agree not
with them in some accidentals, which are neither necessary, nor in themselves
considered, conducing to Salvation, they must needs be Schismatics. For any
Separation, Who Schismatics.
which has not sufficient and evident warrant from some Divine Precept, is
unlawful. There is a mystical Union of all true Believers; for, there is one
body, one spirit, one hope of calling, one Lord, one faith, one baptism, one
God and Father of all, who is above all, through all, in all, Ephesians. 4.4, 5, 6.
There is an Union for Government external, of this the question is to be
understood. And this Union is so necessary in every Commonwealth, whether
Civil or Ecclesiastical, that it is no Commonwealth, if it be not one, and so
one, that every particular person, especially in a Church, be subject to one
and the same supreme independent Judicatory. Concerning the universal Extent
there are, as you heard before, two Opinions: They first make one Church, the
Church of Rome, to have power over all other Churches, and invests the Bishop
of that Church with an universal power of Legislation and Jurisdiction, this is
a Popish Error indeed. The second Opinion subjects all particular Churches to
the universal, whereof they are but parts: this is no Popery, nor do the
present Popes and Church of Rome like it. This universal Church cannot act but
by a general Representative, and such a general Representative there yet never
was, since the Church was enlarged from Sea to Sea, and from the River unto the
World's end. Such a general Council and Court either standing, or occasional,
few, I think, do expect. As for the Councils of Nice, Chalcedon, Ephesus,
Constantinople, they were no such Councils, nor general in proper sense; they
were confined within the Roman Empire; and, if well examined, they left out
several parts of that too. The meaning therefore of some, who submit particular
Churches to the universal, is this: That so many several parts and particular
Churches, as can combine in one Synod, may in some extraordinary cases, and
difficulties, especially if they be of general concernment, submit unto such a
Synod, as being of greater authority and ability, if rightly constituted. Yet,
if these particular Churches have their proper independent Judicatories, this
submission is but a voluntary act, and rather like a Reference or Transaction,
than any Appeal. When, and in what cases such References are fit to be made, I
will not here enquire. Besides these Universalists, if we may so call them, who
extend the bounds of this Church too far, there are others who confine it to a
too narrow compass, as many do conceive; they determine it to be a
Congregation: Of this judgment was Mr. Parker, a learned man in the Reign of
King James; in our times the dissenting Brethren, and their party, which follow
their Principles, and put them in practice to this day. They were called the
dissenting Brethren, because in the Assembly of Divines for Advice, they
dissented from the Presbyterian party: Afterward, they were called
Congregationals, because they confined the Church to a Congregation; and
Independents, because in their single Congregations they erected an independent
Judicatory, and challenged an independent power of the Keys, as due by the
Institution of Christ, to every single Congregation gathered by them. But let
their names be what they will, and the reason of their names what they shall
please, lets consider the thing it self. And before the Question can be
discussed to purpose, we must enquire, 1. What their Congregation is. 2. How
they are gathered. 3. Whether this narrow compass be grounded upon Scripture or
no? For the nature of a Congregation, as they seem to take it, Mr. Parker gives
in a clear account. For with him, 1. A Congregation is a Multitude of
Christians, which may ordinarily and conveniently assemble in one place to
communicate in the Ordinances of God. 2. He confesses that the Essence thereof
does not consist in the act of assembling: for then upon every dissolution and
parting of the Company assembled, it would cease to be a Church. Yet Mr. Hooker
prevents this caution as needless, for he makes those, whom Mr. Parker calls
Christians, and himself visible Saints, to be the matter and confederation,
either explicit or implicit to be the form: and this federation ties them
together, not only when they assemble, but at other times too. This is that
which Mr. Parker calls Union by Convention. Yet, 3. He adds, that though they
ought to be no more numerous, than may ordinarily assemble in one place, yet
they may and sometimes do meet severally, and have several Ministers, who
severally officiate in several Assemblies, and take charge of the whole Church
in common. But 4. They have but one Consistory. He instanceth for this last in
the German Churches, and the Cities of Holland, Polit. Eccles. lib. 3. sect. 1.
2. Whether this be the notion of a Church with the present Congregational party
or no, I know not. I have much desired to have seen something, wherein all that
party agrees in, made public, to satisfy such as desire to know their minds.
By this Definition, they exclude Parishes or parochial Churches, which are
united under one Minister; Diocesan Churches united under one Bishop;
Provincial Churches united under one Archbishop and Metropolitan: Yet both of
them Mr. Parker, and Mr. Hooker might easily have known, 1. That neither the
Parochial, nor Diocesan, nor Provincial Church was accounted the primary
subject of the power of the Keys, Parish no Congregation Christian.
as they affirm their Congregation to be. 2. That a Parish is not now, nor with
understanding men ever was taken for a Congregation Christian, as a Parish in a
civil notion. For therein may be Heathens, Jews, Mahumetans, Schismatics,
Heretics, Apostates. But, it is called a Church or Congregation Ecclesiastical
in respect of the Minister, What Church the primary subject of the Keys.
and those Christians of that Precinct, who ordinarily assemble to perform the
acts of Divine Worship. 3. If the name Church may be given to a few Christians
in one Family and House, as it is, Philem. 2. Col. 4.15. I know no reason but
it may be given to a number and society of Christians in one Parish; where, by
reason of Vicinity and Co-habitation, they may ordinarily and conveniently meet
together for divine Service, which some of their Congregations cannot do.

Protestant Christians from amongst Christians, and such as they find fitted to
their own hand without any pains of theirs, but by the sweat, and labor, and
care, and prayers of some other faithful Pastors and Ministers of Christ,
under whose hands they formerly have been, to whose charge they have been
committed, and under whose Ministry God has prospered them. These amongst
others, they either persuade to be of their Congregations, or if they offer
themselves voluntarily, they admit them, and this to the great grief of their
own faithful Pastors. When they accept of these, they neither teach them any
new Article of Faith, which formerly they professed not; nor press upon them
any new Duty according to the Commandments of Christ, which is either necessary
or conducing to Salvation. There is no essential of Christianity which they can
superadd to what they had before: Only, if ceasing to be Episcopal, or
Presbyterian, or Parochial, they are willing to confederate with them, to walk
after their manner, and be of their party, they are willing to receive them. If
this be their manner of gathering Churches, as it is well known it is with some,
I dare say they have no Example, much less any Precept in the Scripture for it.
They admit indeed of some, which are very unworthy, and such as many
Presbyterians would not accept, with hope that upon their solemn covenanting
they will prove better. I do not write this out of partiality, or prejudice;
for some of that party are my special Friends, and I dearly love them; some are
pious, prudent, and learned, and I honor them much: Yet I desire them
seriously to consider what they do, and also so far as they can to forecast,
what is likely to be the issue, if they do not unite more firmly amongst
themselves, and combine with other pious Ministers, and people of God, both in
Worship and Discipline. For they may make perhaps five hundred, or increase to
a thousand independent Congregations; and can any wise man imagine that these
can continue long without some Subordination, and certain Rules of a former
Union? And can this be consistent with the interest of any Christian Civil
State? If they be searching out some better way, according to the Rules of
Christ, with a sincere resolution to fix upon it, when it is once found, as some
of them do intimate they are, their proceedings are more tolerable. God has
fearfully punished diverse of their Congregations, and they have been divided
amongst themselves, and some of their Members fallen off, and have proved far
worse than ever they were, whilst they continued under their own pious
Ministers.

But to come to the principal thing, which is their Congregational Extent, for
to that narrow compass they confine that Church, which must be the primary
subject of this power. The Question is not, whether some Congregations, in some
cases, may be the subject of this power in this degree; nor, whether every well
constituted Congregation may not have and exercise Discipline within
themselves, for some particulars? For this will be granted them. For both the
Presbyterian, and also the Parochial Congregations and Vestries did so under
the Bishops. But, whether their Congregations gathered in their manner be this
primary Subject, and this according to any precept of Christ? Or, if we leave
out that restriction of being gathered in their manner, whether by any
Institution and precept of Christ the independent power of Discipline does
(...) primarily belong unto a Congregation? For if it do, then it belongs in
this manner to them, and them alone as single Congregations, and to no other
Association of Christians. And if any other Association do assume it, they
transgress a precept of Christ, which is of universal and perpetual Obligation.
For to prove the affirmative, Mr. Parker makes use of the words Synagoga and
Ecclesia, as most commonly taken in Scripture. And the dissenting Brethren
instance in the first Apostolical Churches. Mr. Parker's first Argument is
taken from the signification of the words Ecclesia and Synagoga in Scripture:
And, 1. He presupposes that these signify a Congregation. 2. That a
Congregation is an Assembly meeting in one place. 3. Hence he infers, that
nulla Ecclesia prima, quae non Congregatio. His meaning is, that if the people
of any Precinct, as of a Diocese, or Province, exceed the bounds of a
Congregation, so that they cannot conveniently and ordinarily meet in one
place, they are not that first Church to which the power of the Keys does
primarily and originally agree. And he alleges for this purpose Dr. Reynolds,
saying, That in every place of the Old and New Testament, Synagoga Ecclesia
est, and as well Synagoga as Ecclesia, when they are said to speak of a
Congregation political, signify only an Assembly meeting in one place, Polit.
Eccles. lib. 3. sect. 3. For answer hereunto, it will be sufficient to examine
the signification of these words, as used in the Scripture; and by that we
shall see whether the Argument from the signification of the word be good or
no. To this end it may be observed, that the word Synagoga is used by the
Septuagint a hundred seventy times, if not above, in the Old Testament, under
(...) we find it an hundred and twenty times; and in the first eight places, it
signifies the Congregation of all Israel, which consisted of six hundred
thousand fighting men, besides women and children, as Exodus 12.3, 6, 19, 47
verse, and chap. 16.1, 2, 9, 10. Judges 20.12. It Is an Assembly of four hundred
thousand at least. The word (...) is 37 turned (...), a Congregation; and in
the three first places an Assembly or Congregation of Nations; as Genesis
29.3.35.11.48.4. Cyrus his Army gathered out of many Nations, is, Kahal
Synagoga, Jeremy 50.9. So the vast Army of Gog and Magog is, Synagoga, a
Congregation, Ezekiel. 38.4. Again, as Synagoga may signify a Congregation of
many thousands, and a far greater number than Mr. Parker's Congregation, so the
word Ecclesia is used under the word Kahal seventy times, as formerly upon
another occasion was noted: and in the first place it signifies the
Congregation of all Israel, both in Levit. 8.3. and also Deuteronomy. 18.16. It many
times signifies the Assembly of Israel, sometimes a general Representative. In
the New Testament, Heb. 12.23. it is the general Assembly of the firstborn,
which are written in Heaven. Ephesians. 4.22. it is that body, whereof Christ is Head;
and Chap. 2.20. that building, whereof the Apostles and Prophets are the
foundation, and Christ the chief cornerstone. From all this it is clear, that
the words Ecclesia and Synagoga signify, besides Civil and Military,
Ecclesiastical Assemblies, and the same either political or local; and the
place is either particular, or special, or general; in which sense a whole
Region and vast Country may be one place. So that one fallacy, 1. is in the
word place; 2. another in the word Assembly meeting in one place: For, 1. The
Assembly and Meeting may be rare and extraordinary, as the words do diverse
times signify, as is evident, and this cannot agree to Mr. Parker's ordinary
and convenient Meeting. 2. They signify Assemblies meeting in far greater
numbers than in his Congregation. For, the number of persons which made up
diverse of these Assemblies, were thousands, nay hundreds of thousands; as four
hundred thousand, five hundred thousand, nay millions and whole Nations. And if
so, then they who stand for a National Church, will desire no more; the
Provincial and Diocesan party will be content with fewer. Again, the words
sometimes signify a political Society, consisting of such persons, as shall
never meet together in one place, except at Christ's right hand, and in the
place of Glory. So that if the former distinction used in stating the question,
be remembered, and the question be understood thus, That some Congregations,
such as Mr. Parker describes the Church to be, may sometimes in some respect be
the subject of an independent power of the Keys, then these places are not much
against him. But if he understand it so, that if any Church exceed the bounds
of his Congregation, of so many as may ordinarily and conveniently meet
together, it is not of Christ's Institution, nor can be the primary Subject of
this power, then his Argument a nomine ad rem, from the word to the thing, is
no Argument. But, suppose the words should always signify one Congregation,
which may ordinarily meet in one place, which yet they do not, how will it
follow from any of those places, that such a Congregation, and none other is
this primary subject.

John the Divine, Rev. 4. For he takes it for granted, that the Church there
mentioned, consisting of twenty four Elders, and the four Beasts, was a
congregational Church; or rather that the Church there was a Congregation in
his sense. Answ. But, 1. Let it be granted that there is a description of a
Church, and the same Christian visible, yet it will no ways agree to his
Congregation. For, 1. There is an allusion made to the Congregation of Israel,
pitching in four Squadrons under four several Ensigns, as the Ensign of Judah
was a Lion, and three Tribes under every Ensign, with the Priest and Levites,
encamping next the Ark between it and the Squadrons. This was a Congregation,
as you heard before of 600 -- 000 Men, besides Women and Children. 2. This
Congregation of the four Beasts, and twenty four Elders, sing a Song of praise
unto the Lamb Christ, and acknowledge that he was slain, and had redeemed them
to God by his blood, out of every kindred, and tongue, and people, and nation,
Rev. 5.8, 9. This is a Congregation gathered out of every Nation. This can be
none of Mr. Parker's Congregation.

Matthew 17.18. and from 1 Cor. 5. In the first place. 1. Christ says, Tell
the Church. 2. This Church is the primary subject of the power of the Keys. But
3. He does not say, this Church is Congregational in his sense, neither can any
wit of man prove it out of that place. 4. The word Church in that place is
indefinite, and signifies first a Christian community without any determination
of the number of persons, greater or less. 5. Though this Community and whole
Body be principally meant, yet its here signified as exercising her judicial
power by her Representatives, who may easily meet in one place, when the whole
Body cannot, and that place may be capacious enough to receive them, yet far
too narrow to contain the whole Church and all the Members, and every one of
them represented in that place. As for 1 Cor. 5.4. which is the second place
quoted by him, he argues from these words, when ye are gathered together, that
a Church is a Congregation, consisting of so many as ordinarily meet in one
place. Answ. 1. It Is granted, that according to the Apostles directions, the
incestuous person must be Excommunicated in a public Assembly of persons
meeting in one place. But 2. The Church may assemble personally or virtually in
their own persons, or by and in their Representatives. That this Church did
meet virtually in her Representatives, at least no Man can doubt; but that all,
and every one of that Church were personally present in that Assembly, no man
can prove; for, it was a meeting, as he confesses, for the Exercise of power
of Jurisdiction. 3. Suppose all the Church of Corinth could and did meet in
that Assembly, how will it follow, that every other Church, as that of
Jerusalem, could do so to: or that if any Church was so numerous, that they
could not ordinarily meet but in several places: will it follow, that therefore
it could not be the primary subject of this power. But something more to this
hereafter.

in genere, specie, numero. For he conceives there can be no Communion but
amongst those, who meet in one place to exercise those heavenly duties. Answ.
1. It Is true, that if the number of persons in one Church exceed, they cannot
all be edified and enjoy a sufficient Communion in Worship by one man,
Officiating at one time in one place, where they cannot all assemble. But
what is this to purpose? It Is nothing to Government. Communion in Worship is one
thing, in Government another. The Communion of one particular Church in this
latter respect is political, and consists in this, that they have the same
Supreme and Independent Judicatory according to certain Laws, as they are
subject to the same independent Judicatory in the same Precinct. Communion in
Word, Prayer and Sacraments is rather Moral then Political, and may be had, and
is enjoyed many times, in many places, where there is no external Discipline
settled or exercised. The end of Word and Prayer is first to make Christians,
and then to edify them, and these are no sooner made and multiplied, but they
must hear, pray, participate the Sacraments, before any Form of Discipline be
instituted; and if every one would constantly do his duty in these things both
privately and publicly, there would be no need of Discipline. 2. Whereas he
conceives, that there can be no such Communion and Edification, but one and
the same individual Assembly, he is much mistaken, and besides his words are
very ambiguous. For the better understanding hereof, we must know that the end
of Communion in Word, Prayer, Sacraments, is Conversion and Edification, as
before. 2. These ends may be attained, as well in several Congregations under
one Supreme Judicatory for Discipline, as in one Congregation Independent, or
several Congregations having their several Supreme Judicatories: for both of
them depend upon the Ministry as Instrumental, and upon the Spirit as the
principal Agent, which caeteris paribus may be as effectual in several
Congregations not Independent, and every one of them severally, as in one,
though Independent, and at the same time. And though Discipline may further
Edification in a Congregation, yet it may be furthered as much, when its
Exercised by one Independent Power over several Congregations, as when it is
Exercised by one Supreme Power of one Congregation over it self. Experience
does clearly evince this, and might satisfy us. But I have wondered at the
design of some men, who go about to bind Men to the individual participation in
the same Ordinances, if they will be of the same Church, as though that could
be no Church, where all the Members could not, or did not thus individually
participate. For few of their own Congregations are so ordered, as that all the
Members Communicate at one time, but some at one time before the rest, some at
another after the rest. That which is required of all Christians is no such
thing, but that they all Worship God both in private and public, according to
the same general rules of the Gospel. As for mutual watching one over another,
that is the duty of all Christians, as Christians, and as fellow Subjects and
Brethren under the same God and Lord Jesus Christ, though there never were any
Discipline settled. And this is done far better by them, who cohabit, and
constantly, or for the most part converse one with another, then by them who
live ten, twenty, thirty miles distant one from another, as some of the
Congregationals do: nay Members of one and the same Congregation bound to this
watching one over another, live one at London, another at York; one in Ireland,
another in Scotland, and their Pastor and most of their Brethren in England.

Jerusalem, Antioch, Ephesus, Corinth, etc. which is the same which the
dissenting Brethren insisted upon in the Assembly, I might refer him and them
to what the Assembly has Learnedly answered. The Argument is to this purpose,
The first Apostolical Churches were only Congregational, yet the primary
subject of the power of the Keys. Therefore all other Churches should be
Congregational, and as such they are the primary subject of the power of the
Keys. Whether this be that which is intended, let every one judge, who is
acquainted with the Controversy. The Argument is that of induction taken from
example; That which they assume, as clear out of Scripture to them is, that all
and every one of the first Apostolical Churches were Congregational and only
Congregational, and none of them Parochial, or Classical, or Synodical, or
Diocesan, or National, or had any Presbytery above a Presbyter. That which they
would hence infer is, that only a Congregational is the first Church agreeable
to the first institution, and the first subject of the power of the Keys. The
Argument in form may be this. All rightly constituted Churches ought to be like
the first Apostolical Churches; But all the first Apostolical Churches were
Congregational. Therefore all rightly constituted Churches are Congregational.
The Major is very doubtful and admits of many restrictions. The Minor is
denied. The conclusion as inferred from these premises is not to purpose. 1.
The Major presupposes that all good examples are to be followed, and that they
are equivalent to a binding precept. But this is certain, whatsoever they or
others may say, that examples, as examples, though good, do not bind to
imitation: for they only bind by virtue of some Precept or Divine Institution.
The Apostles in the first plantation of Churches did many good things, which we
cannot imitate, and if we could, yet, if their practice in those things was not
grounded upon a precept of universal and perpetual obligation, it does not bind
us. They did many things by virtue of some particular precept binding them as
Apostles, and no ways else; and some things in extraordinary Cases, upon
extraordinary Occasions. In this respect the first Churches planted by them,
might differ in many things from all other Churches in future times. Therefore,
if the Major should be to purpose, it must be understood so, that all Churches
rightly constituted, are bound and that by some Divine Precept of Universal
Obligation, and perpetual force to be like unto the Apostolical first Churches
in all things, and especially in this, that they were Congregational. How they
will prove this I know not: and if they prove it not clearly they do nothing to
purpose. 2. The Minor is denied both by the Episcopal and Presbyterian, and in
particular by the Divines of the Assembly, who more particularly and distinctly
answer all the proofs brought by them to affirm it. Their proof is by way of
Induction: as the Church of Jerusalem, Samaria, Damascus, Antioch, and so of
the rest were Congregational. Where 1. The term Congregational must be
understood. 2. We must enquire, whether the induction be sufficient or no. 1. A
Church may be said to be Congregational in respect of Worship or Discipline. In
respect of Worship two ways: 1. Of Prayer and Word. 2. Of the Administration of
the Sacraments, either of Baptism or the Lords Supper, as the Assembly does
well distinguish. Now, how will they prove, that the whole Church of Jerusalem
with all the Members thereof, did constantly meet in one place to administer
and receive the Lords Supper? where is the Text that expressly or by consequence
says any such thing. Again, a Congregational Church may be in respect of
Discipline, and that several ways. For 1. A Congregation may signify a
Community of Christians as the primary subject of the power of the Keys. 2.
This Community exercising in this power, and that either by a Representative of
the whole or some part. If they understand them to be Congregational in respect
of the exercise of Discipline, so that their Representatives of part, or the
whole, might all of them congregate and meet at one time in one place, as
ordinary or extraordinary occasion should require; in this sense it will be
granted, that even the Church of Jerusalem, in its greatest extent, was
Congregational; but this is not their sense. For, they mean by Congregational,
such a Community and Vicinity of Christians, as that all and every one of the
Members may ordinarily and conveniently meet at one and the same time, in one
and the same place, not only for Discipline, but Worship: and so, that if any
multitude of Christians exceed this proportion, they must divide and erect a
new Independent Judicatory, and they were bound so to do, if they did not, they
ceased to be such Churches as Christ did institute, and could not be the
primary subject of the power of Discipline. How they should prove the Minor in
this sense, I do not understand. The supposed end of the Congregational notion.
They, who first took up this Congregational Notion, perhaps had a design to
overthrow Diocesan Bishops: and this was thought an effectual means for that
end: and if this conceit had not first possessed their minds, they would never
have imagined any such thing to be so much as implied in these examples. But
suppose some such thing to be implied at least, for expressed it is not in
these places, the Induction may be said to be imperfect. For there were many
Churches planted by the Apostles, and far more than are mentioned in the Acts
of the Apostles. For Paul upon his Conversion went into Arabia, and then
returned again to Damascus, Gal. 1.17. Other of the Apostles no doubt went into
Egypt, Aethiopia, India, Persia, Armenia, Spain, France, Germany: Yet none of
these Churches are mentioned in the Scripture-History. Therefore it might be
said, there is not a sufficient enumeration of particulars to make up a
general. But suppose these Churches to have been Congregational at first; it is
certain, they enlarged and multiplied to far great numbers in after times: and
though this be certain, yet it is no ways certain that upon this multiplication,
they did divide into independent Congregations, and erected independent
Judicatories in every particular Congregation, and were bound so to do, and
that by a Divine Precept. And I wonder much at Mr. Parker that he should argue
so much against a Diocesan Church, and yet grant, that all Israel, consisting,
as he himself confesses, of many Myriades, should be but one Congregation,
which was of a far greater extent than a Diocese. Whether this Congregation was
as now it is by many managed amongst us, be not formally Schism, as it is
charged by some Learned Men, I will not here debate. But this I must needs say,
that such Congregationals, as by this notion, go about to unchurch all other
Churches, which are not cast in the same mold, must needs be guilty of some
such crime. It was first set up to oppose Diocesan Churches, and now to oppose
Presbyterian Classes. But there is another thing, which I wish all Wise and
Judicious Men to consider, whether this does not tend unto, or at least give
occasion of Schism, and also to inform themselves, what effects it has had
hitherto, yet so as to distinguish between these effects of it, which are per
se, and flow from the nature of it, and such as are per accidens. Yet in the
mean time, Charity, Meekness, Humility, Pity of weak Brethren becomes us all,
who profess our selves Christians; and we ought to stand well affected toward
all, who seem to us to look toward Heaven. Let us further consider how far
rational and pious men agree, and according to those things, let us keep
communion and heartily serve our God, humbly imploring his Divine Majesty in
the name of Christ to open our eyes, and sanctify our hearts, that at length
we may be united in the same Judgment and Affection, and with one Mind, and
with one Mouth glorify God even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.

The subject of the whole Treatise.
that the subject of this whole Treatise, is the Government of men by men,
under God and Jesus Christ our Blessed Savior. Of Gods more immediate
Government I have spoken in my Divine Politics: where I show it is Monarchical,
Supreme, Universal, and cannot be bounded to any part of the whole Universe.
For he being immense, and not only virtually, but actually present in all
places, at all times, is only fit to govern all Nations, and the whole World as
the Universal Sovereign; but this is far above the power not only of Men but of
Angels. Therefore, whatsoever he does in Heaven, we know, that when through his
blessing mankind was multipled, and especially after the Flood, and had
replenished the Earth, they were divided into several Societies, and were
subject to several independent Tribunals. We never find them under one: neither
do we in his word or works read of a Catholic King over all Nations, nor of an
Universal Bishop over all Churches. Howsoever some have pretended such a Title,
yet they could never show their Patent subscribed by the Hand of Heaven. But,
suppose they could have acquired the possession of the whole earth, which never
any did, yet no one Man, no one Council, no one Consistory had been able
sufficiently to manage so vast a power, and in any tolerable manner to govern
all mankind at one time living upon Earth. It seemed good indeed, to our wise
God, both in former and latter times to enlarge the power of some States, and
especially that of the Romans. Yet that very Empire of so large extent, took in
but a little part of the whole Earth: and this appears plainly now since by
Navigation, some of the remote parts of the Globe, and both the Hemispheres
thereof have been discovered. Yet in the greatest extent it was thought by some
of their wisest Princes the best Policy Cogere terminos Imperii, to limit and
bound it, because they thought the body of too big a bulk, to be well ordered
either by Prince or Senate, or People, or by all together. But to return to the
matter in hand: the Question is, Whether a national Community of Christians may
not lawfully be subjected to one supreme Judicatory Ecclesiastical? To
understand the Question the better, it is to be observed. 1. That a Community of
Christians may be said to be national several ways, or in several respects: as,
1. When all the Christians of one and the same Nation, do associate and unite
in one body. 2. When these Christians are the major part of the people. 3. When
the whole Nation, or the generality thereof have received, and do profess the
same Christian Faith. I will here suppose the major part or generality to be
Christians, and the association and incorporation to be made by a tacit or
explicit consent, which sometimes may be confirmed by the Laws of the Supreme
Power. Yet this generality may be so understood, as that there may in the same
Nation, be found Turks or Mahumetans, Pagans, Atheists, Jews, which cannot be
of this body; and that also there may be some Schisms and Separatitions amongst
such as profess themselves Christians, and sometimes they may be none. This in
my sense is a national Community of Christians, and a Church-confident before
any form of external Discipline be introduced. 2. When I speak of subjection, I
do not say, that they are always in all Nations bound by any Divine Precept to
be so, but that they may, and that lawfully according unto the Scriptures. 3. I
understand that this subjection, so as that every several member be subject not
to one man, or one party, but to the whole, and that either properly taken or
virtually for a Representative of the whole, which shall have power in the name
of the whole body to make Canons, and in Judgment to receive last Appeals. 4.
I understand the Question of Nations indefinitely taken, for if any be of so
vast extent, as that one independent Court may be either insufficient or
inconvenient, I rather exclude then include such. For, suppose all Tartary
should be counted one Nation, or all Chinae, I conceive, they are too large. 5.
I mention only a national Community; for if that be granted, the Classical and
Provincial must needs come in. The Congregational party, I know, holds the
Negative. And here upon the by, I will take the liberty for to answer Mr.
Parker's seventh argument, for his Congregational way. It Is taken from
Politics, and to this purpose; That as little States are more easily and
better governed then great ones, so is a Congregational Church, which is but of
a narrow compass, than a Classical, Diocesan, or Provincial, or National, which
is far greater. Answ. Though less Communities may be better governed, than one
too great, yet a great one of moderate extent may be better governed and
defended than one that is too little. For Gods one peculiar People and Nation,
which was first under Judges, then under Kings, was subject to one Supreme
Tribunal for a long time, above five hundred Years; and afterward it was
divided into two. Yet it was better governed under one, than under two; when
subject to one individual Tribunal, than when to two; but of this more
hereafter.

minimum or maximum quod sic. Therefore some Latitude must needs be granted. 2.
That the History of the New Testament does not reach those times, wherein it
pleased God to fulfill those Prophesies, which promised, Isa. 49.23.
That Kings should become Nursing-fathers, and Queens Nursing-mothers of the
Church, and she should suck the breasts of Kings, who should come unto her
light. 2. When one should become a thousand, and a small one a strong Nation; I
(says the Lord) will hasten it in its time: Chap. 60.16, 22.
Where, one says, he alludes to the Creation, which he finished in six days,
hastening, and could not rest and keep his Sabbath till all was ended, and man
was made. 3. Chap. 55.34.
When Nations, who knew not Christ, should come unto him. These, I say, were
not fulfilled in the Apostles times. 4. Many of the Primitive Christians, after
their conversion continued for a certain time without any set-form of external
Government, or perfect Rules of New-Testament-worship, except to Word and
Prayer, were settled. Hence those words of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 11.34.
The rest will I set in order when I come. 4. Even within the compass of that
time which the Scripture-History reaches, there was a great inequality in the
Apostolical Churches for the number of the persons, which was far greater in
one Church than in another, and in the same Church fewer at the plantation, and
far more numerous afterward. For the Kingdom of God was like leaven, which did
spread and diffuse it self, and to a grain of Mustard Seed, which did grow
mightily. 5. After many of these became formal Polities, they increased so much
that without divisions and subdivisions they could not be well ordered; so as
that every part should be subjected to the whole. This Ecclesiastical History
testifies. 6. Seeing, 1. That the inequality of the first Churches, planted by
the Apostles, was so great in the former respects. 2. That some of them were
incomplete, not fully formed, not grown up to their full stature. 3. That most
of them did mightily increase and enlarge afterward. 4. That the Prophesies of
the glorious Enlargement of the Church began but to be fulfilled in the times
of the Apostles, therefore those first Churches, as in the Apostles times,
could be no obligatory examples to us for matter of extent, except with
admission of some great latitude. From all this it follows, that the Rules,
whereby this Controversy must be decided, must be the generals of decency and
order, so far as they may prove most efficaciously conducent unto the
preservation and edification of the Body. Yet we must have a special care to
observe the Institution and the Examples agreeable thereunto. And that Church,
which is ordered according to these Rules, and most effectually tends unto
these ends, is the best and most approved of Christ. He does not respect and
value Churches as they are Congregational, Presbyterian, or Episcopal, nor as
of more narrow and larger compass; nor as of less or greater number, but as so
ordered, as to discover false Brethren, reject Heretics, purge out the old
Leaven, cast out scandalous persons, free from the Doctrine of Nicolaitans and
Jezabel, and keep themselves in Unity and Purity. And surely, as our Christian
Profession is disgraced, so is God highly displeased; because we so miserably
distract God's people, and urge upon them such accidentals with so great
importunity, though they be neither essential, nor necessary to good Government.

Israel, which no doubt was National from the times of Moses till the Reign of
Jeroboam; all which time it continued entire in one body, adequate to the
State, and was never divided into independent Congregations. This example is
not to be slighted, as it is by some: For this Church was modeled, enlarged,
and confined by God himself: neither was it in this particular any Type or
Shadow of something to come, which upon the coming of Christ, and the
Revelation of the Gospel was to vanish. And this at least will prove, that a
National Church under one supreme Judicatory is not unlawful in it self. 2. I
might add, that it is no where prohibited in the New Testament. 3. That it is
agreeable to the Rules of Decency and Order. 4. That it is not contrary to the
Institution. 5. If the State be Christian, it may have much help, and many
advantages from the State, especially when the divisions of Church and State
are the same. But, 6. If a Congregational Church may be lawful, then a National
may be so too. And the reason of the consequence is, because a National may be
as easily and as well, nay, more easily and better governed than a single
Congregation, much more than thousands of independent Congregations in one and
the same State. That the multitude of Christians in one Nation associating and
uniting in one body, and subjecting it self to one supreme Judicatory, may be
better ordered than many independent Congregations in the same Nation, is
evident, For 1. they may be far more firmly united, and far more free from
Schisms and Separations. 2. Order, which is the life of Government, may far
more easily be established and observed. 3. It will be far stronger to preserve
it self from all opposition both within and without. 4. It will be furnished
with far more excellent persons, endued with excellent qualities for to make
Officers and Representatives. 5. It will be of far more Authority. 6. It will
be far more able to reform and reduce into order the greater Multitudes, and
whole Congregations, and the greatest persons. 7. It will be far more able to
receive Appeals, to make Canons, give Advice, hear and determine the most
difficult Causes, and to execute their highest Judgments. One reason of all
this is, because so many Gifts of the Spirit may be united in one. To clear
this more fully, we may consider a difference, 1. Between a single Congregation
independent, and a national Community under one and the same power of the Keys.
2. Between a multitude of these independent Congregations, supposing all the
Christians of a Nation made up their several Polities, and all the
Congregations of a Nation united severally for Worship, and some acts of
Discipline, yet all subject to one supreme Judicatory Ecclesiastical. For the
first difference, it is twofold: 1. In the number of persons. 2. In the
distance of place, in respect of the parts and members of these Bodies; both
which, if they be too great, are thought to be impediments of Government. As
for the number of persons: 1. They must not be too many, as they ought not to
be too few. 2. They are far more for number in a National than in a
Congregational Church. 3. As for this great multitude of a Nation, if not too
vast, reason, and the same confirmed by experience, will tell us, that by
distinction, and a wise division, with a co-ordination of parts equal, and a
subordination of the less to the greater, and all the several parts unto the
whole, a multitude, though of millions, may be united into one organical Body,
and governed as one Man. And by the way, we may take notice of a mistake in Mr.
Hooker of New England, who thinks that a Church or Community of Christians
cannot be an organical Body till Officers be made; whereas the making of
Officers is an act of Administration, and presupposes the Constitution,
whereby it is properly and formally organical, before any act of Administration.
But to return, that whereby so many are made one is order, which unites Heaven
and Earth, and all things therein in one Body: much more a petty multitude of
Christians of one Nation. This is apparent in all Bodies Politic; as
Universities, Corporations, Counties, Armies, and Commonwealths. This is God's
way of Government, which the wisest Governors did always imitate. Thus Moses
chose able men out of all Israel, and made them Rulers over the People, Rulers
of thousands, Rulers of hundreds, Rulers of fifties, and Rulers of tens. And
they judged the people at all seasons: the hard causes they brought to Moses,
but every small matter they judged themselves, Exodus 18.25, 26. In this Text
considered with the antecedent, many things as proper to Government are
observable: 1. There must be Laws. 2. Officers. 3. Courts according to the tria
Jura Majestatis of Legislation, making Officers and Jurisdiction. These
presuppose a Community, and a Constitution: 1. There must be a power of making
Laws, that belongs to the Sovereign. 2. Laws by this power must be made for
Administration, which without them must needs be arbitrary and irregular. 3.
Those Laws once enacted must be promulgated, that they may be known. 4. Once
known, they must regulate both the peoples obedience, and the acts of Officers,
and judgment of the Judges. After Laws once established, they must be executed;
and that cannot be orderly and effectually done without a division of the
people. For 1. they must be numbered, divided into tens, fifties, hundreds,
thousands, tribes. 2. They must be coordinate and equally poised, tens with
tens, fifties with fifties, hundreds with hundreds, thousands with thousands.
3. They must be subordinate, ten to fifty, fifty to an hundred, and hundreds to
thousands, and all unto the whole. When this is done, Officers, by whom these
Laws must be executed, must be made. These must first be well qualified. 2. The
people must choose them, Deuteronomy. 1.13. 3. Moses must appoint them their places,
assign them their circuits, give them their charge. 4. They must have their
Courts and Sessions, judge, execute the Laws, and be subordinate, the lesser
Courts to the superior, and all to the Supreme: For their Causes, especially
if difficult, must ascend till they came to Moses, and he brought them to God,
who was their Sovereign; this was extraordinary. But afterward they had their
Sanhedrim and Court of Appeals. This subordination seems to be implied in those
words of our Savior, Matthew. 5.22. But I say unto you, that whosoever is angry
with his brother without a cause, shall be in danger of the judgment; and
whosoever shall say unto his brother Racha, shall be in danger of the council,
but whosoever shall say, Thou Fool, shall be in danger of hell fire. One thing
in all this is considerable, That Moses did not make every Division, nor every
Court severally independent, but subordinated all unto one supreme Consistory.
A Multitude, though National, therefore is no impediment to good Government,
especially when they are numbered, divided, co-ordinated, and subordinated, and
so by a certain and fixed order made one.

Chaldean, or the Persian Empires, of both which we might learn much out of the
Holy Scriptures, especially in the Books of Ezra, both first and second (called
Nehemiah) and Ester and Daniel most of all; we should find, 1. That the extent
of them was far more than National, and the distance of the parts far greater.
2. That these were divided, subordinated, not only in the parts less to the
greater, but also in their Officers both for War and Peace, the Revenue, and
the Administration of Justice, and so by order united under one Head. The
Empire of Rome, (the parts whereof were severed at a very great distance, as
from the River Euphrates in the East, to the Ocean upon the West of France, and
from Egypt Southward, to the North of the Lesser Asia) was according to their
principles of Policy, as well governed as any European petty State at this time
is. The Turkish Seigniory, though of great extent, is as well ordered as diverse
several Kingdoms Christian, confined to a far more narrow compass. Their order
is good, their strength great, their Counsel, which does manage it, politic,
their Laws for administration of Justice certain, their divisions, from matters
of Religion, few or none; and their internal strength must needs be firm, and
the continuance of their Dominion has been long. Some attribute the excellency
of their Government to their severity in punishments, and their bounty in
rewards: yet though these add something, yet these are but the least part. The
Dominions of Spain are many, and scattered at a very great distance round about
the Globe on both sides the Line, within and without the Tropicks, yet all
these are subjected to one supreme Judicatory, and are tolerably governed, and
by a great deal of policy have been kept together till of late. France indeed
is stronger, because divided into thirty Provinces, it is united in one
Vicinity, and subject to one Monarch: Yet in these vast Dominions, and great
Empires, the union of their many parts so distant did depend, not only upon
ordinary means, but some extraordinary acts of Divine Providence. From all this
it is evident, that by division, coordination, subordination, the supreme power
of one Nation, nay of many Nations, may be diffused through the whole Body, so
as to animate it, and reach every part, even the remotest.

Joshua called and assembled all Israel, when yet none but their Elders, their
Heads, their Officers, their Judges were called and convented, Josh. 23.2. Upon
which place Masius thus comments: Cum dictum esset omnem Israelem fuisse
convocatum, ipsa deinde universitas ad eos deducitur, qui populum omnem
repraesentabant. So that all Israel met in their Representative. Thus David,
thus Solomon did use to convocate all Israel. As our State has its Wittena
Gemot, the Parliament, which Cambden calls Pananglium, so a National Church may
have a general Assembly to represent the whole. And this may be so composed, as
to be an abridgement, and contraction of the quintessence of the wisdom, piety
and learning of a National Church: This is a most excellent way for a Community
to act by. This may be both the terminus a quo and ad quem, of all these
public acts, which are of weight and general concernment. By this the
Nomothetical Power is exercised; to this, by Appeal, the highest causes are
brought, and finally determined; yet here it is to be observed, that a
Representative of the whole, is not the whole properly, but synecdochically,
and an Instrument whereby the whole does so act; yet if any thing be done amiss
in a former particular Assembly, the whole may correct it by a latter. 2. That
if the Constitution of a general Representative be right, and the Members
thereof duly qualified, and act according to their qualification, there will be
so much reason and wisdom in their Determinations, as that they will bind more
by virtue of the matter, than the authority and votes of their persons. We
might add, that in these Independent Congregations, there is neither any
convenience, or necessity, that all the Members should meet either for
Juridical or Legislative Acts, though it be expedient that all should know what
is done. They call women and children together for Worship, but not for matters
of Judgment and Discipline: It Is sufficient if such as are rational and
judicious have suffrage in the same matters. Marsilius in his Defensor Pacis
determines the Power of Legislation to be in Populo, aut civium universitate.
Yet he grants that the Laws may be made Per valentiorem partem, or their
Trustees; and that what is so done by them, is done by all. But in this
particular he excludes women, children, servants, strangers, though
inhabitants, if not incorporated; likewise Mr. Parker, who gives the whole and
independent Power of the Keys into a Congregation under a Democratical form,
yet will have the exercise of this power in the Officers in an Aristocratical
mode. Seeing therefore that neither multitude of persons, nor distance of
place, nor impossibility of a vertual and sufficient Convention of all the
Members, being the differences between a National and Congregational Church,
and conceived to be the impediments of good Government, are no impediments; I
know no reason but that all the Christians of a Nation may be as well governed
by a subjection to one supreme Judicatory, as a Congregation independent.

Independent Polities may have; And the same gifted Men and Officers may act
more effectually for the good of the whole; when they are thus united, then
when scattered and divided like the vital Spirits in so many several Bodies,
For vis unita fortior, and the being more firmly, orderly, and regularly
united, may more easily animate and effectually move and direct one body,
though great, then so many bodies independent one upon another and severed,
though little. 2. Again, in this National Body every Congregation, Classis,
Province may act, order, hear and determine matters belonging to their
Cognizance, and within their Precincts, without troubling any general
Representative, except in the highest, most difficult businesses of general
concernment, which with all extraordinary matters are reserved for that highest
Assembly: And all this is done according to the Rules of Government allowed by
God, and practiced by the best Polities in the World. 3. The Congregationals
grant, that any of their single Congregations independent, in a difficult
point, or business may take the advice of twenty, thirty, forty other
Congregations or more; yet if the Major part of them, or all should agree and
give their judgment, that one Congregation shall not be bound by their advice,
but shall have power to judge against it, or subscribe unto it; seeing in this
case no Scripture binds this or other Congregations to be independent, or
perhaps allow any such thing, except in some extraordinary cases, it were worth
the serious consideration of wise men, whether it be more agreeable to the
Rules of good Government, and the general Precepts of Church Discipline, that
one of these Congregations alone should have the power to determine, and that
finally, this difficult cause, and all the rest only to advise, then that
jointly with this one, all the rest and most of them as good, and some perhaps
better, should have power, not only to advise, but determine: And whether this
determination of all jointly were not likely to prove better, and more
effectual, and more conducing to the end of Discipline, than that Determination
of one. But against this two things may be said, 1. That all those other
Congregations may err, but this is but to suppose, and to suppose a thing both
unlikely and extraordinary, that forty well constituted Churches may err, and
that one be free from error. 2. By this it seems to follow, that in some
difficult cases one National Church may not only take the advice of many
others, but subject themselves unto them. But 1. we are bound only to submit
unto the Word of God made clear unto us, though it be very likely that many
seeking God, and making right use of the means, are more likely to find out
truth, and understand the Word of God better than one. 2. I staid at a National
Church, and did not expatiate further, because experience has taught us how
prejudicial it has been even to this State, to suffer Appeals to be made,
either unto Foreign Churches or States. Neither is it fit, in respect of the
Civil Sovereign Christian, that the Church within this State should any ways
depend upon any other Church whatsoever.

Polities Ecclesiastical, within the bowels of one entire Civil Commonwealth
Christian. I do not mean, that the Constitution of the Church and State should
be the same, so that if the State be Monarchical, the Church should be such
too; or if Aristocratical, it should be Aristocratical. For, though God has
determined the model of the Church, yet he has not so particularly defined the
Constitution of the State. Neither do I affirm, that the Church by any Divine
Precept is bound to be co-adequate to the State; only this I say, it will be
convenient, advantageous to the Church, and agreeable to the general Rules of
Decency and Order. 1. That it be co-adequate to the State. 2. That there be but
one independent Church in in one national State, except there be some special
impediment. But not to insist so much upon these, a third and greater reason to
prove this, is taken from the insufficiency of a Congregation to govern and
order it self in diverse cases, not so incident to a national Church well
ordered. Amongst others, there be four acknowledged and reckoned up by Mr.
Parker himself. The first is, when one and the same Cause may concern, not only
one single Congregation, but diverse several other neighboring Churches. The
second is, the Inability of the Eldership of an independent Congregation. The
third is, Male administration. The fourth is, Appeal upon Maladministration
presumed. Concerning these four Cases, I observe, 1. That no single
Congregation does continue long, but some of these Cases, if not all, will fall
out. 2. That in these cases there can hardly be any Redress. 3. That a national
Church is ordinarily furnished with sufficient Remedies against these Evils.
Upon all this it follows, that in some cases a national Church is of a better
constitution, than a Congregational. Whereas Mr. Parker, in the case of
Maladministration grants Appeals, in that very concession he divests his
Congregation of her independent Power, and makes it to be no Polity at all.
For, if (as he says) a congregational Church be, and that by divine
Institution, the primary Subject of the Power of the Keys, how can it be
subject to another Church or Churches, as if it Appeal, it must needs be: Par
in parem non habet potestatem is a certain Rule. For, obligatio ex delicto will
not here take place. To be independent and dependent, cannot agree to the same
Church at the same time. And is it likely that Christ denies the power of the
Keys to that Church, which in all the forementioned cases was sufficiently
furnished with effectual means of redress, and give it to that which is in it
self insufficient? There be several kinds and degrees of Communion between
particular Churches independent, and that for mutual help and edification: yet
all those kinds and degrees of Communion are but extrinsecal, and the Communion
is but like that of Leagues and Friendship between State and State, which can
no ways reach Appeals. And as it is in several distinct States, so it is in
several distinct Churches. That of In his Book of the Church. c. 8. p. 63.
Dr. Jackson is very remarkable, and worthy consideration. That the best Union
that can be expected between visible Churches, seated in several Kingdoms or
Commonweals independent one upon another, is the Unity of League or Friendship;
and this Union may be as strict as it shall please such Common-weals and
Churches to make it, and to subject such a Church in such a case unto another,
is to build a Babel, or seat for Antichrist. This implies that a Church may be
National, and he gives a good reason why it should be no more. And according to
this Rule, Mr. Parker, by granting in this case Appeals, does no better than
build a Babel, and so I fear many others do by making every Congregation
independent.

of the Netherlands, and the Cantons of Switzerland. These cannot subsist
without a strift Confederation, or a foreign Protection: and both are
dangerous, and sometimes, if not often, prove prejudicial. Though the
States General of the Low Countries have their Commission from the several
Republics, and with this Clause, Salva cujusque populi Majestate; yet they are
ready many times to usurp and exercise more power than is due unto them. But
foreign Protection sometimes proves a supreme Power: But the danger of our
independent Churches, as with us, is far greater: because they are so petty,
and far less bodies, and no ways by any certain Rules firmly united. From all
this Discourse a rational Reader will conceive, that a national Church in my
sense is far more agreeable to the Rules of Government, which we find in
Scripture, than so many independent Polities Ecclesiastical in one Nation. Some
still do conceive, and they have reason for it, that as this Nation of an
independent Congregation was at first invented to oppose the Diocesan Bishop;
so the dissenting Brethren pitched upon it in opposition to the Scottish Kirk,
and the English Scotified Presbyterian. And as in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth,
some great ones, and Counselors of State protected the new Conformist, and
made use of him to poise the Bishop; so in our days there were Statists, who
knew how to make the Congregational party subservient to their civil interest,
not only to poise, but to beat down the Presbyterian, and which they far more
aimed at, their party both in England, in the Parliament and Army, and also in
Scotland, which in the end was done to some purpose. For at last the
Independent became predominant, had great Friends was much favored, obtained
good maintenance, and some of them were put in the best places, and enjoyed the
best preferments in the City, Universities and Country. Nay, some of them do
not scruple plurality of places, as though the word Pluralist were only
unlawful, and Plurality, the thing it self legal and just enough. Some of them
do much mislike the Parochial divisions, yet like Parochial Benefices well
enough, and are unwilling, once possessed of them, to part with them; yet this
power and profit is made not only by them, but others, the great interest; few
seek a real Reformation with sincerity of heart.

Best means to reform and unite a Church Divided.
its the duty of us all in the best manner, and by the best means to endeavor,
and make it our chief design, to reform and unite this divided and distracted
Church of ours. For this end, we should and let us see and try how far we may
agree in the general and clear truths of Scripture, revealed for to direct us
in the right ordering of a Christian Society, and put on charity, which is the
bond of perfection, and let the peace of God rule in our hearts, to which we
are called in one body, Col. 3.14, 15. For if we do not hold the Truth in love,
Ephesians. 4.15: no good thing will be done. These are the only and effectual means,
whereby the Foundation of our Church-happiness can be laid. 2. Let no person or
party assume any power, but what Christ has given him or them upon a clear
title. Pretbyters be contented to be Officers, or at the best Representatives,
and not challenge to themselves alone the Original power of the Keys. Let the
People not be wronged, or any ways deprived of that right, which is theirs by
the Rules of the Gospel. things to be of Divine Authority, which are not
clearly grounded upon some Divine Precept. What Is the chief interest of a
Nation, as Christian.
religion: which consists not in Episcopacy, or Presbytery, or Independency,
nor merely in a separation from the Church of Rome as corrupt, and parted from
the purity and simplicity of the Gospel (for this is but negative), but in
certain positives of Doctrine, Worship and Discipline clearly agreeable to the
Gospel. Neither need we go to lay a new Foundation, but consider what the
former Doctrine, Worship, and Discipline was, and retain the best, reject the
superfluous, rectify that which was amiss, and supply and perfect the defects.
When all this is done, it were good that some forms of these established by
Authority may be made public, yet so, that all these may be plain and clear
and consonant to the Gospel. By doing thus we might testify to the world, that
we continue Protestants and reformed Christians, and that our design was
reformation and not confusion and abolition of saving truth amongst us. The
sum of this Discourse is, Christ has given the power of the Keys, the Church
to which it is given is the primary subject, and is bound to exercise it by her
Officers and Representatives for the Churches good. For as the Apostolical, so
this power was given for edification, not destruction, 2 Cor. 10.8.

CHAP. XV. Of subjection in general, and the subjects of a Civil State.
Pars imperans, the Soverain. 2. Pars subdita, the Subject. 5. What the power
of a Sovereign is, how it is acquired, how disposed, and that both in a Civil
State and Church. Now according to order comes in Pars subdita, to be
considered both in a Civil and an Ecclesiastical notion. What a Subject in a
Civil State is cannot be known in particular, except we know the nature of
subjection in general. The word in Greek, which signifies to be subject is
(...) to be subordinate. For subjection presupposes order, not physical and
local, but moral of Superior and Inferior. That which makes a Superior is
power, and power over another, which is not invested with it; in which respect
he is inferior in relation to him that has power over him. And so soon as God
has made one Superior to another instantly, the party inferior is bound to
subjection, which is a thing due unto this Superior. God has set him in a
place under, not above, nor in the same rank; and by this very placing of him,
he is made a subject by Divine Ordination. And this is the first degree of
subjection, from which follows an obligation to active and voluntary
submission. And this obligation arises not only from this, that the power over
him is Gods, not as he is Creator merely and the Author of Nature, as Suarez
does express it, nor only as he is a Supreme Lord by Creation and Preservation,
committing some measure of his Power to man, but also from this, that he
commands man to submit. Actual subjection is an acknowledgment of this power
in such a person, and a voluntary submission. This voluntary submission is a
duty, and that which God requires in the word honor in the fifth Commandment,
and the Apostle from God, when he says, Let every soul be subject to the
higher powers. This submission is. 1. A resigning up of their own
understanding, will and power unto the understanding will and power of his
Superior, so far as God has made him Superior. By this submission he becomes
his Vassal and Servant, and renounceth other Lords and Masters in that kind.
Upon this submission follows either an obligation to obey just commands, or to
suffer upon disobedience. There are several kinds and also degrees of this
objection: there is a subjection of Children to Parents, Servants to Masters,
Wives to Husbands, Scholars to their Teachers, Soldiers to their Commanders,
People unto their Sovereigns, and of all unto God. And because he is Supreme,
and we are wholly both in his power and under it alone, therefore subjection in
the highest degree, and a total and an absolute resignation of our selves unto
him, and him alone is due. And the truth is, no submission or subjection is due
to any other, but all to him. For, when we submit to other higher and lower
lawful powers, we submit unto him in them, who participate some portion of his
power, not of their own. For, there is no power but of God, nay, there is no
power but which is Gods. This subjection is not merely to be under the
predominant force and strength, but also under the directing Wisdom, and the
justly commanding will of another. Thus far of subjection in general.

and distinctions of Subjects there be. Bodin taking Civis and Subditus for the
same, says that Civis est liber homo, qui summae alterius potestati obligatur.
De Rep. lib. 1. c. 6. Arnisaeus is more exact, for thus he defines Subjects;
Sabditi sunt parts Reipublicae, quae summae potestati, quoad omnia,
obligantur, pro quo omnibus juribus, and privilegiis fruuntur, Constit. Pol.
cap. 12. As for Bodin, he mistakes much by confounding Civis and subditus. For
though every Subject be Civis, yet every Civis is not a Subject. A person is
said to be Civis as a Member of a Community, before any form of Government be
introduced. A Subject presupposes a Supreme power determined, and thereupon
being under that power becomes a Subject. The one is a Member of a Community,
the other of a Commonwealth. In the latter Definition we may observe. 1. The
General. 2. The special Nature and Difference of a Subject. The general nature
is, That Subjects are a part of the Commonwealth. For, as you heard before, a
Commonwealth has two parts: 1. The Sovereign. 2. The Subject. By parts, are
meant Members or integral parts, which united, constitute and make up the Body
of a State: wherein none can be found, but they are either Subjects or
Sovereign. In this that they are parts, they differ not from the Sovereign, who
is also a part, though the most eminent and principal. In the special nature
thereof we may observe two things: 1. The duty of a Subject. 2. The benefit.
The duty is implied in the Obligation, the benefit in the Enjoyment of some
advantages. In the duty we may observe three things: 1. An Obligation. 2. The
party to whom Subjects are obliged. 3. The measure of their Obligation. The
Obligation, as I said formerly, follows upon a subjection, and the subjection
upon the designing of a Sovereign. For in a designation of a Sovereign by a
general consent, according to reason and Gods Ordination, men deprive
themselves of that unlimited liberty, which they had as Members of a Community,
and bind themselves to a certain rule and order of inferiority: they divest
themselves of some power, and take a lower place, and resign themselves up unto
a Superior will. Upon this resignation, and from it they become subject, and
by their very place are bound to submit. So that this Obligation follows a kind
of former subjection. But neither of the former Authors tell us, what the Act
or thing is, to which they stand obliged, though both of them do imply it. And
it is a constant submission and fidelity, and both voluntary. And though they
may perhaps refuse to give this submission and fidelity, yet they are bound to
yield it. This is the Obligation. 2. The party to whom they are bound is the
Sovereign, and they mean the Civil Sovereign. And because they are bound unto
this Sovereign in respect of his power, they express the power, and imply the
party invested with this power, and he cannot be a Sovereign, except his power
be Supreme and Universal in respect of the whole body of the Community;
therefore they say Subjects are bound to the Supreme Power; for though they are
under the power of Officers and Inferior Rulers, yet the power of such is but
the power of the Sovereign trusted in their hands for the exercise thereof.
This Sovereign, Sovereign real.
as you heard before, may be either as the whole Community, reserving the chief
and radical power to themselves; or personal, as a general representative, or a
chief and universal Magistrate. 3. The measure is quoad omnia, Personal Measure
of subjection rightly bounded.
in respect of all things, as their Goods, Persons, Lives, Actions in reference
to the Public good. Yet this Obligation must be legal as the Power is legal,
regular and rightly bounded: For absolute submission is due to God alone,
according to the first Commandment of the first Table, a limited submission is
only due to man according to the first Commandment of the second Table: For man
is first bound to God, and then to man in an inferior degree; and every
Subject as bound to man, is first bound to real Majesty, and to seek the good
of the whole, then to personal Majesty, so far as it extends to the benefit of
the whole, and no further: for as Salus populi, the good of the People is the
chief end whereat all power should aim, so it is also the chief end of
subjection. And according to the measure of the power is the measure of
subjection: they must be Commensurable and Coadequate, neither less nor
greater. As power must be just and conformable to the Laws of God, so
subjection must be too, and we cannot be bound to submit in any thing that is
unjust and unreasonable, neither ought we, neither is it wisdom to give too
great, or an absolute power unto any, so as to destroy our propriety and just
liberty. This is the duty.

For Privileges being reckoned amongst Laws, which were favorable, as opposed
to such are called odious, and bring grievances, and charges upon the Subject,
are usually made for the benefit of some single persons: For if they were
general, as here they are taken, they were not privileges properly, except in
respect of Strangers of other States, which in that particular State none but
the Subjects could enjoy. From this subjection it follows, that if the
Sovereign require Fealty and Homage, he acknowledging his power must solemnly
testify it; and if it be demanded, confirm it by oath. For as Princes and
personal Sovereigns swear to the people, so the people are bound to engage
themselves to them again. And by this Oath of Fealty they renounce all other
powers, not only Foreign but Domestic too. For upon what reason can
protection be due, if the persons protected be not Faithful, and Loyal
according to the constitution of the State. By this subjection, if the
Sovereign make Laws, the Subject is bound to obey or suffer. And if the command
be unjust, he is not bound to obey, because he subjected himself according to
the Laws of Wisdom and Justice: Yet in such cases he being a subject, as a
Subject, must be willing to suffer and not resist the power; for though the
power be just, and we are bound to submit, yet we are not bound to obey the
unjust Laws of a just power. The Apostles would not obey the unjust commands of
their Rulers, yet they did not resist their power, but rather suffered, though
unjustly persecuted. By this subjection, the Subject is bound to maintain their
higher Powers for the public good and safety. For this cause therefore (says
the Apostle) pay you Tribute also, for they are Gods Ministers, attending
continually upon this thing, Romans 13.6. By this Subjection he is further bound
to hazard, not only his Estate, but his Life and Person for the Sovereign, and
the State in a time of public danger. And all this must be done not for fear
but Conscience sake. For subjection is a duty required by the Moral Law of God,
and must be performed out of love, and in obedience unto God: and cannot be
performed by any so fully as by a sincere Christian. And though we must pray
for all men, yet especially must we pray for them, 1 Timothy 2.1. And in praying
for them, we pray for our selves, and for our own peace. Honor also is due
from Subjects to their Sovereigns by reason of their eminent Dignity, which
arises from their power. Contrary to these are dishonouring, reviling, or
vilifying the Higher Power, disobedience to their just Laws, denying of Tribute
and other dues; refusing to hazard Person or Estate for the Public safety;
revolting and infidelity, keeping Intelligence with Enemies; open Rebellion and
Resistance of their Power; secret Treasons and Conspiracies against their
Person, or other ways directly or indirectly. And the greatest Treason and
Rebellion, and Infidelity is that against the State it self and real Majesty;
the next is that against personal Majesty in the general Representative of the
whole Community; the next to that, is that against the person or persons, upon
whose safety the Peace and Happiness of the People much depends. And that which
is against Government in general, is far greater than that which is only
against this, or that form in particular. Treason against Laws is more heinous
than Treason against persons: and Treason against the Fundamental Laws, than
Treason against Laws for Administration. This Treason against the Fundamentals
was charged upon the Earl of Strafford; and the personal Commands of the King
could no ways excuse him. Yet it was not thought fit that the Judgment past
upon him, should be made a Precedent for Inferior Courts; because none but a
Parliament could judge of and declare the Constitution, and what was against
it, and what not.

the Covenant and Engagement in respect of such as have taken them. Of the
Civil Wars of late, how far they tended unto the Dissolution of the Government,
and how far they did actually dissolve it. Whether the warlike resistance made
by the Parliament against the King's Commissions and his party was Rebellion:
and whether there was any legal certain Power that could justly challenge
Subjection, or induce an obligation to it, since the commencement of the War:
or whether the Power continued in the Parliament till the Members thereof were
secluded: whether the Act of Alteration was a sufficient ground of Obligation:
or whether any of the Alterations made since, can be sufficient for that
purpose. But the distinct discussion hereof would require a great Volume, which
I intend not. Neither if I should presume to deliver my judgment in these
particulars, is there any probable hope of giving satisfaction, seeing so many
men of Eminent Parts and Learning do so much differ in them. I can, and I shall
pray that God would open our Eyes to see the Truth, and unite our Hearts in
Love one toward another. 1. For Usurpation, few do distinguish between the
Usurpation and manner of Acquisition, and the power itself. For Power is Gods,
and is always just, though it may be both acquired and exercised unjustly.
There are also several kinds o^ Usurpation, whereof some may be apparently
unjust, and some doubtful: And there is scarcely any power now in the Kingdoms
and States of this World but were Usurped, either by the present Possessors, or
some of their Predecessors. Neither can the tract of time make them lawful
without some rational consent either tacit or express, and something of Divine
Providence besides. For supreme power personal cannot be usurped and possessed
by any man without the Will of God, not only permitting, but acting and giving
it too: not that he approves man's sin, or can do any thing unjust, but for
Reasons just and good, known many times only to himself and not to us. For God
has made use of Usurpers for to execute his judgments, and to do as much
Justice as many lawful Successors or Possessors, and may bless them temporally
for their good service, and yet punish them for their Ambition and unjust
manner of seeking Power. By this he no ways does warrant or encourage, or give
the least liberty to any one to usurp power unlawfully. We must in this point
put a great difference between those Usurpations which are contrary to the
Moral Laws of God, and such as are only disagreeing with humane Institutions,
which many times may be unjust. Suppose we desire to have an Usurper, or
Usurpers removed, yet we must consider, whether removal may not do a far
greater mischief than our submission can possibly do. When we do submit, we
must not so much look upon the unjust manner of acquiring the power, as at the
power itself, which is from God; and we must consider the necessity which
Divine Providence has brought us into, seeing he gives us no power, or
opportunity to right our selves in respect of humane Titles, or free our selves
from such as we conceive Usurpers, under whom he many times enjoys Protection,
Peace, Justice, and the Gospel. It Is no Wisdom to be so ready and rash as to
call every one Usurper, which did not obtain his power according to the Fancies
and Idea's of our own Brain, and to deny all power, when as they know, that if
there should not be power, and in the hands of some, and the same exercised
too, all would come to ruin, and they themselves could not escape. It may be
observed, that the greatest Usurpers themselves are readiest to charge those
with Usurpation which have justly dispossessed them. Yet for all this we must
not justify Usurpation that is truly and really Usurpation, neither must we
swallow Gudgeons, comply with every party, and sail with every wind, as some
are ready to do. Yet on the other hand, we must not be too scrupulous and
pretend Conscience, and yet make our Fancy or some humane Constitutions our
Rule, and adhere unto them, as though they were Divine Institutions. For some
whilst they refuse either to submit or act under a power in their conceit
usurped, they become guilty of more heinous Sin, and when they presume they are
faithful to some personal Majesty, they prove unfaithful to Real, and their own
dear Country, preferring the Interest of some Person, or Family, or persons
before the good of the whole body of the people, to whom they owe more than to
any other. And whosoever will not be faithful unto his own Country, cannot be
faithful to any form of Government, or personal Governors. Yet, whosoever will
handle this point accurately, must first define what Usurpation in general is.
2. How many kinds and differences of Usurpation there be: and 3. What the
particular Usurpation is against which he argues; and 4. State the particular
Case with all the Circumstances.

him cease. A Parliament turning into a Faction, acting above their Sphere,
wronging King or People, cannot justly require, nor rationally expect for
Subjection: And though private persons cannot, yet the people by a latter and
well ordered Parliament may both judge them, and call the Exorbitant Members to
account. When a personal Sovereign cannot protect his Subjects, because their
Lives, Persons, and Estates, are in the power of another, he cannot rationally
require subjection, but for the time at least he should be willing to free them
from Allegiance: and to let them make the best terms they can for themselves.
But voluntary Revolt or Rebellion cannot free them from this Obligation to
their lawful Sovereign. In a word, so many ways as Majesty and Sovereignty may
be lost, so many ways this Obligation may be dissolved. Yet in all these
Dissolutions Subjects must remember, that their Obligation to God and their
Country does continue, when not only Personal Sovereigns, but also the Forms of
Government are altered. There are just Causes and Reasons of the Dissolution of
this Obligation, and there are also unjust pretenses and grounds of denying
Subjection. If any one of an innovating humor or desire of alteration, or
discontent with their present Governors, or conceits of false Titles, or an
intention to advance some of their own party, or a belief that any foreign
Prince or Priest can absolve them from their Allegiance; or that their
Sovereigns are wicked, or do not administer justly, or are Tyrants, when they
are not, or in any such like case, shall seek to cast off the Yoke, and think
themselves free, they must needs be guilty, and cannot be excused. Those are
the greatest Offenders, who are Enemies to Government it self under pretense of
liberty, or impunity in their Crimes, veiled under the notion of
self-preservation, or a reformation of some things amiss.

England, according to the fundamental Laws, and could neither take it away nor
add any thing unto it. The Parliament by them might declare what was the Duty
of every Subject. The occasion of them both are well known; the end was to
exclude all foreign Power in matter of Religion and civil Right, in both which
the Pope had usurped formerly, and might do so for future times, especially,
seeing many Subjects did incline so much unto the Sea of Rome. They seemed to
bind the Subjects, taking them not only to the present Kings or Queens, but
their Heirs and Successors. For the King might have Heirs and Successors; and
he might have no Heirs, and yet have Successors. For Queen Elizabeth had no
Heir or Heirs, but a Successor she had. Yet, because the Crown is not entailed
by common Law, and the fundamental Rule, as some tell us, therefore none is a
Successor till he be designed, and actually invested and acknowledged, and till
then the Oaths were not administered to be taken by any particular subject. The
Oath taken to the former Prince, if once removed by Death or some other way,
though it expressed Heirs and Successors, was not thought sufficient: it must
be taken anew unto the present Successor by Name. Yet, if the Crown had been
entailed, or the King's proper Fee by Inheritance, this seems to be needless.
One reason of these words inserted seems to be this, that seeing Succession and
Election was usually in a Line, it was intended by them to exclude Pretenders,
and all Power of the Pope, or any other to dispose of the Crown when the former
Possessor was removed or deceased: yet they did not so tie us to be faithful
unto the Power of England, to be exercised by King, Peers, and Commons: as that
it were unlawful to be true and faithful unto the Community of England, though
under another form. The Obligation to our Country was far higher, and fidelity
to it was due by the Laws of God and Nature, so that we must seek the good
thereof, though the Government was altered. Fidelity unto the Community is
first due; Fidelity to it under some form of Government was the second;
Fidelity unto it as under that form by King, Peers, and Commons was the third;
Fidelity unto the person of the King is the last, and presupposes the former:
whosoever understands and takes them otherwise, perverts the true meaning, and
makes them unlawful. The Protestation and Covenant were made in a time of
danger and distraction, and did include or presuppose the former Obligations:
yet the Protestation superadded something concerning the Protestant Doctrine of
the Church of England to be maintained, and the Covenant something of
Discipline as to be performed, and both extended to the preservation of the
peace and union of the three Kingdoms: Neither of them did allow any unlawful
means to compass these ends: Neither of them could take away our Obligation to
our Country, and destroy our English Primary Interest, but it remains entire:
and since all the alterations made afterward, we are as much as ever bound to
seek and promote the same; and whosoever will refuse to do so, upon pretense of
these Oaths, the Protestation and the Covenant, he is Traitor to the common
good of the Nation. For as there is a positive, so there is a negative
Infidelity. For though such did not use any means positive to destroy it, yet
they neglect it, and if every one should do as they do, sit still and look on,
and do nothing, it would certainly come to ruin, and fall into the hands of
those who are their Mortal Enemies.

The late Civil Wars in England did not only tend unto the Dissolution of the
Government, but actually for that time dissolve it. For if the first Supreme
Power personally was in King, Peers, and Commons jointly, then it follows, that
when the King forsook the Parliament, and refused to act jointly with them, it
was dissolved, much more when he set up his Standard, and granted the
Commission of Array and fought against them. For then there were two contrary
Powers and Supreme Commands, and the Subjects in strict sense were not bound to
obey either. And the Parliament did declare, that whenever the King should
make War upon them, it was a breach of the trust reposed in him by his People,
contrary to his Oath, and tended to the Dissolution of the Government. If the
Government was dissolved, it will follow that the Subjects were freed from
their Allegiance, yet the Allegiance due to the Community of England did
continue; and every one was bound to adhere to the just party according to the
Laws of God, though in doing so, they could not observe the Laws of men. And
whosoever did oppose that just party, did render themselves for ever incapable
of the benefit of the English protection, and were ipso facto Enemies to their
own Country, their own peace and safety. Yet the Parliament did not declare,
that upon a War made upon them, the Government was actually dissolved; because
though that War tended to the dissolution thereof, yet they conceived that the
form did remain still in King, Peers, and Commons; and a considerable party of
the Lords and Commons remained in the place, whither they were summoned by the
King, and by virtue of the Act of Continuance continued a Parliament, and that
the King's power was virtually in the two Houses: Yet in this they passed above
the Letter of the Law, and followed the Rules of Equity and Reason; and perhaps
they had some hopes of rectifying the King, and had no intention to alter the
form, if they could preserve it, and keep it up. But all their Wisdom and
Endeavors could not prevent the Judgment, that God intended to execute.

such as were commissioned by the King, they fought against the King, and, if
the King declared the Parliaments party to be Rebels and Traitors, he must
needs judge the Parliament guilty; because as he in his War was the principal
Agent, so they on their side were too. This gave occasion of curious
distinctions. For men did distinguish between Charles Stewart and the King,
between his regal and his personal Capacity: and on the other side, between the
Parliament and a party in the Parliament, though the whole Parliament did
Commission and Arm. Thus they found a difference between the King and himself,
and the Parliament and itself. These distinctions were not altogether false:
yet though Charles Stewart and the King, and so the Parliament, and a party in
the Parliament might be distinguished, yet they could not be separated. And woe
unto the people that is brought into such straights and perplexities. For if
they kill Charles Stewart, they kill the King; and if the King destroy that
party in the Parliament, he destroys the Parliament. But to return unto the
Question; it is one thing to be Rebellion, another to be judged Rebellion. For
that may be judged Rebellion, which is not such, and the same thing may be
justified by one and condemned by another. Arnisaeus handles this matter at
large, and makes the Question in general to be this: Whether upon any Cause
whatsoever, it is lawful for the Subjects to resist, or take up Arms against
their lawful Sovereign? When he has stated the Question, he determines upon
the Negative, and proves it. In stating the Question, he seems to define a
Subject to be one, who has given his Allegiance to his lawful Prince. But what
he means per fidem datam, is not made so clear. Then he distinguishes of
Princes. For, 1. There are Regna pactionata, where Princes are made upon
condition. 2. There are Regna absoluta, where the Princes are absolute. 3.
There are Tyrants, and that of two sorts: 1. In Title, as Usurpers. 2. In
Exercise. These distinctions being made, he grants, That Princes upon condition
may be resisted for their ill Administration. 2. That Tyrants in Title, before
the Subjects bind themselves unto them, may be opposed. 3. That Tyrants in
Exercise may be deposed, and that by their Tyranny, excidunt jure suo etsi
haereditario, divests themselves of their power, though hereditary. 4. That
absolute Sovereigns who have potestatem non delegatam, sed transfusam, cannot
be resisted lawfully, though they be vicious, and their Administrations impious
and unjust, if it reach not Tyranny, which is directly against the Laws and
Rules of Government, and tends to the destruction of the Commonwealth. But in
all this Discourse he does not produce any Authentical Record, Fundamental
Charter for these absolute Sovereigns, which have omnem and omnimodam
potestatem a populo transfusam. As for that Roman transfusion of power upon the
Emperors, it is an uncertain thing: Lex Regia does no where appear, it is
doubted of many, as it is denied by many. And suppose that people should be so
unwise, what is that to others? He seems to contradict his own Definition of a
subject, which I formerly explained, he mistakes most grossly the Constitution
of some States, wherein he instanceth, Whosoever will determine this
Controversy, or debate it to purpose, he must, 1. Define Subjection, and
declare the several degrees of it, according to the several Constitutions of
Common-wealt. 2. If he instance in a particular State, he must certainly know
the Fundamental Laws thereof, and truly express them. 3. He must put the case
aright, and state the Question, hic and nunc and rebus sic stantibus. This
resistance, if Rebellion must be an act of a Subject, as a Subject; and that
cannot be but against his Sovereign, as his lawful Sovereign according to the
Laws of God and just Laws of Men. And no man is able to justify the Resistance
of a Subject, as a Subject. The Question is therefore, Whether he that is a
Sovereign may not be in some case resisted by the people, and if he may, in
what case a resistance is lawful and free from the guilt of Rebellion? Our Case
in England is extraordinary, and not easily known by many of our own, much less
by strangers not acquainted with our Government. The Resistance in the late
Wars, was not the first that was made against the Kings of England, by the
people of England, though it differed from all the former. The difference was
between the King and Parliament, whereof he was a part, yet severing himself
from the whole body. And the Parliament was no Subject, considered as a
Parliament, for then the King himself being an essential part thereof should be
a Subject. As he was divided willingly or wilfully from it, he could be no
King, no Sovereign. For if the power was in the King and Parliament jointly, it
could not be in him alone. Besides, when there is no Parliament, we know he is
a King by Law, and the Kingdom is Regnum pactionatum non absolutum. If he make
himself absolute, by that very act he makes himself no King of England. For the
common and fundamental Law knows no such King. Yet this was all either he or
his party could say to justify themselves. If he say the Militia was his, the
Parliament will say it is theirs as well as his, and except he be absolute, it
must needs be so. For if the supreme power be in King, Peers, and Commons
jointly, the Militia, which is an essential part of this power, could not be
his alone. The Parliament conceived that when he left them he left his power
with them, and if that could be made good by the Fundamental Constitution, then
all England was bound to subject to them for the time, and obey their just
Commands. And, if it were not so, how could all such as took up Arms with the
King against them be adjudged Traitors, as they were. If these things be so,
there could be no Rebellion upon the Parliaments side, because according to the
Rules the Parliament was no Subject, the King then, separated from the
Parliament, refusing to Act with them, Acting and Warring against them, was no
Sovereign. The Question in the time of those bloody and unnatural Dissentions,
was stated several ways: as, Whether it was Rebellion in Subjects Commissioned
by the Parliament to resist evil Counselors, Agents, Ministers of State, and
Delinquents, sheltring themselves under the King as divided from the
Parliament, and acting against the Laws by his Commissions? or, Whether the
Parliament of England lawfully Assembled, where the King virtually is, may by
Arms defend the Religion established by the same Power, together with the Laws
and Liberties of the Nation, against Delinquents, detaining with them the Kings
seduced person? or, Whether the Parliament might not grant a Commission to the
Earl of Essex by a force to apprehend Delinquents about the King to bring them
to a due Trial, and this even against the personal will of the King? Or,
whether after the Parliament had passed a Judgment against the King, they might
not lawfully give Commission to General Fairfaxe, to apprehend the Kings
person, and bring him to the Parliament? or, Supposing the King to be an
Absolute Monarch, whether any of these things could be done by any Commission
from the Parliament, as the Condition of the Kingdom stood at that time? Thus
and several ways was the Question then stated and debated. But the Truth is,
that if the Fundamental Government be by King, Peers, and Commons jointly, and
that neither the Parliament, consisting of these three States, nor the
Parliament as distinct from the King, nor the King as divided from the
Parliament could alter this Constitution, nor lawfully act any thing contrary
unto it, then so soon as the Commission of Array on one side, and of the
Militia on the other were issued out, and were put in Execution, the Subjects
in strict sense were freed from their Allegiance. And if they acted upon either
side, their actings were just or unjust, as they were agreeable or disagreeable
to the Fundamental Laws, and the general and principal end of Government. For
even then their subjection to the Laws of God, and Fundamental Constitution of
the Kingdom did continue: and they were even then most of all bound to
endeavor with all their power the good and preservation of their Country
bleeding, and conflicting with the pangs of Death. And in that cause no man was
bound too scrupulously to observe the petty Rules of our ordinary
administration, which were proper for a time of Peace, which could not help but
hinder her recovery. In such an extraordinary case, many extraordinary things,
if not in themselves unjust, might have been done to prevent her ruin. And if
the Parliament had gone at first far higher than they did, they had prevented
the ruin of the King, the dis-inherison of His Children, and very much effusion
of blood which followed afterward. The business then was easy, which
afterward became difficult and could not be effected but with the loss of many
thousands, and the hazard of themselves: for their Cause at first was well
resented and had many advantages, but was much prejudicial by too much
intermedling with Religion, and making some alterations in the Church before
the time.

during a Parliament, this binding power is in King, Peers, and Commons
jointly: in the Intervals of Parliament, its in the King acting according to
the Laws of Administration. But all this while, nay to this day, there is no
such Parliament, no such King. And both in the time of the Wars and after, both
King and Parliament acted not only above but contrary to many of our Laws,
which in the time of Peace are ordinarily observed. Neither of them could give
us any Precedent for many things done by them: and those few Precedents
alleged for some of their Actions were extraordinary, and Acts of
extraordinary times. If the Counties and People of England had not been
ignorant and divided, the division of King and Parliament did give them far
greater power than they, or their Forefathers had for many years. But it did
not seem good to the Eternal Wise and Just Providence to make them so happy.
Punished we must be, that was his sentence, and punished we have been, yet few
of us receive correction, or return to him that Smote us. Some think an
ordinary power continued on foot till the Members were secluded, yet there was
no such thing; for the two Houses could not according to ordinary Rules
exercise the Ordinary power of the King, though they might use his name, and
did so contrary unto his consent. If they should allege that his power was
forfeited and did divolve upon them, that would be hard to prove. We know well
enough, if it be not in him, where it is: it could no ways be in them but for
the exercise, and in them for that end it was an extraordinary way. Some would
say, that if the King was dead either naturally or in Law, a Parliament must
instantly dissolve and be no Parliament, because there was wanting an essential
part. The act of continuance could not help them in this case, for it
presupposed all the three essential parts. Neither could any particular
Parliament enact, that there should be a Parliament without all the three
essential members. If they should make any such Act, by a following Parliament
it may be repealed, and the parties in the name of the People of England,
called to account for altering the Fundamental Government. For we must not
favor on particular Parliament, so as to wrong all England, or suffer any ill
example to be given. Yet, if ever any Parliament did deserve not only to be
pardoned, if they did some things amiss, but to be rewarded for their service,
surely this Parliament did: for never any suffered more even from him who
summoned them, and from them who chose the particular Members: Never any was
brought into the like straits: I mean, that this respect was to be had to the
upright party. But, if there was no ordinary power, what must the people do in
such a case and distracted condition? In this I will give mine opinion in that
which follows.

of England as the primary subject of Power, and the heir of real Majesty, I
mean the rational judicial party; for no consent of people, that is not
rational and agreeable to the Laws of God, is of any force. And I exclude not
only such as are barely Members virtually, but all Rebels, The rational part of
a people the heir of real Majesty.
Traitors, and malignant persons. For in the midst of these Bloody
distractions, and perplexity of minds, there was a Sanior pars, a rational
judicious party that unfeignedly desired the Peace, Welfare, and happiness of
England. And, when many Members of a Community are insufficient of themselves
to judge, what is just and good, and many of them perverted, the power remains
in part saniore, aut in part hujus partis valentiore; and in those, who upon
right information shall consent with them. For many who are not able of
themselves to judge, yet when they are rightly informed, are willing to
consent. But to return unto the former Question, seeing there was no ordinary
power, which could introduce any strict Obligation, what must the People do in
such a Case? What Is their duty? The Answer is, That though there was no
Ordinary, yet there was an Extraordinary Power ever since the Wars were ended
to this day, which they were bound to obey. For, 1. Seeing the Community of
England did remain, and in the same better party, Real Majesty did continue. 2.
The Fundamental Government could not be dissolved by one King and one
Parliament, though they both had agreed to do it. For, though as to them it was
actually dissolved, yet the right might remain virtually in the Community; I
mean, a right to continue it, if they pleased. 3. As the Case now is, and was
since the Wars were ended, this Fundamental Government could not be so restored
as to Act. 4. All parties did agree that there should be a Government and a
Power for Protection, and Administration of Justice; but the difference was,
what the Model should be and most of all, who should Exercise this Power. Some
did challenge and seek it for themselves, some for their Friends, whom they
conceived to favor their party and interest. For many of the Royalists were
for the late Kings Eldest Son, not so much for the Public good, as for the
private interest: and many other parties were guilty of the very same crime. 5.
Government it self for the substance is more material, than this or that form,
and the Exercise of Power, than the Exercise by such or such particular
Persons. For, if there be not a Governing Power, and some to Exercise it, and
the rest to submit, there can be no protection from Enemies, no Justice, no
Order, but a mere Anarchy, upon which a ruin instantly and unavoidably will
follow. For prevention whereof much may be done, which in a time of safety
would be utterly unlawful. The people may submit to any, whom they shall
conceive shall be able to protect them, and willing to preserve the Laws for
Administration of Justice. They need not stand upon doubtful Titles, nor
Quiddities in Law, but may do what they can do, so that it be not unjust by the
moral Laws of God. 6. Seeing some particular Government was necessary, and all
rational men did agree in this, therefore there was an obligation to
subjection, and every particular person was bound to submit unto the present
power, under which they enjoyed the benefit of the Laws, and protection both
from public Enemies and private Injustice. This is not so to be understood, as
though every one or any ought to rest in this extraordinary condition, but to
desire and endeavor to restore the first constitution freed from corruption,
or some part or degrees of it, and proceed by little and little, as God in
divine providence shall prepare the people for it, and enable us to introduce
it and settle it. But still we must prefer the public good before any
particular form of Government, and seriously consider what is best to be done
for the present. For, when we cannot do what we will, we must be willing to do
what we can; whosoever will not submit in such a case, nay, and act too for the
public good and interest of his dear Country, must needs be guilty before God,
as not loving God, and his public Neighbor as they are bound to do. It was a
just resolution and profession of some, who returned to act in Parliament,
after the Members were secluded, and the King put to death, and said though
they did not like and approve of some things already done, yet they would join
cordially with the rest to promote the public good for future times. So
likewise the Judges, after another great alteration was made, debating what to
do, they unanimously agreed to act, because there was a necessity that Justice
should be administered unto the people, and the Laws kept in force. They did not
think it fit to demur and delay till the names of King and Parliament should be
put in their Commission: they knew they were not essential to Justice, or
necessary, or so much as conducing to the administration thereof, as the case
then was. Neither did they scruple to undertake the work, because of the former
Oaths, Protestation, Covenant, Engagement: for, if these did tie their hands
from doing God and their Country service, they knew they must be vincula
iniquitatis, but so they did not understand them. The sum is, there was an
extraordinary power, besides the Allegiance due unto God and our Country, and
therefore subjection was due from all English men. Let us suppose an
Inter-regnum, as there has been, is and in part will be till we be more fully
settled, and the power ordinary brought into a constant channel, will any man
doubt or fear to submit and act, because he conceives things are not ordered
according to his mind? And shall there be no Government, no submission till he
be satisfied, and his Idea established? Suppose all should do so, especially
such as are of parts and ability, what will become of us all? Let wise men
consider what would be the consequents thereof. It Is true, no party should
engross the power to the prejudice of our Liberty and the public good; yet we
must stay God's time, and use such means as may stand with the public safety.
Some kind of remedies may at some times help, which at another may do mischief,
not cure, but kill. We should remember that it is not committed to man but
reserved by God unto himself to dispose of the Kingdoms and States of the
World. It Is not in our power to have and choose what Government and Governors
we will. That we, after such bloody Wars and bitter Dissentions have not a
settled State, it is God's Judgments upon us for our sins; that for the present
we enjoy peace and the Gospel, it is his unspeakable mercy: Let every soul
therefore be subject to the higher powers, for there is no power but of God:
the powers that be, are ordained of God. Let us submit our selves to every
ordinance of man for the Lord's sake, whether to the king as supreme, or unto
governors, as unto them who are sent by him for the punishment of evildoers,
and the praise of them that do well. Where, amongst other things, these are
observable, That Governors, and Government are of God. 2. That the end of
Government is the punishment of Evildoers, and the praise and protection of
them that do well. 3. That Governnours are supreme and subordinate. For by
(...), turned ordinance of man, is meant, Civil Government molded by man, and
Governors designed and created by man to rule over man. 4. That subjection to
these is due by Divine Law and Ordination. These things I thought good to
deliver, and to express my mind briefly in the matter of subjection, and do
humbly in this (as in all the rest) submit to wiser men; and my intention is
peace, and my end the public good; which I with a single heart desire to
promote, without any inclination to a Faction or Party.

The Authors of Politics speak of the distinction, division, and education of
subjects; and though some of these belong to a Community, or are presupposed
before a Community can be complete, some of them are reduceable to
administration, the second part of this Art: yet I will briefly handle them in
this place, because they are accidents to pars subdita. 2. Because they prepare
the Subject for Government, and so facilitate Administration. The method is
this: Subditi,
distinguuntur in eos qui tales imperfecte ut peregrini Ecclesiastici, incolae
utrique Ecclesiastici,
perfect nati utrique Ecclesiastici, nobiles plebai
facti utrique Saeculares.

Dividuntur, in parts. 1. majores Provincias, Comitatus,
minores, Centurias Decurias.

2. Aequales, quae co-ordinantur In aequales, quae subordinantur, Minores
majoribus, singulae toti,


Educantur modo nobiliori in Scholis Collegiis Academiis studii generalis
Philosophiae, Jurisprudentiae, Medicinae, Theologiae.


Minus nobili ad Rempublicam conservandam hinc agricultura, opificium quod
melius ordinatur per Collegiae, Vniversitates

defendendum, hinc ars militatis, ditandam and ornandam, hinc Mercatura.




This, though not so accurate, is sufficient for my design, seeing the
principal subject of my discourse is Ecclesiastical Government, and for the
more particular and distinct knowledge hereof, I refer the Reader to other
Authors, who have written more at large concerning these particulars. Yet not
to be altogether silent, let us speak first of strangers: then secondly, of
complete subjects.

Incomplete and imperfecte subditi sunt peregrini incolae.


Strangers are such as either only sojourn, or such as fix their Habitation in
another Commonwealth, where they are neither perfect Members of the Community,
nor complete Subjects of the Commonwealth. Such as only sojourn or travel out
of their own state, are called Peregrini, in the Greek (...), and sometimes
(...). In Hebrew (...), this is their name when they are in another
Commonwealth. There may be many Reasons and Causes sojourning and
peregrination. Abraham by Gods special command forsook his own Country, and
sojourned in the Land of Canaan, so did Isaac and Jacob. Some are persecuted
and fly from their own Country for safety and shelter; some guilty persons fly
for to avoid punishment; some sojourn for succor in a time of Famine, as
Israel in Egypt; some live in Foreign Nations for Traffic; some for to
improve their Knowledge and gain Experience in several kinds of Professions. To
such we owe much of our skill in Trades, several Workmanships, in Learning, in
Geography, in the nature of their Soil, Buildings, Military Art; the Manners
and Customs of several Nations, the Disposition and Nature of the Inhabitants,
in the Model of States, in the manner of Administrations. Some converse in
other States to learn Fashions, or Wickedness; some as Spies and
Intelligencers. The ends and the events are therefore several. Some are good
and benificial to themselves, to their Country, to other Nations. The Issue of
some men's Travel is Vanity, or Vice, or Mischief. There are Strangers, who do
not merely Travel and Sojourn, but also fix their Habitation in other States;
these are called Advenae incolae, and in Greek (...), in Hebrew (...), though
the word be used for Pilgrims and Sojourners. Neither of these are properly
Subjects of that State where they live, yet they ought to carry themselves
fairly, and not do any thing to the prejudice of the Laws or Government of the
places where they do converse: and according to their good carriage they are to
be used civilly. It was Gods charge to Israel to use Strangers well, because
they themselves had been Strangers in the Land of Egypt. For Strangers are
used strangely, and in Foreign Countries exposed to many abuses and dangers.
But special kindness is to be showed to such as are miserable, and fly for
Religion, or for protection. The Magistrate of every Commonwealth should have
a special eye upon these Strangers, and enquire into their carriage and their
practice. To receive too great multitudes of them, may be dangerous, and some
may do mischief, either by corrupting the Subjects, or seeking to betray the
State. Neither is it safe to naturalize many of them, much less to advance them
to places of Power and Trust, which must needs offend the Subjects and and
Natives, especially when these are favored and prefered, and the other are
neglected. The Judgment of God upon the Jew in this respect is very heavy; for
they are commonly hated in all places, and not suffered to inhabit in any
Nations, and where they are permitted to dwell and trade, hard terms are put
upon them.

Perfect and plene subditi sunt nati. facti.


There are besides Strangers, such as are properly and completely subjects, who
according to their subjection enjoy the benefit of protection, the rights and
privileges of Subjects. Yet there is a great difference amongst these,
according to the several constitutions of States. For, some are far more free
and enjoy far greater privileges, as the Roman Subjects did, as is evident in
Paul, who said to the Centurion, Is it lawful for you to scourge a man that is
a Roman and uncondemned? Acts 22.25. For a Roman could neither be condemned
unheard, nor scourged, if not condemned. These had diverse other privileges,
which the Provincial Subjects had not before they were infranchised. The
Subjects of England, if they enjoy their right, are more free then the Subjects
of France or Spain, and diverse other Countries. Some are little better than
Slaves, especially such as live under Despotical Sovereigns. The right and
privileges of Subjects are acquired several ways, which may be reduced to two.
For some are such by birth, which are called Cives originarii, some by
allection. This distinction is the same with natural and naturalized, as you
heard in the Doctrine of a Community. This distinction is implied in these
words of the chief Captain Lysias, saying, With a great sum obtained I this
freedom; and of Paul, who answered, but I was free born, Acts 22.28. The seas
Subjects were essentially the same, and if either should as such be perferred,
the native Subject caeteris paribus had the priority. Subjects also as Subjects
are equal, though in diverse other respects accidental unto them, they may be
very unequal; some may have special privileges; some may be Officers, and by
virtue of their Office have their privileges. Here some take occasion to speak
of the multitude and paucity of Subjects in the same Territory and State. If
they be few, they may receive Fugitives and adopt Strangers, as Romulus did. If
they be too many, they may send out Colonies, and make new Plantations. If the
multitude be not too great, it is the honor of the Sovereign and safety of the
State; if too few, it is the weakness of a Nation, and a danger of destruction.
For, in the multitude of people is the King's honor, but in the want of people
is the destruction of the Prince, Prove. 14.28. Yet this is to be understood of
a multitude well qualified and ordered by a good Prince. For, Tyrants and
Oppressors waste and destroy their people to their own ruin.

Ecclesiastici, Saeculares.


By Ecclesiastical persons are understood, such as are indeed Subjects, yet
their Office and Work is in matters of Religion; they act between God and Man,
as Messengers and Mediators between them. They deliver God's mind to men, and
offer men's Prayers and Gifts to God. They officiate in Divine Services, and
that is their chiefest Work. They are singled out from amongst men to direct
others unto eternal Life. These anciently were called Priests, and their place
was honorable: yet there was an imparity amongst themselves. In the New
Testament, these Ecclesiastical persons never called (...), Priests, but
Ministers of the Gospel, or Presbyters: under which words are signified all
Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors and Teachers. So that the word Priest
was only given to Christ or Melchisedeck; or the Levitical Pontiffs and
Ministers, or some Heathenish Sacrificer. Yet in aftertimes, because the
Sacrament of the Eucharist was a Commemoration of the Sacrifice of Christ, The
Sacrament what
therefore in respect thereof the Table was called an Altar, and the Minister a
Priest. At length, the Church of Rome turned the Sacrament into a Sacrifice,
properly so called, and the Minister into a Priest. And this was the original
of the Mass. This Ecclesiastical Function was instituted by God, and very
honorable both in that respect, and also because their work is so excellent
and necessary: for upon it under God, Religion and the benefits of Religion
both private and public, temporal and eternal do much depend. To these by
divine Commands Maintenance is due from the people, and they have been much
honored in well constituted States with many privileges and immunities. But
their own unworthiness, and the profaneness of the people have much debased
them. Yet, good Ministers with good people will be much esteemed to the World's
end: and when the chief Shepherd shall appear, They shall receive a crown of
glory, which fades not away, 1 Pet. 5.4. These were accounted as a distinct
and eminent Order of Subjects, as they were solemnly ordained. The rest of the
subjects and the Sovereign, in respect of these, have the name of Seculars, and
the Subjects are called Laics, or Lay People. This distinction is not so to be
understood, as though the rest of the people had nothing to do with Religion.
For they are bound to serve their God, and seek Eternal Life, which that they
might attain, this spiritual Office was ordained from Heaven. And every
sanctified person is a Priest to offer spiritual Sacrifice to God. Yet, this
does not make any such person a Minister and public Officer of Christ, who
must sequester himself from worldly business more than other men to tend his
Calling, to which he is consecrated and solemnly devoted. With this distinction
agrees that of the Clergy and Laity. Whence the name Clerus, the Clergy for the
Ministry, should have its original, is uncertain. The people of Israel
sanctified and consecrated unto God, were called (...), the Lot or Inheritance
of God, and the Priests and Ministers were the eminent party of this Lot and
people. For the people as distinct from the Pastors are called the Clergy,
Lot, or Heritage of God, 1 Pet. 5.3. in which it cannot be proper to the
Ministers. It Is true, that the first Officer made by the Church after that
Christ was glorified, was made by Lot, For the Lot, that is (Cleros) fell upon
Matthias, Acts 1.26. From whence some think the system of Presbyters and
Deacons, were called the Clergy (...), and (...), signify one made and an
Officer by Lot. As for Laity, we find often in the Old Testament, the people as
distinct from the Priests and Levites, called (...), the Laity. The Apostle and
seventy Disciples were distinguished from the rest of the Disciples and
Believers. The Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors and Teachers, were
different orders from the rest of the Church. The twenty four Elders, which
signify the Priests and Levites divided into orders by Lot, were distinct from
the four Beasts, that is the main body of the Church: but these are days of
confusion and disorder. Every one will be a Prophet and a Teacher, either
presuming upon their gifts, yet scorning to engage themselves for the service
of Christ in the poor and much despised Ministry; or pretending blasphemously
to the Spirit, which God never gave them. There is another distinction of
Subjects -- in Nobiles, Plebaeos.


Some are Noble, some of a lower Form and Rank, Nobilis is any Gentleman well
descended: Yet there is a difference inter Nobilem and Generosum: for though
Omnis Generosus sit Nobilis, yet Omnis nobilis non est Generosus, because
Generosus is not only one well born, but also one virtuous. In this respect,
the word of a Gentleman is more than the word of a Nobleman, nay, than the word
of a King: yet Nobility with us is taken more strictly, and is given to none
under a Baron and Peer of the Kingdom, which has right of suffrage in
Parliament, as one of the House of Lords. The ancient Nobility of England is
much diminished and decayed, and many of their Estates alienated; and the late
Barons created by Patent, do much obscure them: and if these as Barons have
their suffrage in the House of Lords by virtue of their Honor, and not their
Virtue and Wisdom, I do not see how the Parliament should be Wittena Gemott;
the Meeting of Wise Men. It were wisdom by some strict Law to limit Jus
Nobilitandi, unto Virtue and Wisdom. For, Honors should be conferred rarely,
and upon merit and worth; for they have great privileges, which should not be
made so common and prostituted to the Lust and Ambition of every one that can
pay for them. The subjects of lower Rank, if Freeholders, have also their
privileges, and one principal, is a power to Elect the Knights of the County
to represent in Parliaments. There be other accidental differences of less
moment, which I pass by.

After these distinctions, follows a division of the whole body of the Subjects
into parts: and this is necessary, especially in respect of the Administration.
For without an orderly division the subjects cannot be well governed. Israel
was divided into Tribes; Tribes into Families; Families into Households;
Households into Persons: Thus they were divided, and according to this order
Achan was discovered, Josh. 7.16, 17, 18. and they had their (...), Heads of
their Tribes; and their (...), Heads of their Hundreds; as Masius upon the
place observes. The Romans were also divided, in Tribus, and Tribus in Curias;
and after these we read of Centurias and Decurias. We read that Alfred divided
England into Counties; Counties into Hundreds; the Hundreds into Allotments. In
some Counties we find Ridings and Wapentakes; yet Sir Henry Spelman under the
word Hundreds, understands by Wapentake an Hundred, which in the Welsh is
called Cantreda, where he adds, that the Counties were divided into Tithings,
Rapes, and Laths: and Hundreds were divided into Tithings and Friberges. Upon
this division made, it is said, that Justice was administered with that ease,
exactness, and severity, that any man's goods might at any time be secure in
any place: Yea, they might hang golden Bracelets in the High-way-side, and in
open view, and none durst meddle with them. To this head belongs the numbering
the people by pole, enrowling their Names and Estates, without which Taxations
cannot be justly imposed. The end of this distribution was to reduce the people
into a certain order, according to which the equal parts were to coordinate
one with another, as Counties with Counties, Hundreds with Hundreds, so that
one had no Jurisdiction over another. The unequal were less or greater, and
were subordinate the less to the greater, which had Jurisdiction over the less,
and all the parts were subject to the whole. This was necessary for Judicial
proceedings, that Actions in Law might proceed according to the subordination
of Courts. For anciently with us Actions did commence in the Courts held by the
Lords of the Manors: if the cause were too high, or could not there be
determined, or Justice had, Appeal was made to the Hundred Court, from thence
to the County Court, from thence to the King's Court. In the word Comitatus,
Sir Henry Spelman observes, this was the ancient Order, and thinks it an abuse
and great disorder, that in our days, every petty Business and Cause is brought
into the King's Court at Westminster. What the Division of this Nation was
under the Romans, is not so well known, except we may conjecture of it by the
ancient Division of the Provinces, and the Cathedral Seas and Diocesses, which
much differ from these of latter times. Cambden finds some divisions of England
in the time of the Romans, yet they are not clear and certain. Under the Saxons
he finds several divisisions, 1. Some according to certain proportions of
Lands. 2. He makes the Heptarchy an argument that it was divided into seven
parts. At length he concludes his political Division with that of Counties,
which he, as Sir Henry Spelman, ascribes to the King Alfred. But I have read,
that it was thus divided before his time, and this is more probable, because
the Myrrour informs us of Counties, and of Counties before there were any Saxon
Kings: Vt subditi
distinguuntur sic distincti dividuntur educantur modo nobiliori, minus nobili.


After the division and distinction of Subjects, follows Education; and in the
very Constitution of a State, some special care must be taken of this. There is
some Education in a Family, Education.
but more perfect in a Community, but the best and most perfect is found in a
well constituted and ordered State, which in laying the very Foundation,
provides for the better Institution of the Subjects. The end hereof is the good
of the people, and preparing for the preservation of the Community, and the
better and more easy administration and Government of the Commonwealth. There
are few, to whom God in the Creation of their immortal Souls, and their mortal
Bodies, has not given some special power, disposition, and propension to
something more than another. The work of Education is to improve those
principles and powers, so as to bring them to a greater perfection. And for
such as have the care of Education, it is an excellent piece of Wisdom, to
discover what the Genius and Disposition even of Children is, and what they
seem to be made for: and so by instruction and example, draw it to the height
and utmost pitch it is capable of. How many excellent sparks are raked up in the
ashes of Sloth and Negligence, or else utterly quenched, or at least made
useless by a diversion of them to other things, to which God did not dispose.
Great is the ignorance, imprudence and negligence of Parents, Masters, and
others in this particular. This Education is either more noble and excellent,
or less and inferior: The more noble is that which improves men's knowledge
either in Humane or Divine Learning. Humane Learning, both in Arts and
Languages is useful for the State, and beneficial to the Church. By reason man
excels a beast, and by learning he excels other men, and by divine Learning he
is made like unto Angels, and to God his Creator. For this end wise and good
men, being of a public spirit, and intending the general good, erect Schools,
Colleges and Universities, and endow them with competent Maintenance, for to
encourage such as shall take the care of them. Of the original and progress of
these Societies, we may read in Hospinian. Yet, much more we may find, then he
has written of them. Schools strictly taken as with us, are only for the
entering of Children, and teaching the Rudiments of some Arts and some
Languages. Colleges and Universities serve for higher improvement, neither are
they limited to some particular Arts or Languages, but according to the Clause
in their Charter, Licentia generalis Studii; They may enlarge to all Learning,
all Languages. Yet, this general Study is usually confined to Philosophy, Law,
Medicine, Theology. The principal design of them should be to breed Gentlemen
for the State, and Ministers for the Church: But, there is not any due care
taken to furnish the Nation with either of these. Some by their constant and
diligent pains do much improve themselves. Such as are idle and negligent lose
the opportunity, their time, and their very School-learning, mispend their days
in vanity, and learn iniquity; and the sons of the Nobility, Gentry, and
Rich-men, are much guilty in this Respect. It Is pity that such noble
Foundations should through our ignorance be so little beneficial: and it is a
great sin, which God will punish, that they are so much abused. These places
for Learning are great blessings of God, if we would make right use of them, we
should find it to be so. But it is a sad thing to consider how both Instruction
is neglected, and Discipline remitted. In this kind of Education the Jesuits
are said to excel, and to single out the best capacities to direct them orderly
in learning both Languages and Arts, till they have made them general
Scholars, teaching them how to make use of their Learning: And their
Discipline is strict, but it is pity, that all this improvement should be made
subservient to a wrong end. There is hardly any intelligent People or State,
that does not provide some, that should be skilful in Religion, and know how to
officiate in Religious Services; and for these they provided a sufficient
Maintenance. These were anciently Priests, and many of them great Scholars,
and such as did instruct others, who should succeed them, and direct the people
in the Worship of a Deity, upon whose favor they conceived, the public Weal
and Happiness did much depend. Yet many of the Heathen Priests had familiarity
with the Devil, and were great Magicians.

There is an inferior kind of Education, yet in reference, and that ad
Rempublicam Conservandam Defendendam Ditandam:
The first is for the preservation of the Commonwealth, without which the
subjects cannot live, or the Commonwealth subsist: Husbandry, and Trade, and
Manufactures tend to this end. And though this may seem to be an institution
proper to Families, yet Familes make a Commonwealth; and the Governors should
take special care of ordering these aright, that so the State may have
sufficient Commodities both of Growth and Manufacture, not only for it self,
but for Exportation to bring in what the Country wants most. Under Husbandry,
we may comprize not only the Tillage and manuring of the Ground, but also the
ordering of Cattle. These were the first professions in the World: for Adam
brought up his Children to this purpose. Abel was a Keeper of Cattle, and Cain
a Tiller of the Ground, Genesis 4.2. And Noah planted a Vineyard: for he began
after the Flood to be an Husbandman, and planted a Vineyard, Genesis 9.20. These
are so generally necessary, that the wise man says, The profit of the earth is
for all, the king himself is saved by the field, Eccles. 5.9. There are certain
manual Trades without which a people cannot well subsist, as Clothing, and all
such works as belong thereunto, which are many. Next, are such as are for
building, as Masons and Carpenters; For a man must have House and Harbor; for
this end also such, as Tubal-Cain, who work in Iron and Brass, are useful, and
are subservient to many other professions. Amongst these some are for curious
Workmanship, as Bezaleel; some professions are not much useful, and rather
hurtful than beneficial for a State; as being subservient only to vanities,
pride, and unlawful pleasures. Therefore the Magistrates should have a special
care to order these, to cast out all idle people, all lazy beggars, and set the
poor on work. None that can work should be idle, but take upon them some honest
profession, and no professions or persons should be suffered, who bring
detriment into the Commonwealth.

some power to defend it self, so a sufficient strength is required in every
political Body for to continue the safety thereof. And this is a Sword, not
only of Justice but of War. This Sword of War especially cannot be well managed
without a sufficient skill, which cannot be had without instruction, exercise
and experience. Hence the Art Military is not only useful but necessary in
every well ordered State. One thing especially requisite in this profession, is
to have good Commanders, men of valor and prudence, able to lead and instruct
others. God himself would have Israel his own people a Warlike Nation.
Therefore, after that he had given them possession of the Land of Canaan, he
left some certain Nations unsubdued, only that the Generations of the Children
of Israel, might know how to teach them War, at least, such as knew nothing
before of it, Judge. 3.1, 2. Those who lived in the times of Joshua were well
experienced, but the Generation following had no experience, neither could they
learn any without some Enemies constantly to exercise them. Therefore, though
Wars be heavy Judgments, yet it is the will of God, there should be warlike
dissentions, and that for many ends: 1. To punish the wickedness of the World.
2. To let men know, how sweet a blessing Peace is. 3. To be a Nursery and
School of breeding gallant men, especially when he by them intends to do some
great work. In consideration of these things, its good that any State in time
of peace, not only choose Captains, train Soldiers, provide Arms: but also send
some into foreign Wars to learn experience. Of this part of Institution, as
also of that of Learning, you may read at large in Contzen. Polit. lib. 4. and
lib. 10. Of the Laws of War Grotius may be consulted. That some Wars are
lawful, especially such as are necessary and undertaken for our defense,
there is no doubt: and not only defensive but offensive arms may be justified
out of the Holy Scriptures, and from the Example of Abraham, Joshua, many of
the Judges, and David, who were excellent Commanders, under whom many gallant
men served: when God intended to ruin Judah, he threatens to take away the
mighty Man, Esaias 3.2. It Is a sad presage, when the Gentry and Nobility of a
Nation become vicious and effeminate: and this was one cause of that heavy
Judgment of God which many of them suffered in the late Wars: Wherein England
gained great skill and experience both by Sea and Land, yet with the woeful
expense of much of her own blood. And how happy had we been, if so much valor
had been manifested in the ruin of the Enemies of Christ and his Gospel.
Whosoever desires to understand more of this Subject, as belonging to
Politics, let him read Military Books. If this be so necessary for the defense
and safety of an earthly State; how much more is the spiritual Militia
necessary for the defense of our Souls?

Spain, and the Jesuits are the only Politicians in this kind: though it be a
Question, whether this profession be not derogatory to Nobility. Yet King
Solomon and Jehosaphat were Adventurers in Corporations, and great Cities,
these Tradesmen and Merchants have their several Companies and their Orders,
and are called by some Systemes, which cannot be well regulated, without some
Laws of the Sovereign power

CHAP. XVI. Of Subjects in an Ecclesiastical Polity.
unto it, if he will be a Member of the same and enjoy the benefit of that
external Government: and by the very institution of Christ, though there be no
solemn Confederation, they are bound so to do. This subjection is different
from that, which is due from the people to their proper Pastors. The power
external of the Keys, as you heard, is, 1. In the whole Church particular,
according to the extent, as the primary subject of the same. 2. In the
Representative exercising this power. 3. In the Officers. The Representative is
either general, to which every particular person must submit, or particular, to
which the particular Members of that Association and Division are bound to
submit, and none else. Submission is due unto the Officers according to their
intensive and extensive power, and no further. The Rule and Measure of this
subjection, are the special or general precepts of Christ and his Apostles, and
if a Church, or its Representatives, or Officers transgress these precepts,
they cannot justly challenge any submission as due unto them. In this respect
its necessary, there should be Canons to regulate both the fundamental, and
also the derivative power, and the same agreeable to the Gospel. The want of
these and the observation thereof may be an occasion, if not a cause of
separation, whereof the Church it self may be guilty, and will prove so to be.
This subjection arises from this, that they are Members of such a Church: for
every single Member is subject to the whole. Here is no exemption of any,
though they should be Bishops, Metropolitans, Patriarchs. The Patriarchs of
Rome may challenge a transcendent power to be above all Laws, and all
Judgments: he will command all; judge all, will be commanded, will be judged by
none. But all this is but an unjust and insolent Usurpation. For Christ's
Institution in those words, Tell the Church, excludes such powers, dethrones
such persons. He that will sit in the Church of God, as God, must needs be the
Son of Perdition. From this subjection arises an Obligation to acknowledge the
just power of the Church to be faithful unto it, and by all means to seek the
good thereof, to obey the Laws, and submit unto the just Judgment of the same.



Subditi enim Ecclesiae distinguuntur distincti -- dividuntur educantur.



1.They are distinguished both from others, and also among themselves; from
others they are differenced; for some are within, some without, some are
Brethren, some are not: This is implied by the Apostle, when he says, If any
man that is called a Brother; and what have I to do to judge them that are
without? Do not ye judge them that are within? 1 Cor. 5.11, 12. Therefore there
are such as are not Brethren, such as are without and cannot be judged by the
Church; these are no Subjects. There are Brethren, such as are within, and may
be judged; these are Subjects. By this distinction, Mahumetans, Pagans,
unbelieving Jews are excluded: For none can be a Member of a Church Christian,
but a Christian, who by Baptism is solemnly admitted to be a Subject of God the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and a Member of the Universal Church: And
whosoever shall be such, may be a Member, and so a Subject of a particular
visible Church. Yet one may be a Member of one particular Church, and not of
another; for as in civil politics none can be a subject of two several States
civil at one time; so in Ecclesiastical Government, no person can be a subject
of two particular Independent Churches at the same time. Therefore, when the
Apostle says, Do not ye judge them within? is to be understood of the Members
of that particular Church of Corinth. For they could not judge them of the
Church of Rome, of Ephesus, of Jerusalem or any other but their own: yet here
is to be observed, that manifest Apostates, though they have been Christians,
cannot be received into a Christian Church; nor such as have been Members of an
Heretical, Superstitious, Idolatrous Church, till they have renounced their
Heresy, Superstition, Idolatry. Neither must any subject himself to any such
Church, nor continue in it, if formerly he has been a Member; for all sinful
Communion is unlawful. Yet, wherein there is no such thing, and God in his
Providence casts him upon another Church, he may subject and also continue. As
in a civil State there are sojourners and strangers, and also plenary subjects,
so there may be in a particular Church. For all such as are Members and
Subjects of one Church, and yet either sojourn or inhabit in another for less
or longer time, they are not Subjects till they be incorporate, yet they are
Subjects of the Catholic Church in any part of the World. And upon Letters
Testimonial, or any other sufficient Information, they may be admitted to
Communion in Word, Prayer, and Sacraments: for these are privileges of the
Universal Church, and common to all Christians of Age, as Christians. But these
does not render them Members of that particular Church, for Discipline without
Submission and Admission. Only, if they do offend against the just Canons of
that Church where they are Strangers: The Rule of delictum in alieno
territorio, etc. holds good, and they may be censured, where the Offense is
committed, and where the Scandal is committed. Of plenary subjects, some are
such by Birth, some by Election. Those by Birth are like the native Jew; those
by Election are like the Proselite. Yet this is to be observed, that as one who
was an Heathen, might be made both a Proselite and a Member of that Church of
Israel at the same time, and the same Act, so one that was of no Church, as
being no Christian, may be made a Christian, and a Member of a particular
Church visible at once. Therefore we must distinguish of such as are
incorporated into a Church; for as Ephesians. 2.11, 12. There were such who were
Gentiles, and so none of God's people, and aliens from the Commonwealth of
Israel, and strangers to the Covenants of Promise, who afterward, ver. 19.
were no more Strangers and Forraigners, but fellow Citizens with the Saints,
and of the Household of God, and so of no people made a people, and more, of no
Christians made Christians. There be others who formerly were Christians, and
that which is more, Subjects of some one particular Church, which are made
Subjects of another. This is so to be understood, as that to be a Christian, or
a Member of a particular Church is not merely from Birth, but from birth of
Christian Parents, who are Members of the Church Universal, and sometimes, nay
often of a particular Church under a form of Government. Neither does this
Birth without Divine Ordination incorporate us into the one or other. What
makes a Churchmember.
For to be a Christian is not from Nature, but from God's gracious Ordination;
which requires that even those who are born in the Bosom of the Church, and
baptized too, should, when they come to Age be instructed in the Covenant, and
also own their Baptism by profession of their Faith, and promise for to keep
the Covenant. The neglect of this is the cause why many Congregations have such
unworthy Members: Yet it is not necessary by any Divine Precept that all should
be excluded, whom we do not certainly know to be real Saints. And here I will
take occasion to debate of two things much controverted in these times: 1. Of
the qualification of a Member of the Church. 2. Of separation from a Church.

Who a Visible Saint.
But the Question is, what a visible Saint is? By visible, the Congregational
party, in particular Mr. Hooker of New England understands, one that shall
appear to such, as should admit him to be a Saint. This Saintship is, as he
informs us, in knowledge and practice; and he grants a latitude in both. This
visibility is that, whereby they appear to us to be Saints in respect of their
knowledge and practice. And thus they appear and may be represented to us,
either immediately by examination of their knowledge, and knowledge of their
practice, either from our own sight, or their expressions mediately by the
testimony of others who are judged by us to be credible. By this, the grossly
ignorant, and such as trade and constantly live in sin, and are obstinate and
refuse to be reformed, are excluded. To these must be added, such as are grossly
erroneous, and blasphemers, and such as deny plain and saving truth with diverse
others. For all these may have sufficient knowledge, and for their lives may be
blameless, and for their outward carriage eminently just, honest, holy. But
that which makes the Question difficult is, the difference between such as
never were born in the Church, nor baptized, nor admitted for Christians and
those who have been either born in the Church, baptized, lived, and continued
Christians by profession, or such as upon their profession and promise, when
they were at age were baptized and admitted. Shall their Birth give them right
to Baptism, and their Baptism right to Membership, and the gross ignorance of
them born in the Church and baptized make them no Members, or deprive them of
their native and baptismal Right? Or shall it not? But suppose they have some
knowledge of Christ, and the principles of Christianity, and yet be Idolaters,
Covetous, Drunkards, Railers, Incestuous Persons: for one that is called a
Brother, and a real Member of a particular Church may be such, as is evident,
from 1 Cor. 5.11, 12. Besides, such a Brother may deny to hear the Church, as
is implied, Mat. 18.17. Yet these may own their Baptism, profess their Faith in
Christ, and utterly renounce all other Religions. The Question therefore is,
Whether these and such like are not Members of a Church Christian? If they be
not, how can the Church censure, judge them, and cast them out? Yet such owning
their Baptism, and the Faith whereinto they were baptized may be censured, and
if they will not hear the Church, may be cast out. These are neither Pagans,
nor Mahumetans, nor unbelieving Jews, they will abhor them, God will judge them
as Christians, as being baptized, as having heard the Gospel, as owning Christ,
and professing their hope to be saved by him; though he will say unto them,
Depart from me ye workers of iniquity. These, if cast forth, do not cease to be
Brethren, till they renounce Christianity. These associate with Christians,
frequent Christian Assemblies for Divine Worship, and usually are under the
Ministry, and if there be any External Government, by their very Baptism owned
are Subjects to the Power of the Keys. Many as bad as these and some worse were
in the Church of the Jews, and yet not Loammi, but reckoned amongst the people
of God, till God took away both his Word and Spirit from them. The Nicolaitans
and the Disciples of Jezabel were as bad as these, yet they were Members of the
Churches where they lived: how else could they be cast out, as Christ commands.
The Valentinians, and many of the Gnostics were worse than these, and yet many
of them were in and of some Christian Church visible. These must be either
without or within, except we can find a third place for them, as they of the
Church of Rome have invented Purgatory for such as were not good enough for
Heaven, or bad enough for Hell. They, as I conceive, do far better, who enclose
them within the pale of the visible Church, and seek to reform them, then they
who place them in the outward Court, and leave them amongst the Gentiles. It
were but reasonable, that they who are so pure and strict in their new invented
way, would declare in proper terms their minimum quod sic, and make the same
evident out of the Scriptures. But this they have not done; they seem to us,
whatsoever they are amongst themselves, to be Scepticks.

active, is that which is voluntary: and as the former, so this may be just or
unjust, and may admit of several degrees, according as the Union and Communion
is. For some separation may be total, some partial, and of partial, some may be
greater, some less. The reason why I take occasion to speak of this subject is,
because these are times of separation: and it were good to know, what may be
justly done, what not, either in seperating others by non-admission, or
ejection, or in separating our selves. And this is a certain rule, that all
Union and Communion instituted, commanded, or approved of God, ought to be
observed: and whosoever shall violate this must needs be guilty, there can be
no just or sufficient cause to do so. The Church of England was formerly a true
Protestant and Reformed Church, and had the same public Doctrine, the same
Form of public Worship, the same public Discipline. Yet, because the first
Reformation was judged imperfect, and many Abuses and Corruptions entered in
afterward, which did alter it for the worst, therefore a further and a new
Reformation was thought to be at least expedient, if not necessary. That the
first Reformation in respect of Discipline was imperfect is evident, first from
the book of Common Prayer in the Rubric of the Communion, which plainly
implies, that the ancient Discipline was not, and it seems could not, at that
time be restored, and till the restoring of it the Commination must be used.
Yet it was never restored, neither did any seem to seek it. Again, the
imperfection thereof appears by that Book made by the Commissioners in the
latter end of the Reign of Edward the Sixth, which is called Reformatio legum
Ecclesiasticarum. Yet, that though imperfect, was never established, nor by the
Bishops put in practice. The latter Abuses, Innovasions, Superstitions brought
in by the Bishops, and as some say, at the King's command, and that without Law
and Authority of Parliament, were confessed by many, and exclaimed against
generally: and diverse charged the Bishops as guilty of Usurpation: And how
could they be less, when they imposed the reading of the Book of Sports and
Recreations on the Lord's Day, and punished diverse Ministers refusing to read
it; and, which was not tolerable, the Rule of their Proceedings in the Exercise
of their Power were Canons never allowed by Parliament, besides the business of
Altars, and bowing toward them, which had no color of Law. Many began to set
up Images in their Churches, and innovate in Doctrine. In consideration of all
these things, a Reformation, if it might be had, was thought necessary, not
only for the perfection of the first, but also for to cut off the late
introduced Corruptions, and prevent the like for the future. An opportunity
seemed to be put into the hands of a Parliament with an Assembly of Divines for
Advice to do this. A Reformation they promise, begin to act in the way, and the
expectation was great. But, instead of perfecting the former Reformation, they
cause a new Confession of Faith, and new Catechisms to be made, instead of the
former Litany and Set-form of Worship, a new Directory is composed and allowed;
for Discipline the Episcopal Power is abolished, and the former Government
dissolved, the Presbyterian way, and that very near to that of Scotland, is
agreed upon. So, that whatsoever was formerly determined by Law, is null and
void. In the end, all that was done in Doctrine, Worship, and Discipline, in a
time of War, without, and against the mind of the King, did vanish, was
rejected by many, and received by few, and such an Indulgence under pretense of
favoring tender Consciences, was granted, that every one seemed to be left at
liberty. Hence sprang so many Separations and Divisions, that England, since
she became Christian, never saw the like. There were Divisions in Doctrine so
many as could not be numbered, and men were in their judgments not only
different, but contrary. And the former Errors pretended to be great, were few
in number, far less noxious in quality to these latter, which were very many,
and some of them blasphemous and abominable. All the old damned Heresies seemed
to be revived and raked out of Hell, and the more vain and blasphemous the
Opinion was, it was by some the more admired. For Worship instead of some
Ceremonies or Superstitions, at the worst all kind of Abominations brake out of
the bottomless Pit. Some professed high Seize and Dispensations to the
contempt of Sabbaths, Sacraments, and Scripture it self. Some turned Ranters,
as though the old abominable Gnostics had been conjured up from Hell. Some
become Seekers, till they lost all Religion. Some were Quakers, and most rude,
uncivil, inhumane Wretches, deadly Enemies of the Ministry, and most violent
Opposers of the Truth; and some no ways ill affected, but otherwise well
disposed people seemed to be suddenly bewitched, as the Galatians were, and
could give no Reason nor Scripture for the Separation and Alterations. To be
Anabaptists seemed to be no Offense in comparison of the former. For
Discipline, some adhered to the Prelatical Form, and refused Communion with the
Presbyterian Party, who, with the Scottish Kirk, thought their way to be the
pattern in the Mount. The Congregational was of another mind, and stood at as
far a distance from them on one hand, as the rigid Prelatical Party did on
another. Yet in all this God preserved an Orthodox Party, who retained the
substance of the Protestant Religion with moderation, and these are they whom
God will bless and make victorious in the end. For, all these came to pass and
were ordered by Divine Providence, to discover the Frailty of all, the
Wickedness of some, the Hypocrisy of others, to mainifest the Approved, to
confirm the Sincere, and let men know what a blessing Order and Government in
Church and State must needs be. Here are many Separations, some passive, but
many active. As for the Quakers, Seekers, Above-Ordinance-Men, Ranters, their
Separation under pretense of greater Purity, is abominable: The
Antipedobaptists and the Catabaptists cannot justify themselves: and in the end
it will appear. The Dissenting Brethren, and Congregational Party, after they
began to gather Churches, with the rigid Prelatists and Presbyterians, cannot
be excused. They, who actually concurred to procure a Liberty and Indulgence,
especially the Zealots in that work, who had a design to promote their own way,
have much to answer for, and their account will be heavy. And surely they are
no ways innocent, who took away the former Laws and Government before they had
a better, and in their own power, effectually to establish them. And, whosoever
departed from the former legal Doctrine, Worship, and Discipline in any thing,
wherein it was agreeable to the Word of God, must needs be worthy of blame; as
also those who took an ill course to introduce that which was better. They, who
will not Communicate with others, or refuse to admit unto Communion with
themselves in all parts of Worship, such as are Orthodox and not changeable
with Scandal, are Offenders, and cannot be free from Schism in some degree. The
Usurpations of the Bishops, and the Innovations made by them and their Party,
together with their Negligence and Remisness in the more material parts of
Discipline, gave no little cause of Divisions and Separations. To be hasty,
high, rigid in Reformation, is a cause of many and great Mischiefs. This Church
of England, upon the first Reformation within a few Years brought forth to God,
even under that imperfect Reformation many precious Saints and glorious
Martyrs. And after the Persecution, how did she multiply, and yield as many
able and godly Ministers and gracious Servants of God, as any Church in the
World of that compass. And all those good Children were begotten, nursed, and
increased, whilst under one supreme independent national Judicatory. And though
the first Reformation was imperfect, and the Church in some things corrupted,
and many Members of the same without sufficient cause persecuted by some of the
ungodly and unworthy Bishops: yet, for any of the Subjects and Members to
separate from her without some weighty cause, must needs be a sin. A
Reformation might have been made without pulling down the whole Frame, and
opening a way to the ensuing Divisions. Imperfection is no sufficient cause to
separate from that Church, wherein any person receives his Christian being, or
continuance, or growth of that being; neither is every kind of Corruption. No
Church but has some defects, but has some corruptions, and no man should
depart from any Christian Society, further than that Society is departed from
God. To depart and divide upon conceits of greater purity and perfection, or
out of a spirit of Innovation, or in any thing which is approved of God, and
not contrary to his Word, cannot be lawful. Let every one therefore reflect
upon the former Divisions, and consider the present distractions, and examine
himself how far he either is, or has been guilty, and confess his sin to God,
desiring pardon, and for time to come endeavor peace, and supply the defects
of understanding, which in some things is the cause of difference in judgment
with the greater measure of Charity. For, though we had less knowledge then we
have, and yet more charity, the breaches of the Church might easily be made up.
Thus far I have digressed, and enlarged upon this Subject, out of a desire to
persuade every Member of a particular Church to submit unto the lawful Power
thereof, and continue united in the same Body, till God shall give a Command
and Commission to come out or separate.

Parker, and so many of the Congregational Way, do think was not good and
allowable. His, and their Exceptions I will not here mention, but will with
them confess, 1. That as they be born in such a Parish, or forced by the
Magistrate, they could not be Members of the Church. 2. That Baptism, without
instruction of such as are capable, is not sufficient. 3. That it is fit that
every one when they are instructed, so as to understand the substance of the
Covenant, should publicly in their own persons profess their Faith, and make
their Vow. 4. That when this is done, some care should be taken of their lives,
that it may be known, whether they walk according to their Profession and their
Promise. Yet this may be said, that by good Ministers something to this purpose
was done, though by others it was neglected. And the Church even from the first
Reformation required and intended this in the strict command of Catechizing,
and in Confirmation. For though Confirmation was no Sacrament, nor proper to a
Diocesan Bishop, by Divine Institution, yet the end was good, and the effect
might have been happy, if it had been duly observed. For, it would have so
qualified the Members of the Church, that we should not have had so many
ignorant, so many scandalous in every Parochial Precinct. But it was either
neglected or abused. But because to be a right qualified Member of a visible
Church is not sufficient, let every one remember, that it is his duty to be a
Citizen and Subject of Heaven, and to live accordingly. For, as the Apostle
says, Phil. 3.20. Our conversation is in heaven; so we turn it, though there
may be more in the Original. For, (...), may be turned, Jus municipum, aut
civium, aut municipatus; as Hierome, Tertullian, and Sidonius understands it,
with Beza a Lapide, Musculus, Heinsius. The sense is, that we are Burgesses,
Denisons, and Subjects of Heaven, and incorporated into an Heavenly Polity:
therefore let our life be holy and heavenly, and let us converse most and
chiefly with God, and remember that we are but Pilgrims and Strangers upon
Earth, and by the observation of the Laws of this heavenly Kingdom, we tend to
our abiding Mansions above. And if our lives and carriage be such, though men
may persecute us, cast us out, separate from us, refuse to admit us, yet we
know our God approves us, we have fellowship with him, and with Jesus Christ
his Son, whilst we walk in the Light, as he is Light, and in the end we shall
be happy, and our Joy will be full.

As the Subjects must be divided and subordinated in a Civil State, so must
they be in a Church. The people of Israel were three times numbered and divided:
the first numbering was by tens, hundreds, and thousands, that Moses might make
Officers and Judges for the civil Government, Exodus 18. The second which was
most exact and purely Ecclesiastical, as you may read in the four first
Chapters of the Book of Numbers, which was so entitled by the Septuagint,
because of this Numeration and Division of the People. They were also numbered
the third time, Numb. 26. The end of the second numbering was, that they might,
according to an excellent order, encamp about the Tabernacle, and also march in
order before and after it. The first division upon the numeration was of the
Body of Israel into two parts: 1. That of the Levites, which was subdivided
into four parts: The second of the other twelve Tribes in one body first
separated from the Levites, and this was subdivided into four Squadrons, and in
every Squadron three Tribes, which acccording to their Ensigns quartered at a
distance, East, West, North, South of the Tabernacle, the Levites being within
them. The Description of the Universal Church, Revel. 4. as learned Men have
observed, alludes to this order. And both these Scriptures teach us, that
without numeration, division, and subordination, there can be no order in the
Worship of God, or the Government of the Church. And the first thing done upon
this division, according to God's command, was the removing of the Lepers and
Unclean out of the Camp, which was the more orderly and easily done upon the
former division, and does teach what must be in the constitution of a Church,
and exercise of Discipline.

Asia the less, now called Natolia. As for the divisions made afterward in the
Roman Empire, I shall say something anon. The Church of England, if we may
believe Mr. Brerewood, was anciently divided into three Provinces, according to
the three Provincial Cities, York, London, Cacruske in Monmouth-shire; though
after that we find Valentia and Flavia Caesariensis added to make five: of
which divisions we find something in Cambden. Yet afterward we find another
division of the whole Island into two Provinces, York and Canterbury. These
were divided into several Diocesses, the Diocesses into Archdeaconries, the
Archdeaconries into so many Rural Deanries, the Rural Deanries into Parishes.
This was an orderly way and did facilitate Government much. The Church of
Scotland was divided into Provinces and Shires, and upon the Reformation, as
some tell us, these Shires into Classical Presbyteries: but afterward reduced
in our times under a certain number of Bishops. Yet Archbishop Spoteswood
inform us out of their public Records, that from the first Reformation they
had Superintendents. In the Reformation intended in England, when Episcopacy
was taken out of the way, and the Presbytery introduced, they divided the
Church according to the Counties, the Counties into Classes, the Classes into
Congregations. The Subordination was of Congregations to a Classis, of the
Classis to a Provincial Synod of a County; of these Provincial Synods to a
general Assembly.

Roman Empire, we may read in several Histories both Civil and Ecclesiastical,
and in the Acts and Canons of several Councils. And from this division
Hierarchy, which is Ancient derives its Original. To understand this you must
know, that Hierarchy presupposes Episcopacy: For before there were Bishops
there could be no Subordination of Inferior or Superior Bishops. What these
Bishops were, and how they did first arise, and what their power was, the
Scripture says nothing, much less gives any Divine precept special for the
Institution of them, or the manner of their Consecration. That of Timothy,
Titus, and the Angels of the Churches, will not evince any such thing, as has
been said before. That there were Bishops anciently and betimes in the
Christian Church within the Roman Empire cannot be doubted, if humane story be
of any force. After these Bishops (whom the general rule of decency and order,
together with the light of reason might manifest to be convenient) were
multiplied according to the number of the Cities, wherein Christian Churches
were planted, set up in these Cities, and these Cities Subordinated unto others
in the same Province, these Bishops began to be Subordinate to the
Archbishops. For, as a Bishop is one above a multitude of Presbyters, so, an
Archbishop is one above a multitude of Bishops. The Bishop of the chief City
and Metropolis in a Province was called a Metropolitan. The Bishop of the chief
City of a Diocese of the Roman Empire was called a Primate, or Patriarch. By
Diocese, you must not understand an Episopal Diocese, but a far greater
compass. For the Roman Empire was first divided into Diocesses, the principal
whereof were three: one in Asia, another in Africa, as now we understand it,
another in Europe. These greater circuits were divided into Provinces, as: we
read the Empire of Persia was parted into an hundrd twenty seven Provinces in
the Reign of Abasuerus. And some tell us, that the Provinces of the Roman
Empire were at first an 120. The chief City of the Asian Diocese was Antioch,
of the Egyptian and African, Alexandria, of the European, Rome. According to
these three Cities, where the great Officers of the Empire kept their
Residence, were set up three Patriarchs; one of Rome, one of Alexandria, one of
Antioch, and all the City Bishops and Provincial Metropolitans were under
these, if they were within that division, as there were several Provinces out
of these Diocesses; as that of Carthage in Africa, of York in Britain, Justiana
Prima in Dacia. To the three Patriarchates in after-time were added other two;
as that of Constantinople, Division Subordination of that Church when.
or New Rome, and that of Jerusalem. The first division and subordination of
the Church was made about the time of the second Century, and followed the
division of the Empire that then was, and as then divided. Yet it did not reach
the whole Empire, though there might be Christians in all the parts thereof,
and many more far beyond the bounds thereof. That there was such an
Hierarchical Order before the great Council of Nice, is evident from diverse
Canons of the same, and continued after, as appears by the Council of
Chalcedon, and Constantinople, and others. What the limits and bounds of the
first three Patriarchates were, we may read in some Authors. But you must know,
that this division of the Empire was several times altered by diverse of the
Emperors, even by Constantine himself, so that the Ecclesiastical Division and
Model could not be always exactly conformable unto it. Of this model
Spalatensis says but little, Mr. Brerewood a little more, Dr. Reynolds is very
brief, Dr. Usher is a little more large in his Lydian or Proconsular Asia. Yet
far more might be discovered of these particulars, both out of Humane and also
Ecclesiastical Histories.

jure divino above Presbyters; yet as Spalatensis affirms, they by divine Law
are equal amongst themselves. For, if they succeed the Apostles, though some
grant primatum ordinis, yet there is no Primacy of Jurisdiction of one above
another. For Peter's Supremacy, asserted by the Romans, can have no sufficient
ground in Scripture. Ignatius in his Palma Christiana, does maintain the title
of Archbishop, and goes about, though very weakly, to prove even out of the
Scriptures, that Primates are jure divino, yet he seems to understand by
Primacy, that only of order; but he is hardly worth the taking notice of. 2.
That yet before the Nicene Council, there was an Hierarchy of the Church in
some parts of the Roman Empire: for there were Bishops, Metropolitans,
Patriarchs. 3. This Hierarchy was a conforming of the Church in division and
subordination to the Civil State of the Empire. For, as the State was divided
first into greater parts, called Diocesses; and the Diocesses into Provinces,
and the Provinces into Cities, and their Territories; so the Church was
divided. As the Cities and their Officers were subordinate to the Provincial
Officer, who did reside in the Metropolis of the Province, and the Officers
provincial were under the power of the chief Officer, who kept his residence in
the chief City of the Diocese; so the City Bishops were subject to the
Metropolitan of the Province, and the Metropolitans of the Provinces to the
Patriarch, residing in his Patriarchal City. Subordination of Bishops
prudential.
4. Though this was a prudential Order, and good for Administration, yet it was
but humane in the State, and also humane in the Church. For in neither was it
of divine Institution. For, if it had been such, they could not justly have
altered it, as they did afterward in several places. 5. That therefore the
Episcopal Hierarchy, though ancient and of long continuance, Episcopal
Hierarchy not of Divine Authority.
yet is not of divine Authority; neither do we find any divine Ordination for
it. 6. Therefore, the Argument from Episcopacy to Hierarchy, is gross. For a
Bishop was before a Metropolitan or Patriarch: and though some kind of Bishop
should be of divine Institution, yet an Hierarchical Bishop may be, and is an
humane invention. 7. It was not thought good to erect one supreme independent
Judicatory Ecclesiastical in the whole Roman Empire. For they made three
Patriarchs independent one upon another; and if they had all been put in one,
yet many parts of that Empire, and of the Church within it had been without
those bounds. 8. Whether the Patriarchs at first had Jurisdiction over the
Metropolitans, Bishops over Presbyters uncertain.
and the Metropolitans over the Bishops, and they over the Presbyters, is very
uncertain. And, if they had no Jurisdiction according to this subordination,
there could lie no Appeal from the Bishop to the Metropolitan, nor from the
Metropolitan to the Patriarch. It Is likely that the power was in Synods, and
men might Appeal from an inferior to a provincial Synod, and from the
Provincial to the Patriarchal, which was the highest Court, except the
Christian Emperors call a General Council. And, that was said to be a General
Council, which extended beyond the bounds of one Patriarchate, especially if it
included all. 9. After these Patriarchates began to be such eminent places,
many ambitiously sought them, and there was great contention amongst
themselves, who should be greatest and have the precedence. Neither could
General Councils by their determinations prevent them for time to come. 10. The
Patriarch of Rome, though but at the first one of the three, and afterward of
the five, and according to some, of the seven, if you take in Justiniana Prima
with Carthage, did challenge the precedence and preeminency of them all. And
though the Council of Chalcedon gave the Constantinopolitan See equal
privileges with his, yet he would not stand to their determination, but
afterward challenged greater power then was due, began to receive Appeals from
Transmarine parts beyond the bounds of his Diocese, and to color his
Usurpation, alleged a Canon of the Nicene Council, which was not found in the
Greek Original. He will be President in all General Councils; no Canons must be
valid without his Approbation. His Ambition aspires higher, when the title of
Universal Bishop had been denied the Patriarch of Constantinople by Gregory the
Great, Boniface his Successor assumes it. And by degrees, they who follow him,
usurp the Power, and at length the civil Supremacy is arrogated, and the Roman
Pontiffe must dispose of Kingdoms and Empires, and will depose and advance whom
he pleases. The Pope the Man of Sin, etc.
And is not he the Man of Sin, and the Son of Perdition, who opposes and
exalts himself above all that is called God, or that is worshipped, so that
he as God sits in the temple of God, showing himself that he is God? 2 These.
2.3, 4. From all which words, he that goes under the name of M. Camillas,
defines Antichrist in this manner: Antichristus est Pontifex maximus, Elatione,
vicariatu, assimulatione Christo oppositus, lib. 1. c. 3. de Antichristo. As
the Roman State subdued and subjected unto themselves the former Empires and
Monarchies of the World, and this in themselves, after that became Vassals and
Servants unto one Absolute Imperial Monarch, and by him Rome-Heathen reigned
over the Kings of the Earth, Revel. 17.18. So in tract of time, Rome-Christian
usurped Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical over all Churches, and her Patriarch
swallowing up all the power of the former Patriarchs, became Universal Monarch
and Visible Head of the Universal Church. The occasions, true causes of this
Usurpation, and the means whereby he by degrees aspired to this transcendent
power are well enough known. Some will tell us, that Episcopacy, or rather
Prelacy was the occasion at least of the Hierarchy, Prelacy the occasion of
Hierarchy, and that of Papacy.
and the Hierarchy of the Papacy. For, if there had not been a Bishop invested
with power in himself, and a provincial Jurisdiction given to one Metropolitan,
and many Metropolitans subjected to one Patriarch, the Bishop of Rome could
have had no advantage nor color for his Usurpation. This makes many prudent
men jealous of Episcopacy, especially as many understand a Bishop to be one
invested with the power of Ordination and Jurisdiction, and that by divine Law
without the Presbytery. Division and Subordination, which are essential to
Government, could be no proper cause of the Papal Supremacy. But, the trusting
of power Ecclesiastical in one man, extending and enlarging the bounds of one
particular Church and independent Judicatory too far, and subordinating the
People and Presbyters to the Monarchical Jurisdiction of one Bishop, the
several Bishops to one Metropolitan, the several Metropolitans to one
Patriarch, and several Patriarchs to one Roman Pontiffe, did much promote, and
effectually conduce to the advancement of one man to the Universal Vicarage. At
the first institution of the Hierarchy, neither the people nor Presbytery were
excluded; the Patriarchates were of a reasonable extent, the Patriarchs
independent one upon another, and the end intended was Unity, and the
prevention of Schism; and the subordination seemed to be made out of mature
deliberation. Yet humane Wisdom, though never so profound, if it swerve from
the Rules of divine Institution, proves Folly in the end. Let not all this
discourage any Ecclesiastical Community, or dissuade them from division,
co-ordination, subordination, if so be they keep the power in themselves as in
the primary Subject, and reserve it to the whole, and not communicate it to a
part, and keep themselves within a reasonable compass. From all this we may
conclude, that a Secession from Rome, and the rejection of his Ecclesiastical
Supremacy, if so be we retain the true Doctrine and pure Worship of God, is no
Schism, especially in England. For 1. there were many Provinces out of the
great Patriarchate, and no ways subject to any of them, but they had their own
proper Primates and Superindendents. Amonst these England was one, and by the
Canon of Nice had her own Jurisdiction, and was under no Patriarch, but a
Primate of her own. England under no foreign Primate.
2. The Bishop of Rome was at first confined to that City, and after he was
made Patriarch, he had but the ten Suburbicarian Provinces, and the rest of the
Provinces of Italy had Milan for their Metropolis. 3. That after the Conversion
of the Saxons, that that Bishop should exercise any power in England, was a
mere Usurpation. And to cast off an usurped power, and the same Tyrannical,
could be no Schism at all. There is a Book printed at Oxford, in the year 1641,
wherein we find several parcels of several Authors bound up in one: The first
Author is Dr. Andrews, the second Bucer, the third Dr. Reynolds, the fourth
Bishop Usher, the fifth Mr. Brerewood, the sixth Mr. Dury, the seventh Mr.
Francis Mason. The design of the whole is to maintain Episcopacy, and in part
to prove the Hierarchy. 1. Some of the formentioned Authors do grant with
Hierome, that the Church was first governed by the common advice of Presbyters,
though this position in strict sense is not true, as has been formerly proved.
What a Bishop was at first.
2. Some grant, that at the first Institution of Bishops, a Bishop was nothing
else but a President or Moderator in Presbyterial Meetings. 3. That afterward
these were constant and standing, with a power of Suderintendency, not only
over the people, but the Presbyters within a City and the Territory thereof. 4.
That when a Church was extended to a Province, in the Metropolis thereof, they
placed a chief Bishop, called a Metropolitan, who had the precedence of all the
other City Bishops. 5. That these Bishops could do no common act, binding the
whole circuit without the Presbytery. 6. That there were such Bishops and
Metropolitans in the Apostles times; thus Dr. Usher does affirm, and he quotes
Ignatius to this purpose. 7. That there was an imparity both in the State and
Church of Israel under the Old Testament, and so likewise of the Ministers in
the Church of the New Testament. Thus Dr. Andrews. 8. That most Reformed
Churches have Bishops, or Superintendents, and something answerable to Bishops.
The design of all this seems to be this, to prove that Episcopacy and Hierarchy
are Apostolical and Universal. Yet none of these produce any clear divine
Testimony for this, No Divine Testimony for Bishops.
much less any divine Precept to make this Regiment to be of perpetual and
universal Obligation. Neither does any of them all tell us distinctly what the
power of Bishops, of Metropolitans, of Patriarchs was: nor whether they
exercised their power as Officers, or Representatives, or by an immediate Jus
divinum derived from Christ unto them. All that can be made clear is, that some
kind of Bishops may be lawful, and have been ancient, and of good use, Bishops
of good use, not of necessity.
though of no necessity. As for the Hierarchy, it is merely Humane, and being at
first intended for Unity, was in the end the cause of the most bloody Schisms
that ever were in the Church; and an occasion of intolerable Ambition,
Emulation and Contention.

provide for both, yet for the one far more than the other. For, what will it
avail us to be temporally rich, and spiritually poor: to gain the World and
lose our Souls? This therefore is a special work of the Church to educate her
Children, and nurse them up for Heaven: and the Magistrate Christian is bound
to further her in this work. Adam, though Lord of the whole Earth, and one who
might give his Chrildren far greater Estates in Land than any man ever could,
yet brought them up not in idleness, but honest labor. But his principal care
was to teach them how to serve their God, and when they were at age, to bring
their Offerings before him. God says of Abraham, I know him, that he will
command his children and his household after him, and they shall keep the way of
the Lord to do justice and judgment: that the Lord may bring upon Abraham, that
which he has spoken of him, Genesis 18.19. Joshua says, As for me and mine house
we will serve the Lord, Josh. 24.15. It was the command of God, that Israel
should diligently teach their Childrin the words of God, and talk of them when
they sit in their houses, and when they went abroad, and at their lying down
and rising up, Deuteronomy. 6.7. How often does Solomon exhort to this duty, and
earnestly persuade all, especially Children, to hearken unto, understand,
remember, and constantly follow the Instruction of their Parents and their
Teachers? This was the care of Moses, of Joshua, the Judges and good Kings of
Judah. For this end the Priests, Levites, and Scribes were ordained of God, and
the Schools of the Prophets were erected for this work. This was one prime work
of the Levite, A special Work of the Levite.
to teach Jacob God's Judgments, and Israel his Laws, Deuteronomy. 33.10. This same
commandment of spiritual Education is repeated in the New Testament. Parents
must bring up their Children in the nurture and admonition of the Lord. This
was the great work of Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors and Teachers.
For, they must not only pray, but teach, and labor, not only for conversion,
but the edification of the Churches children. Every Christian should help and
further one another in this work. As Parents in their Families should have
knowledge, and be able to instruct their Children, so all Schools should have a
care to inctruct the Scholars, not only in Languages and humane Learning, but
also in the saving Doctrine of Salvation. This was the reason, why by the
Canons of the Church they were bound to Catechize the Children committed to
their charge. The Universities and Colleges were bound to this likewise, and
were Seminaries, not only for Lawyers, Philosophers and Physicians, but
especially for Divines, who, though they improved their knowledge in Arts and
Languages, yet it was in subordination to their diviner and more excellent
Profession. To this Head belongs correction, good example, and prayer. For the
principal Teacher is the Spirit, who must write God's truth in the heart, and
make all means of Education effectual. The public and principal Officers,
trusted by Christ with this work, are the Ministers of the Gospel: whose work
is not merely and only to preach and expound, but to catechize. In these works
we are either very negligent or imprudent. For, we should plant and water, and
pray to God for the increase: we should lay the foundation and build thereon;
yet some will do neither, some will preposterously water before they plant, and
build before they lay the foundation, and so do Christ little service, and the
Church little good. Some ^ake upon them the Charge, and are insufficient. Men
may teach by word or writing: By word first, the principle should be
methodically according to the ancient Creeds and Confessions be taught: this is
the foundation. Without this Sermons, Expositions, reading of Scriptures, and
Books of Piety will not be so profitable, and edifying as they might be. People
should be taught to believe the saving and necessary truths of the Gospel, obey
his commands, pray for all blessings and mercies, and especially for the
Spirit, that their faith may be effectual, their obedience sincere, and also to
receive the Sacrament aright, and make right use of their Baptism. Expositions
should be plain and clear, that the people may not only hear, but understand,
and be moved by the truth understood. Sermons should be so ordered, as that the
Texts proposed, and the Doctrines and divine Axioms thereof may be cleared,
understood according to the drift and scope of the Spirit. And the application
should be pertinent, to inform the understanding with the truth, and remove
errors, and when that is done, to work effectually upon the heart, and make it
sensible of sin past, and pertinent by the precepts, the comminations and the
promises, to comfort and raise up the soul dejected, and this especially by the
promises of the Gospel, and upon motives to exhort to duty, and upon reasons
restrain from sin. This Ordinance and means of divine institution is much
abused many ways, by instilling of erroneous and novel opinions, with which the
people are much taken, if delivered with good language by impertinencies,
digressions, quaint terms and formalities. But of these things I have spoken in
my Divine Politics. This institution is so necessary, that without it the
Church cannot subsist, nor the Government thereof be effectual.

whereof is not the Pope, or Prince, or Prelate, or Presbyter, or People, as
distinct from Presbyters, but the whole particular Church, which has it in the
manner of a free State. Here something is said of the extent of the Church.
After all this comes in pars subdita, both Civil and Ecclesiastical, where I
speak of the nature of subjection, and of the distinction, division and
education of the Subjects, both of the State and Church. All this is done with
some special reference both to the State and Church of England, desiring Peace
and Reformation. If any require a reason, why I do not handle Ecclesiastical
Government and Civil distinctly by themselves without this mixture, the reasons
are especially two: 1. That it might be known, that the general Rules of
Government are the same both in Church and State: for both have the same common
principles, which by the light of Reason, Observation and Experience, may be
easily known, but especially by the Scriptures, from which an intelligent
Reader may easily collect them. Therefore, it is in vain to write of
Church Government, without the knowledge of the Rules of Government in general,
and the same orderly digested. The ignorance of these is the cause why so many
write at random of Discipline, and neither satisfy others, nor bring the
Controversies concerning the same unto an issue. 2. By this joint handling of
them, the difference between Church and State, Civil and Ecclesiastical
Government; the power of the Sword and Keys is, more clearly, as being laid
together, apparent: For this is the nature of Dissentanies, Quod juxta posita
clarius elucescunt. This is against Erastus, and such as cannot distinguish
between the power of ordering Religion for the external part, which belongs
unto the civil Sovereigns of all States, and the power of the Keys, which is
proper to the Church, as a Church. Yet, if these two Reasons will not satisfy,
and some Reader may desire and wish they had been handled dictinctly, he may
read them as dictinct and several even in this Book. I my self had some debate
within my self, what way I should handle them, yet upon these reasons I
resolved to do as I have done.

the Remedies, both for prevention and recovery. Corruption is from the bad
constitution, or maladministration; and both Sovereign and Subject may be,
and many times are guilty. The conversion and woeful changes, and also the
subversion and ruin is from God as the supreme Governor and just Judge of
Mankind, who punishes not only single and private Persons and Families, but
whole Nations and Commonwealths. Of these things the Scripture, humane
Stories, and our own experience do fully inform us. But of them, if it may be
useful, I shall speak more particularly and fully in the second Book: the
subject whereof in general, is, Administration; in particular, Laws and Canons;
Officers of the State and of the Church, and Jurisdiction both Civil and
Ecclesiastical. The reasons why I desire to publish this first, and severally
from the latter part, are partly, because, though the first draught of that
latter part was finished above half a Year ago, yet I intend to enlarge upon
the particulars: partly because I desire to know, what entertainment this first
part may meet withal: for if it be good, I shall be the more encouraged to go
forward: but chiefly, because the most material Heads and Controversies are
handled in this, which is far more difficult. The latter will be more easy,
yet profitable and useful, especially if some of greater ability would
undertake it. The God of Truth and Peace give us Humility, Patience, Charity
and the Knowledge of his Truth; that holding the Truth in Love, we may grow up
unto him in all things, which is the Head, even Christ, to whom be Honor,
Glory and Thanks for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

