THEO-POLITICA: OR, A Body of Divinity, CONTAINING The Rules of the special
Government OF GOD, According to which, He orders the immortal and intellectual
Creatures, Angels, and Men, to their final and Eternal Estate. Being a Method
of those saving Truths, which are contained in the Canon of the Holy Scripture,
and abridged in those words of our Savior Jesus Christ; [Go and teach all
Nations, Baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost:]Which were the Ground and Foundation of those Apostolical Creeds
and Forms of Confessions, related by the Ancients; and, in particular, by
Irenaeus, and Tertullian. BY GEORGE LAWSON, Rector of More, in the County of
Salop.

LONDON, Printed by J. Streater, for Francis Tyton, and are to be sold at his
Shop at the Sign of the Three Daggers in Fleet Street, MDCLIX.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
Christian Reader,
I Will not trouble thee with any tedious Preface, or Epistle Dedicatory; but
only in a few words acquaint thee, 1. With the subject of this Treatise. 2.
The manner how its handled. 3. The use that be made of it.

I.
The Subject is noble and excellent: it is that glorious Kingdom, and special
Governmentt of the Supreme, Universal, and Eternal King, which is the
principal, if not the adoquate, subject of the Holy Scriptures, which were
revealed from Heaven; and without which, neither Men nor Angels could have
known much of it. For as it is the Kingdom of God, so the Word of God must
inform us of it. Angels, Prophets, Apostles, and Christ himself spoke of it,
and it was the principal matter of the Doctrine. This Government was contrived
before the World was; and, after time began, it was one of his principal Works,
wherein once made known by Revelation, we may read more of God, of his deepest
Counsels, and of his perfections, then in the vast Volume of Heaven and Earth.
The Doctrine thereof does so much concern sinful Man, that upon the knowledge
thereof depends his Eternal Salvation. This Kingdom should be the chiefest
subject, not only of our most serious and retired Thoughts, but of our
Discourse; that it might be made known to the following Generations, till time
shall be no more: and it will be the matter of that Heavenly Music and Melody,
which Saints and Angels shall make in the Temple of Eternal Glory; For all thy
Works shall praise thee, O Lord, and thy Saints shall bles thee. They shall
speak of the Glory of thy Kingdom, and talk of thy power. To make known unto
the sons of men His mighty Acts, and the glorious Majesty of thy Kingdom. Thy
Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom, and thy Dominion endures throughout all
Generations, Psalm. 145. 10, 11, 12, 13. This Kingdom did commence upon the
Creation of Angels and of Men; whom both, He governed according to different
Rules, especially after the Fall and Promise of a Redeemer: for then He
new-modelled the Government of Mankind, and of that new Model there were three
degrees: The first, continued from the times of Adam, till the exaltation of
Christ at His Fathers right hand. The second, which is more excellent began to
be administered by Christ glorified, and shall not determine till all Enemies,
even Death the last, shall be destroyed. The third which is most glorious,
shall commence upon the final Judgment, and shall be of endless date. This is
the subject.

II.
For the manner of handling of it the Language is plain, and rather rude then
polite, and more Grammatical, then Rhetorical: for my desire was to be
understood. I had no design to please the curious, but, by plain Doctrine to
inform the Understanding; by clear Method to help the Memory; and by the divine
and excellent matter, rather than by excellency of words, to work upon the
affection, and wind into the heart. The very Subject, being a Kingdom, did
dictate the Method, and the Scripture furnished me with suitable Expressions. I
do not proceed by way of Dialogue, or of Catechisms or of Problem, or of
Systems, or of Sermons. I thought good, and took the liberty, to deliver
positive Doctrine in a continued Discourse, yet in a certain method; and so to
draw on the Reader from one head to another and from one part of this
Government to another, till he come to the beginning of that perfect and most
glorious degree, wherein God shall be all in all. In some particulars I deliver
my opinion yet with submission to the judgment of the more Learned and
Judicious. I desire no man to believe any thing delivered in this Treatise,
which shall not be found agreeable to the Holy Scriptures. To seduce, and
mislead the meanest Christian, would trouble me much. If the more understanding
discover my imperfections, I desire him to pardon them: if any passages be
amiss to correct the mistakes, and not too rigidly censure the Author. We all
have much of Man in us; we are yet in the flesh, and many are our
imperfections; and mine more then those of others. And if every Reader shall
remember himself to be a man, as yet in the flesh, I shall do well enough. Let
none impute to me the Errata of the Press, though some few may be gross: for I
was for the time of Printing at a great distance. Some things in this work I
only touch, intending a more distinct discussion in another Book, (which is an
Exposition of the Epistle to the Hebrews.) This for the manner of handling.

III.
The use of it may be the same with that of other Systems, and larger
Catechisms; What it may add, I leave to others for to judge. It may serve to
acquaint us more particularly with the nature of that Kingdom, whereof many
speak, and which few do understand. It may help to improve our Knowledge of the
Principles; to understand the Scriptures more clearly; to direct younger
Students, who intend the Ministry; to bring some Controversies to an Issue. It
may give occasion to men of more excellent gifts, out of Scriptures, to improve
the Body of saving Doctrine: And, for the present, it may testify, that
notwithstanding all our Divisions and Alterations, the substance of the Ancient
and Apostolical Doctrine remains amongst us. I desired to do some good unto
this poor Church: and if any good be done, it is not I, but the Grace of God in
me; who desired to serve in this, as in other things, the great and glorious
Monarch of this Kingdom: To whom be glory everlasting, Amen.

Thine, to serve in the Lord, GEO: LAWSON.

THE ARGUMENT AND CONTENTS OF The several Chapters.
LIB. I.
CHAP. I.
THe Subject and Rule of the whole Treatise, both in the First and Second Book.
CHAP. II.
The Mind of God concerning His special Kingdom, 1. Known unto Himself, 2.
Revealed: 1. To Man immediately by inspiration: 2. Communicated by Man to Man,
by Word and Writing, and both Infallibly: As written in Hebrew, Chaldee, Greek,
it makes up the Canon of the Scripture, which is the most excellent Monument in
the World, and differs in many things from all other Books; especially in
respect of the Authority thereof, which is primarily Divine in the Original
Copies; secundarily, in the Transcripts, and Translations. These sacred
Writings are learned and known several ways, and by several means of men that
are not infallibly directed, further then they follow the Scriptures rightly
understood. And by these, especially Ministers, by whom God speaks to men
another way, they are taught several ways, in a certain order: How these must
be heard, understood, applied so, as the Hearer may attain to a Divine Faith,
and a Saving Knowledge. Where something of the Tradition of the Church.
CHAP. III.
The Doctrine of this Kingdom is contracted by Christ and His Apostles, and, as
such, is the ground of all the Apostolical Creeds and Confessions, all agreeing
in method and matter. The manner of the handling of the subject in this
Treatise is different from that of ordinary Systems, Catechisms, and common
places; where something is said of Faith in general, and of Divine Faith. A
Confession taken out of Tertullian.
CHAP. IV.
Of the Divine Essence and Attributes. How God's Essence is intelligible, and
how represented to us by certain Attributes. What Attributes are, and certain
Rules concerning them. The imperfect definition of God, including all the
Attributes.
CHAP. V.
The Attributes in particular. The distribution of them into Greatness,
Goodness. In the Greatness, unity infiniteness. Infiniteness in Immensity (from
which arises His Incomprehensibility, Vbiquity) and in Eternity.
CHAP. VI.
God's goodness being one and infinite, is known by his excellent and most
eminent Acts and Virtues of his Understanding Will, Power; as His most
excellent Knowledge and Wisdom, the integrity of his Will, and the perfection
of his power.
CHAP. VII.
The Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, their unity, order, distinction. They are not
Three Persons in that sense, as Men or Angels are called persons. The vanity of
the Socinian Argument against the Trinity, grounded upon the word person,
strictly taken. How the Soul may be said to be an Image, and imperfect
resemblance of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.
CHAP. VIII.
God considered in his Regal Capacity in respect of his power, acquired by
Creation, and continued by preservation. How God is a cause of all things, by
his Counsel contriving Will decreeing. Power actually producing. The knowledge
of GOD, in respect of things out of Himself. His Decrees free, wise,
unchangeable. The cooperation of the Persons their distinct manner of working.
The Creation in general, the special Creation of Man. The Conclusions deducible
from this Principle, God created Heaven and Earth, and all things therein. By
this Work, God has a propriety in all things* and may dispose of them, and
order them to the ends whereunto He has made them ordinable. Hence his supreme
universal absolute power. How all things created, are preserved and ordered.
Ordination in general, the first act of God's Power acquired and continued.
CHAP. IX.
The Exercise of God's Power in general.
CHAP. X.
The special Ordination and Government of the Intellectual and Immortal
Creatures, Angels, Men. The government of Angels constituted, administered,
according to certain Laws, Judgment, whereby some being obedient, were
confirmed, rewarded: Others, disobeying rebelling, and forsaking their station,
were punished and cast out of God's presence, reserved for greater punishments
in the end of the World.
CHAP. XI.
The special Government of Man, which is twofold; 1. Of Justice without
Christ. 2. Of Mercy in Christ. The constitution of the first Model. The
administrations, Laws, Moral, Positive, considered as a rule of Man's
obedience, God's Judgment.
CHAP. XII.
The Judgment of God-Creatour, passed upon Man, according to the Laws of
Creation, and strict Justice. The Object of this Judgment: 1. Man obedient,
rewarded with the continuance of a comfortable condition in Paradise. 2.
Sinning. Sin in general is a disobedience to God's Laws. The degrees, and the
consequents thereof. The first sin of our first Parents in particular. The
causes of it. The effects thereof before Judgment.
CHAP. XIII.
God's judicial proceeding against Adam, Eve, the Serpent, Satan. Their
Convention, Conviction, Sentence, Execution. More particularly, God's Sentence
passed upon the old Serpent the Devil: In which God new models his Kingdom, of
mercy in Christ promised, and gives Man hope of Pardon, and everlasting
comfort.
CHAP. XIV.
The Penalties more particular, both Bodily and Spiritual; public private;
Temporal, Eternal, all signified by Death; to which Sin made man liable; yet
all by Christ removable.
CHAP. XV.
Original sin what it is. Whether it be properly so. Whether Concupiscence in
persons baptized be such in proper sense. The derivation of Original sin.
Whether it be derived by Propagation, or the just Judgment of God, or both.
CHAP. XVI.
The principal Attributes of God manifested in this Judgment; as Holiness,
Justice, especially Mercy: in the manifestation whereof he exercised his
transcendent power above the former Constitution and Laws.
LIB. II.
CHAP. I.
THe Coherence of this Book with the former. The difference of the two Models,
both the former and latter. The acquisition of a New Power, by the Word made
Flesh, and anointed; taking upon him the form of a servant, and being obedient
to the Death of the Cross. A Description of the Redeemer. His Person, Nature,
Offices. The union and distinction of the two Natures: His particular Offices.
CHAP. II.
The Humiliation of the Son of God; 1. In taking upon Him the Form of a
servant. 2. In suffering Death. A brief Historical Narration of His Sufferings:
1. Before Judgment. 2. His Judgment. The Preparations of His Trial. His Trial,
1. Before the Ecclesiastical. 2. The Civil Judge. His Condemnation, Execution,
with the Prodigies which happened about that time.
CHAP. III.
A more large Discourse concerning the Suffering and Death of Christ. It was an
Act of Obedience to His Heavenly Father, commanding Him to suffer for the sins
of Man, whereby He was offended. To this Death He became obnoxious, not only
by His Fathers Command, but His own voluntary submission, to be an Hostage and
Surety for Man, as guilty. It was a Sacrifice offered freely to God, as
Lawgiver offended, and as supreme Judge. The effects of this sacrifice
accepted, are immediate, mediate, Immediate, Satisfaction of Divine Justice,
and Merit. What He merited for Himself; what for Man. How the benefit of this
Sacrifi^^ became communicate from Christ, as a Representator General, and the
Will of God the great Sovereign. Of the extent of this benefit. Whether
Propitiation is to be ascribed to His active or passive Obedience severally, or
to both jointly. Whether this Death prevents all punishments or only the
Eternal? And if not, what punishments it removes. The Attributes manifested in
this great Work of Humiliation, of the Word made Flesh, by which a new Power
was acquired.
CHAP. IV.
The exercise of the new Power of God-Redeemer, in the Constitution of His New
Monarchy. The Sovereign and Monarch. The Subjects, the Officers, the
Administrator-General: the Enemies. The manner of reducing Man to subjection:
the nature of this subjection, especially after Christ's Exaltation, Men are
reduced by Calling. Of the nature of Calling, whereby Predestination begins to
be put in execution. What Predestination is, considered as a Model, or Idea, in
God. Of this special Government and Ordination of Man to His Eternal Estate.
CHAP. V.
The Exercise of this New Power acquired in the Administration, considered
first in general. How this Kingdom was administered from the times of Adam, till
the Call of Abraham, and God's Covenant with him. How from his time, till
Moses. How from Moses, till John the Baptist. The Covenant made at Mount Sinai.
The Bondage of the Church under that Covenant, according to the Promise in her
minority. Some alteration begun by John the Baptist. The exaltation of Christ
to be Administrator-General. The great alteration that followed thereupon in
Administration both in Heaven and Earth.
CHAP. VI.
The Administration of the Kingdom of God-Redeemer, in particular, by Laws,
Moral, Positive, as a Rule of Obedience in Precepts and Prohibitions.
Conscience, what it is. The Moral Laws of perpetual Obligation. The different
manner of Obligation to Adam Innocent* from that which followed after the first
Promise of Christ. The more perfect knowledge of it always continued in the
Church; which has its use to the Gentile, to the Jew, to the Church-Christian.
How to be understood Evangelically: The inequality of the Morality of several
Commandments.
CHAP. VII. The First Commandment.
The Preface of Moses, and the Preface of God: The meaning of the words. How to
be understood, and how observed Evangelically. The sins forbidden, reduced to
Atheism and Idolatry. The Duties commanded and how to be performed to
God-Redeemer alone, as Supreme, and that in the highest degree.
CHAP. VIII. The Second Commandment.
The Analysis of the whole, showing the sin prohibited; the Reasons why it
must be avoided; the particular and distinct Explication of the whole
Commandment, and every part: what is expressly, and in proper sense forbidden;
what by consequence and analogy. The Duties commanded, both under the Law and
the Gospel, both by consequence and analogy.
CHAP. IX. The third Commandment.
The Order and Connection of this with the former; as of the former with the
first. The Analysis; the proper and immediate sense; the sins forbidden; and
the Duties commanded by consequence and analogy.
CHAP. X. The Fourth Commandment.
The order and relation of this Commandment to the former. The reason why God
instituted a Sabbath, and the end of it: the Analysis of the words: the
Explication of every part: the Duties commanded: the sins forbidden: the
Reasons to persuade to Sanctification: the Jewish Sabbath ceased: the Lord Day
substituted; and both upon sufficient grounds, plain in Scripture.
CHAP. XI. The Fifth Commandment.
The order, the difference, the inequality of the former, and this latter part
of the Law. This, with the four following, derive their Morality from the last,
as that receives Morality from the first of the first Table: the Analysis; the
Explication; the Duties commanded; the sins forbidden expressly, by consequence
and analogy; as they concern persons in Families, States, Churches, according
to their several Relations.
CHAP. XII: The Sixth Commandment.
The Subject, man's life; the absolute propriety whereof is in God, the use
only in Man, and it cannot be taken away without Warrant and Commission from
God. What Murder is: what the degrees thereof: what sins are here forbidden:
what Duties commanded: Reasons against Murder.
CHAP. XIII. The Seventh Commandment.
Adultery presupposes Marriage: what Adultery it is: how many ways committed:
the heynousness of the sin, and the Reasons against it: what sins here
implicitly, according to certain Rules, are reducible to this Commandment, and
forbidden. The degrees of uncleanness: the Causes: the Duty in general
commanded: Chastity inward, outward, in Marrriage, Single life: the disswasives
from Uncleanness: the swasives to Chastity, with the means to preserve it.
CHAP. XIV. The Eighth Commandment.
Which presupposes Propriety absolute in God, derivative and limited in Man.
The several ways of acquiring it; the degrees of it. What Theft is. The
distinction of Thieves and Theft, according as it is more or less palpable; and
as goods are public or private, or sacred; committed by such as are trusted by
others, or have contracted with others. The several kinds of Thefts, in respect
of Contracts. The degrees of Theft. The Causes, What is commanded. The means
whereby Justice in this kind is preserved. The reasons persuading to the
observation of it.
CHAP. XV. The Ninth Commandment.
This Commandment presupposing Laws and the power of Jurisdiction, aims at
just Judgment. The former determines the right of Persons, in the fifth; of
things (as Wife-life Goods) in the sixth, seventh, eighth; and this to be
observed before Judgment. This prescribes our Neighbors right in Judgment. The
words explained. The end why Witnesses are only mentioned. The Duties and
Offenses judicial of Jnformers, Plaintiffs, Defendants Sollicitors, Atturneys,
Witnesses. Notaries, Counselors Jurors delatory and judicial, Judges,
Executioners. The Disswasives from Disobedience, Swasives to Obedience of this
Commandment.
CHAP. XVI. The Tenth Commandment
This Commandment derives morality unto, and is the rule, root, and measure,
of the five former Commandments, and is explained. Certain Rules and
Observations upon the words explained. The sins forbidden; the Duties
commanded: the principal and intended duty, which is, To love our Neighbor as
our selves. What love in general is: What the love of our Neighbor: What the
measure, and what the end of it is. Certain Rules added, to give light to
understand and use the Moral Law of Moses's Ten Commandments.
CHAP. XVII. Of Positive and Ceremonial Laws of God-Redeemer, as a Rule of
Obedience.
The Name and Nature of Ceremonial and Positive Laws. The Ceremonials and
Positives, especially Sacrifices and Sacraments, instituted before the
Exhibition of Christ, and the Revelation of the Gospel. The nature of
Sacraments in general, and their Accidents. The Sacraments of the New
Testament. The Institution of Baptism by Christ, in the Name of the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost. The definition of it: the Institution of the Eucharist,
with the definition of it: the Explication of the Elements, Actions, Words,
mentioned in the Institution, who may administer these Sacraments. To whom this
may be administered. Whether Christian Infants, as one person with their
Parents, who are members of the Church, and joined with them in obligations and
privileges, may not be baptized. Whether the Faith, as well as Prayers, of
one, may not profit another. Whether these Sacraments ought to be administered
upon a divine, infallible, or humane fallible Judgment.
CHAP. XVIII. Of Prayer.
Of the nature of Prayer. The Lord's Prayer. The Preface, directing, 1 Who must
pray. 2 For whom. 3 To whom. 4 In what manner. And that since Christ's
Glorification, all Prayers, even the Lord's Prayer, is to be offered in the
name of Christ, and so to God-Redeemer. The body of the Prayer, contracting the
matter of all Prayer, to a few Petitions, disposed in a most excellent order.
That which is first matter of Petition; if once received, becomes the matter of
Thanksgiving. A brief Explication of every several Petition; and also of the
conclusion.
CHAP. XIX. Of Promises, and Threatenings.
The Laws of God, both Moral and Positive, considered as a Rule of Judgment, in
Promises and Comminations. The nature of Promises in general, and of
Comminations. Their Order, as following Precepts and Prohibitions. The nature
of the Promises of God-Redeemer. The nature of Comminations. The difference
between Promises and Threatenings, both in respect of themselves, and of the
subject; and also the matter, which are rewards or punishments, bodily,
spiritual; of this life, of that which is to come.
CHAP. XX. Of Punishments.
What the Judgment of God-Redeemer is. It Is Particular, Universal. Of
Punishments, which might be reduced to order, according to Chronology, or
according to Laws general, or particular, for the violation whereof they are
inflicted. The difference between the punishments upon Mankind for Adam's
sin; and those which we are liable to for our sins against the Laws of
God-Redeemer. Several distinctions of punishments. Of Spiritual punishments
suffered in this life, both by Unbelievers, and Believers, considered either as
single persons, or associate in lesser or greater Communities, both
Ecclesiastical and Civil. Punishments suffered after Death, before the
Resurrection.
CHAP. XXI. Of Rewards.
What a Reward of God-Redeemer is. The distinction of Rewards into those of
this life, and that which is to come, before and after the Resurrection.
Rewards presuppose the performance of a Duty; and the first special Duty pre
requires preventing Grace. The first special Reward is, to take away the
Stoney-heart, and to give an heart of Flesh. The second is, God's writing of
His Laws in Man's heart. The third, God becomes our God, Christ our Head, and we
are made His Subjects, His Members.
CHAP. XXII. Of Justification.
The fourth Spiritual Reward is Justification defined. The Judge, and how
considered. The Party judged, Man sinful, guilty, penitent, believing in Christ
as Propitator and Intercessour. What kind of Faith justifying Faith is. The
Acts of it, and what the Objects of these Acts are, and what not. Where the
Judgment or Judicial Act is passed, and how manifested. What it is. The proper
effect of it. Certain observations. The greatest punishment, Justification
frees us from, is the want and loss of the Sanctifying Spirit, and the dominion
of sin. How this Doctrine differs from that of Trent. Council. Three Questions:
1. Whether God does always in every Sentence of Justification, free the guilty
totally, or sometimes only in part. 2. Whether there be two parts of
Justification, as Remission and Imputation. 3. Whether good Works be a
condition of Justification continued, or final, so as to give a right upon the
Promise.
CHAP. XXIII. Of the Parts of Justification, and the continuance of it.
The Branches or Parts of Justification, which some call Effects; as
Regeneration, Reconciliation, Adoption, from which arises the happy estate of
the justified. The continuance of these in this Life, and after Death, before
the Resurrection, which might be called the Fifth Reward. Mortification,
Vivification. The Spiritual War. The different Issue of the several Battails.
The last Issue, which is a final Victory. Of Perseverance, and falling away.
CHAP. XXIV. The Final and Universal Judgment.
The time of this Judgment. The Judge. His manner of coming. The General
Summons. Convention and Appearance of Men and Angels. The Eternal Rewards of
the Godly. The Eternal Punishment of impenitent and unbelieving Sinners.
These several Books following are Printed, and to be sold by Francis Tyton, at
the Three Daggers in Fleet Street.
MR. Baxter's Saints everlasting Rest, Quarto His Apology, containing
Exceptions against Mr. Blake. The Digression of Mr. Kendal. Animadversions, on
a late Dissertatition of Ludiomeus Colvinus, alias Ludovinus Molineus. An
Admonition to Mr. Eyrs: With Mr. Crandon's Anatomy, quarto. Confession of Faith
quarto. Christian Concord, quarto. Defense of the Worcestershire Petition.
quarto. Advice to the Parliament, quarto. Letter to Mr. Durry, for
Pacification, quarto. Concerning the Saints perseverance, quarto. The Quakers
Catechism, quarto. Of Infant Baptism, against Mr. Tombs. The Unreasonableness
of Infidelity, Octavo. Thirty two Directions, for getting and keeping Spiritual
Peace, Octavo Against Popery, Octavo. Mr. Lawson's Examination o^ the Political
Part of Hobb's his Leviathan, Octavo^* These several Books of Mr. Gilberts,
Minister of Limtick in Ireland.
THe Libertine schooled: Or, A Vindication of the Magistrates Power, in Matters
of Religion, Quarto. A Sovereign Antidote, against those sinful Errors, that
are the Epidemical Disease of our Times, quarto. A pleasant Walk to Heaven, on
Ephesians. 4. 1. quarto. The Blessed Peacemaker: Or, A Christian Reconciler,
intended for the healing of our Divisions, quarto. Innocents, no Saints: Or, A
Pair of Spectacles, for a dark sighted Quaker. By E. Dod. quarto. Man's Duty,
in magnifying God's Work: A Sermon preached before the Parliament, on the
occasion of the Victory obtained against the Spanish Fleet: By John How,
Preacher of the Word, at the Abbey-Church, Westminster, quarto. The Perusal of
an old Statute of Death and Judgment: A Funeral Sermon, By Mr. Bedford, in
quart^.
These several Books following of Mr. Strong.
HEavenly Treasure: Or, Man's chiefest good, Twelves. Communion with God, the
Saints Privilege and Duty, Twelves. Thirty one Sermons, preached on select
occasions, quarto. The Will of Man, subjected to the Will of God, Octavo. A
Commemoration Sermon, preached at Paul's on the 5th of November, 1646 quarto. A
Voice out of the Temple: Being also a Sermon on the 5th of November, quarto. A
Confession of Faith, of the severa^ Congregations, or Churches o^ Christ in
London, commonly called Anabaptists. quarto. A Discovery of some t^oublesome
Thoughts. By Daniel King. quarto. Gospel-Glory, in the (...) invisible Worship
of God. By Edw. Drapes, quarto, Common-Good: Or, The Improvement of Commons,
Forests, (...) Cha^es, by Inclo^ure. By S. T. quarto. An Assi^e Sermon:
Pre^^^bed by The Gilbert. quarto. The Word of Faith: Or, The Co^lection of the
Sermons of a M^neth, preached at Martins in the Fields methodically. By Mr.
Sanger. Barton's Translation of the sin^ing Psalms, Twelves. Sydenham's, for
Infant Baptism, Octavo* Renodeus Dispensatory, in Folio. Spencer's Similies, in
Folio. Dr. Robinson's Endoxa in Octavo. Dr. Harrison's Spiritual Logic, in
Octavo. The History of Dreams: By Mr. Philip Goodwin, Minister at Watford,
Octavo. The Three Theological Graces: By Mr. Ward, Octavo. Biddle dispossessed,
in answer to his Challenge, Twelves. Habbington's Edward the 4th, in Folio. His
Observations, on History, in Octavo. Allen 's Henry the 7th, Octavo. Buck on
the Beatitudes, in quarto. Eurialus and Lucretia, Octavo. Herbert 's Henry the
8th, Folio. English Law, By Charles George-Cock, Folio. Par on the Romans,
Folio. Hackwel's Argument, for the Liberty of the Subject, quarto. The false
Brother, quarto. Mr. Obadiah Sedgwick's Sermon, at Mr. Strong's Funeral.
quarto. Duke Hamilton's Case argued by Mr. Steel, now Lord Chancellor in
Ireland, quarto. Gospel-Ministery, and Gospel Light and Life, By Dornford in.
octavo. The Rise, Fall, and Ruin of Antichrist, By Haughton, octavo. Orders of
Chancery, octavo. Illustrious Bashaw, in folio. The Bloody Inquisition of
Spain, Twelves Hughs Abridgment of the Common Law, Large quarto. ^is Abridgment
of all the Acts and Ord^nances, quarto Several Works of Mr. Murret, Minister at
Dublin in Ireland; with his Life, quarto. A Catalogue of the Chancellours of
England, quarto. A Scripture Chronology, By Mr. Al l^n Minister, in quarto. A
Catalogue of most Books vendible in England, of Divinity, History, Law, etc.
quarto. Annotations upon Job, Psalms, Proverbs Ecclesiastes, Song of Solomon,
By Arthur Jackson, Preacher of God's Word at Faiths under Paul's, quarto.

ERRATA.
Page 6. l. 36. artificiale, read inartificiale p. 9. l. 30. yet men, r. yet if
men. p. 17. l. 35. unbelief, r. belief, p. 17. l. 47. which, r. what, for it r.
is, in the Margent, by is omitted. p. 18. l. 18. Legal, r. Regal. p, 32. l. 36.
wrap, r. rap. p. 23. l. 43. del^ not. p. 36. pro. 34. l. 32. knew, r know. p.
35. l. 31. if, r of p. 39. l. 47. in it is written, r it is written. p. 40. l.
38. elements, r element. p. 48. l. 17. they have, r God has, l. 35. propriety,
r variety. p. 50. l. 17. resign, r reign. p. 54. l. 15. r. and attain, p. 66.
l. 19. convinced, r charged. p. 70. l. 30. wherein passed, r wherein God
passed. p. 70. l. 21. heart, r heel. p. 91. l. 26, case, r cause. p. 94. l. 18.
r with godly sorrow. l. 40. resently, r presently. p. 96. l. 8. he, r God. l.
21. in, r to. p. 103. l. 50. pardoned, r pardonable. p. 107. l. 10. charge, r
care. p. 106. l. 7. it, is omitted. p. 111. l. 16. sure, r since. p. 147. l.
12. twofoldness, r twofold use. p. 153. l. 3. ought, r would. accused r
accursed. p. 156. l. 39. as he, omit as. p. 160. l. 47. mere, r merely. p. 172.
l. 36. because he r man may. p. 176. l. 32. to, r they who. p. 177. l. 35. it
is omitted. l. 37. omit the word not. p. 183. l. 43. rise, r risen. p. 184. l.
32. the word, King, is omitted. p. 189. l. 27. r in some. p. 200. l. 9. is the,
r its the. l. 16. omit they. p. 208. l. 40. all, r also. p. 233. l. 38. new, r
men's. l. 40. r arbitrary power. p. 227. l. 3. unprofitable* r profitable. p.
242. l. 26. Grenaeus, r Iraeneus. p. 246. l. 30. Cross, r Mass. l. 38. r Heb.
9. 26. p. 264. l. 36. if r that. p. 276. l. 49. for nothing, r something. p.
278. l. 45. but, r by. p. 285. l. 46. conform, r confirm. p. 297. Pro. 327. l.
38. was made, r was not made. p. 328. l. 15. omit the word, to. p. 330. l. ult.
r etc. p. 394. l. 6. external, r eternal.

The First Scheme.
How^^^ the (...) the Holy S^riptu^^, which being the Word of God written
signify the Mind of God concerning His special Government, first known unto
Himself alone, as contrived by His Wisdom, decreed by His Will.
afterward revealed from God to Man, immediately by inspiration, mediately by
Man, infallibly directed in Words, Writings, of the Old instrument begun by the
Prophets, finished by the Apostles.
New instrument begun by the Prophets, finished by the Apostles.

which are of Divine Authority, primarily in the first Origina Languages,
Copies.
secondarily, in the Transcripts, Translations,
as they agree with the Originals, no further.


fallibly in their Words, Writings,
yet infallibly so far as they follow the infallible Scriptures, and attain the
knowledge thereof by certain ordinary means appointed by (...) communicate the
knowledge several ways to others wh^ by Reading, Hearing, Meditation, Prayer,
Power of the Spi^^^
attain a Divine Faith.






more Largely in the whole Body of the Canon, which upon the Testimony of the
Church Reasons added
is believed to be Divine Briefly as being contracted in many places of the Holy
Scriptures, particularly in the words of our Saviors doctrine. concerning the
Father, Son, Holy Ghost,
Math. 28. 19. which is the ground for Matter, Method,
of all Orthodox Creeds, Confessions, Catechisms, Theological Systems.






declares the Government of God, considered in Himself, as only fit to be the
Universal Sovereign, Absolutely a most perfect Being great one, and only one
alone, infinite immense incomprehensible, omnipresent,
eternal, existing always, necessarily, the same,


in his most eminent Acts perfection of acting by His Understanding knowing
himself all things
at once fully, clearly.
Will, willing, indeclinably that which is just, readily that which is good.
Power, doing all things exactly according to His Understanding, Will.



Relatively Father, Son, Holy Ghost.

Regal Capacity, according to an Actual Power; being acquired by Creation
continued by Preservation
of all things. was exercised in the ordering of all things for their ends,
special Government of Angels, who 1. Being created holy, became subjects of
this Kingdom, by their dependence upon God, voluntary submission.
2. Received Laws, Were judged, and some of them according to their
Disobedience and Apostasy, condemned to Eternal Death, Loyalty and Obedience,
justified, confirmed, rewarded.


Men, according to the Order of Creation in the Constitution of God's
Sovereignty, Man's Subjection, Natural from Creation, Moral God's Will, Man's
voluntary Submission.


Administration giving Laws Moral, Positive, concerning the Tree of Life
Knowledge of Good, Evil.


judging Adam, and in him all his Posterity, according to His Obedience,
whilst he continued innocent and righteous, rewarding him with present
comfort, hope of future glory.
Sin, which was considered In general, as disobedience to the Law of God, has
many evil consequents: In particular, a breach of a positive Law, and Committed
upon a temptation made, yielded^
Sentenced to a punishment, to be inflicted upon the Tempter, (...) movable
Persons (...) as (...) by Chr^^^
Transmitted to Posterity by Prop^^ just (...)






Redemption, and Free Grace.





THE DOCTRINE OF The Kingdom of God.
The First BOOK.
Chap. I.
Showing the Subject, Matter, and Method of the ensuing Discourse.
THE Divine Politics inform us of the Kingdom of God, and of His Power; and
how it is acquired, how exercised, both in the Constitution, and the
Administration of his Government, by Laws and Judgments, determining both the
Temporal and Eternal Rewards and Punishments of Angels and Men, according to
their Obedience or Disobedience. They say little of Angels, but much of Men*
who were first under the Government of Justice, and after of Mercy: For when
Man transgressed the Law given in Creation, and made himself liable to the
Eternal Displeasure of his Lord and Sovereign, the first Government was altered
and mode^ anew: And thereupon the Laws, the Judgments, the manner of
administration were new and different from the former. God acquires a new
Power, requires a new Obedience, and orders Man to Eternal Rewards another way.
And because these are high Matters, great Mysteries, glorious Designs, and many
of them far above the reach of Man's Reason; therefore it is necessary, that we
have some certain Rules to direct us: yet no Direction, except from Heaven,
will serve the turn. God must give it: and this he has done. The Rule is at
hand; even the Holy Scriptures. The Method therefore to be observed, is:

1. To man fest, that these Holy Writings are a certain and perfect Rule; And

2. To proceed to speak of this Blessed and Glorious Kingdom, according to the
same: And the Lord of all Wisdom, Truth, and Mercy in Christ, direct and assist
me, and incline mine Heart with all care and humility, to follow his
Directions, AMEN.

CHAP. II.
Concerning the Holy Scriptures.
THE Holy Scriptures are the Mind of God, concerning his special Kingdom
expressed in Writing: To understand this more fully, we must observe, 1. The
Mind of God, concerning this Kingdom. 2. The Expression of his Mind. 3. The
several Ways and Degrees of this Expression.


First, For God ordained these things before the World to our glory, 1 Cor. 2.
7. These his Thoughts and Counsels at first were known only to himself, and to
none other: For what man knows the things of a man, save the Spirit of Man
which is in him? Even so, the things of God knows no man, but the Spirit of
God, 1 Cor. 2. 11. Therefore, before there can be any knowledge of them, God
must express himself, and communicate his Mind unto Angels or Men, who alone
are capable and fit to receive the knowledge of his Mind made known to them.
This Expression and Revelation of himself, out of himself, is called, The Word
of God.

The Word of God is; Word, I do not understand that Word which was in the
Beginning, and was with God, and was God, and by which the World was made, Joh.
1. 1, 2. For that Word was a clear and full expression of God himself to
himself; the brightness of his glory, and the express Image of his Person. This
was the Word in himself: But this Word is an expression of some part of his
Mind out of himself.

There be, For the Heavens declare the glory of God, and the Firmament shows
his Handiwork, Psalm. 19. 1. Not only the Works of Creation, but of
Providence, speak much of Gods glorious perfections; as of his Wisdom, his
Power, his Goodness, his Justice, his Mercy. He may express himself by
Representations by Angels* by an audible Voice to the outward Senses, or by
Impression upon the inward and common Sense, or by inspiration immediately unto
the immortal Souls of Men. For as God [at sundry times,] so he spoke [divers
ways] to the Fathers by the Prophets, Heb. 1. 1 How he spoke to Angels and Man
at the first Creation, we know not. The Expression, by Inspiration and
immediate Vision, is the most perfect and excellent: For by that the persons
inspired know not only what the things spoken are but that it is God that
speaks. He expresses himself by Writing, as he wrote the Ten Words, or
Commandments, of the Moral Law in two Tables of Stone; and at length, in
process of time, caused the whole Body of his Doctrine concerning his Kingdom
to be written. And hence that Book, with all the parts thereof, concerning this
Kingdom, is called the Holy Scriptures; which, both in regard of the Author,
the Matter, and the Contexture, is the most excellent Book and Writing in the
World. But before I come to speak of them, I must observe the several degrees
of Gods expression, and signification of his Mind to Man.

The several degrees of God's expression of his Mind, Inspiration and
Revelation, before it could be infallibly communicated unto others, either by
Word or Writing. The holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the Holy
Ghost, 2 Pet. 1. 21. For they must first be moved and inspired by the Holy
Ghost, before that they spoke unto any man, that which they received immediately
from God. Paul received not the Gospel of man; neither was he taught it, but by
the Revelation of Jesus Christ, Gal. 1. 12. And the mystery of Christ was
revealed unto the Apostles and Prophets by the Spirit, Ephesians. 3. 5. In this
respect it is said, that all Scripture (that is, all the Doctrine of Scripture)
is given by inspiration of God, 1 Timothy 3. 16.

Thus God speaks immediately to man; Holy Ghost (as before): And so did write;
otherwise their Doctrine had not been infallibly true. It Is said, not only
that the Word, but the Scripture: all Scripture was given by inspiration of God.

And now, Divine Wisdom thought it expedient (if not necessary) to express
himself by Writing. God could have supplied all defects of man 's
Understanding, Memory, Utterance, by immediate inspiration and direction, as he
did at first, and will do in Heaven: yet he thought good to make use of
Writing, which was a more certain, and ordinary permanent way of continuing and
propagating his Truth to many Generations: for Writing is a lasting Monument
and Record. Whether the Word was written, or any part of it upon Record, before
the time of Isreal's deliverance out of Egypt, we do not certainly know: Yet
this is certain, that God spoke unto man from the Beginning. For Abel offered a
better Sacrifice then Cain, by Faith, Heb. 11. 4. But where there is no Word,
there is no Faith: And Enoch, by Faith, pleased God: but this could not have
been* if he had not believed that God is, and that he is a Rewarder of such as
diligently seek him, Heb. 11. 6. yet this he could not believe, without the
Word of God. If any should say that he knew all this by the Light of Nature:
The answer is; 1. The Light of Nature, is the Light of God. 2. That God should
reward sinful, guilty man with eternal glory, could not be known by Reason,
looking upon the Works of Creation, but by Revelation from God himself, or the
instruction of man, according to that Revelation. The first Books and Writings
of God's Kingdom, now extant, are those of Moses; as the last is the Revelation
of John the Divine. And this Canon of the Scripture, was finished within the
space of Two Thousand Years, or thereabout; and the Authors and Penmen of them
were all the Posterity of Jacob (if Luke the Evangelist be not excepted). The
several parts thereof were written, as they were revealed at several times.
They are the most ancient Writings in the World known unto us. They are either
Historical, or Doctrinal, or Prophetical. The Historical reaches the Creation:
The Prophetical, the dissolution of the World, and touches upon Eternity to
succeed. They were written in Hebrew and Greek, two Languages used in the midst
and Center of the then known World. That Moses, and Malachy, and all the rest
of the Books, should be written in the same Hebrew, seems strange: For, that
any Nation should continue their Language the same, without alteration (at
least) in the Dialect, for so many Generations, is not probable, though
possible. Yet it may be, God did so order it, that it should be published in
the Learned, not the Vulgar Language of that People. For the Learned Greek,
which is now in use amongst Scholars, is the same, which was used near Two
Thousand Years ago: Or it may be, that Ezra, or some inspired Prophet, after
the Captivity, might gather them into one Body, and Volum, and turn them into
the same Hebrew, wherein we enjoy them. The Old Testament, which is the former
part of this Canon, was translated into Greek, before the Incarnation of our
Blessed Savior, and made way for the New Testament, the second part, and for
the Gospel to be preached in all Nations. The Original Copies are properly and
primarily authentical Divines, and infallible; Transcripts and Translations,
secondarily, and so far as they agree with the Originals, and no further.

That is true of the whole body of the Scripture, Divine Apostle affirmed of
his Doctrine, 1 John 1. 2, 3, 4. That it was most excellent; 1. For the
Subject. 2. For the certain truth. 3. For the end thereof, and the great good
it tended unto.

1. For the subject it was most excellent, even the Word of Life, and that
Eternal Life, which was with the Father, which was the life and light of men,
which was made flesh, and now is glorified at the right hand of the Father.

2. The truth of it was certain, and infallible: For,

1. It was manifested, and manifested unto them the Apostles of that Eternal
Word. 2. Their apprehension was clear and certain: For they had heard that
which was manifested: They had seen it with their eyes, looked upon it, and
handled it with their hands. 3. Their Declaration of it was agreeable to the
Manifestation, and their knowledge of it: For that which they had seen and
heard, they did declare (...) write, and nothing else.
3. The end was Fellowship with the Apostles themselves; and their Fellowship
was with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ. And they wrote these
things, that the joy of their Disciples might be full. In like manner; The
subject of the Scriptures is the Kingdom of God, and that Eternal Word which
was with the Father. The truth thereof is most certain, and infallible, in
respect of God's Revelation, the knowledge of the Prophets, and Apostles, and
their Declaration of it in Word and Writing. The end and ultimate effect
thereof believed, and obeyed, is, Full Communion with God and Jesus Christ; and
thereupon Full joy, and everlasting glory.

These Scriptures are sufficient for all ends and purposes God intended them;
and impartial. For the Scriptures of the Old Testament in their time were able
to save such as believed and obeyed them. And after the Canon of the New
Testament was finished, it was able to make men of those times Wise unto
Salvation, through Faith in Jesus Christ. Yet after the Gospel was revealed,
the Doctrine of the Old Testament was insufficient to this end. The whole body
is not only sufficient, but super-abundant. For some part or parts, of the New
Testament (though all the other were lost) will sufficiently direct us to
Eternal Glory. For the Divine Character thereof, something shall be said
hereafter. For the Authority and Credit of them, that is true of all the whole,
which the Apostle affirms of one principal part, concerning the coming of
Christ into the World, to save sinners; That it was a faithful saying, and
worthy of all acceptance. For the perspicuity; the entrance of his wor^s. give
light, and gives understanding to the simple, Psalm, 119. 130. And Timothy, of
a Child, learned them.

In this extraordinary Communication of God's mind to Man by man, 1. The
persons by whom he spoke. 2. The matter spoken, as it was strange and new. 3.
The confirmation of the Doctrine taught, so far as it was new.


1. The principal persons were Christ and his Apostles: For in these last days
(says the Apostle) he has spoken unto us by his Son, whom he has made Heir
of all things; By whom he made the Worlds, who was the brightness of his
Fathers glory, and the express Image of his Person* Heb. 1. 2, 3. He was more
excellent then the Angels, then Moses, then all the Prophets: He was the great
Prophet, acquainted with his Fathers secrets, taught the Doctrine of Eternal
Life, confirmed the same by his Holy Life his glorious Miracles, and sealed it
with his blood. Besides, God spoke by the Apostles, and especially after they
had received the Holy Ghost, sent down from Heaven by Christ glorified,
according to his Promise. These made up the Canon of the New Testament.

2. They taught Doctrine, that for the matter was new: For, besides the Morals
formerly known, and other Points revealed in the Old Testament, they did
declare and write by the infallible direction of the Holy Ghost, That Jesus of
Nazareth, born at Bethlem, crucified at Jerusalem, was the Son of God, was
risen again from the dead, ascended into Heaven, made Universal King, and an
everlasting Priest, makes intercession in Heaven: That remission of sins, and
eternal life upon condition of Faith in him as glorified, was promised, and to
be preached to all Nation (...) the Jew first, and then unto the Gentiles.

3. Because these things, though not contrary to Reason, yet far above Reason,
were New, and tended to the alteration of the former administration of God's
Kingdom, and many former Laws given by God unto the Fathers, and the abolition
of Religion that was then established in all Nations; therefore it was
confirmed by the new and excellent gifts of the Apostles, the great and
glorious miracles done in the Name of Christ; the gifts of the Holy Ghost from
Heaven upon such as heard and received this Doctrine, by the conversion of Jews
and Gentiles, and this by mean and contemptible men. These were special Works
of the Supreme and Eternal Providence, and such as the like had not been done
since the Creation, nor ever since the times of those Apostles, who could speak
in the Languages of all Nations to whom God sent them, so as the unlearned
might understand them. These taught first by word of mouth, and then by
Writing, till the Canon of the New Testament was finished: and the Originals of
their Writings were kept in the Churches they planted, and after composed in
one body.

Thus far God spoke to man, Church, and his Divine Revelations were always the
Rule of ordinary Teachers: And, in matter of Religion, they had no Warrant to
teach any thing, but according to that Rule. These ordinary Teachers were
Fathers, Masters of Families, every Neighbor and Brother, which had ability
and opportunity. Amongst the Jews, the ordinary Prophets, Scribes, Lawyers, who
were learned in the Law of God, Priests and Levites. But the principal amongst
these are the Learned, who have taken that charge upon them, according to a
Lawful Call, make it their chief business, to whom maintenance, by God's
institution, is due. These* in the New Testament, are called Pastors,
Teachers, Bishops, Elders, Ministers, who take charge of men's souls. This
distinction of Teachers in the times of the Gospel, may be grounded on that
Text; When Christ ascended up on high; he led Captivity captive, and gave gifts
to men. And he gave some Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, some
Pastors and Teachers, Ephesians. 4. 8, 11. The extraordinary were Apostles,
Prophets, Evangelists: The ordinary were Pastors and Teachers. And these
later, as well as the former, were given for the perfecting of the Saints, for
the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ, ver. 12.
These also may teach the mysteries of God's Kingdom by word, and by writing.
Yet neither their words nor writings were of equal authority with the words and
writings of the Prophets and Apostles. For the Authority of their Doctrine
presupposes, that it is contained in the Holy Scriptures, and that the Holy
Scriptures are the Word of God; and that those which they affirm to be the Holy
Scriptures are so indeed. This gives occasion to examine what force may be in
the Tradition of the Church, to prove the Scriptures to be the Word of God.
This cannot be done to purpose, except we know 1. What Tradition is. 2. What
the Church. 3. What the Holy Scriptures be, as most understand them in this
point.


1. Tradition, in this particular, is nothing but a Testimony, which as such
has no force in it to prove any thing, but that which is borrowed from the
party testifying, or the thing testified, or* from some other thing: Therefore
it is called Argumentum artificiale, and assumptum; because it assumeth force
from some other Reason or Argument. A Testimony is either Divine or Humane: For
here I will say nothing of the Testimony of Angels. The Divine Testimony is
infallibly and necessarily true; yet not as a Testimony, but as the Testimony
of God, whose Veracity is such, that he cannot d^^ive, or be deceived: He is
true, and Truth it self. The testimony of man may be, and is many times false;
for he is subject unto Error, and may be deceived, because his knowledge is
imperfect: He may also deceive for want of fidelity and integrity. There is no
necessary and inseparable Connection between his testimony and the truth;
because he himself, as testifying, and truth, are separable. This is the reason
why testimonies in judgment are confirmed by Oath: And for this cause the
Doctrine of the Apostles, so far as it was new, was attested from Heaven.

2. The party testifying in this particular is the Church, as a Collective
Body. By Church may be understood, either a particular Church, or Churches, or
the Universal made up of all the Particulars. This Universal Church is either
the present Universal Church, or the same considered, as successively continued
since the time of the Apostles, or as including John the Baptist, Christ, and
his Apostles; or the Church of all times since the Beginning. Again, the
present Universal Church of any time may be considered, either as properly
Universal, or as representatively such, in a general Council.

3. The thing testified is, that the Holy Scriptures are the Word of God: And
by Holy Scriptures we may understand the whole Body of the Canon, and the
several Books of the Old and New Testament, and the same in such a certain
number as to exclude, or include the Books called Apocrypha. And these may be
considered either in the Original Copies, or in Transcripts, or in
Translations: or else we may understand the principal matters of the Scripture,
concerning Faith in Jesus Christ, and obedience unto his Commands. After this
explication given, some things are to be observed, 1. Concerning the thing
testified, and to be believed, 2. Concerning the Testimony of the Church.


First,

1. Every Christian born, and continuing in the Church, by his Birth, Baptism,
Education in the Church is bound to believe that the Doctrine of the
Scriptures, concerning Faith in God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost; and
Obedience, is Divine and from God.

2. That none such having the use of Reason, ought to rest upon mere tradition,
but ought to seek a better and higher Reason.

3. None is bound to believe by a divine and infallible Faith, necessary to
Salvation, that all, and every Book, and part of the Scripture is immediately
and infallibly divine, further then he has some certain reason so to do.

4. That the Original Transcripts and Translations of the Scriptures, agree in
the principal Doctrine necessary to Salvation, though in other respects they
may differ. For the most wise and merciful Providence has so ordered it, that
there is found no Transcript or Translation, wherein there is not so much as
would direct a man unto Salvation, though there be many mistakes and errors in
them.

5. That many have been converted by the bare instruction of one single Teacher
without the Scriptures: Yet the matter of that instruction was in the
Scriptures. No man can believe without the Word of God taught, yet many may
believe without the Word of God written.

6. That the Doctrine of the Old Testament, was sufficient to save such as
lived before the Incarnation; but not, after the Revelation and Preaching of
the Gospel.

Secondly, Tradition, and the testimony of the Church;

1. That the testimony of the Church, as a Testimony, can satisfy no man. If
the Church indeed were infallible, and I knew it to be so, then I were bound to
believe it.

2. The testimony of the Church Universal, since the Apostles times, is but
humane and fallible, and inferior to the testimony of any one man immediately
inspired.

3. No man living, since the Gospel was preached to all Nations, and the Church
extended to the ends of the Earth, can resolve his Faith into the testimony of
the Universal Church. The reason is, because the Church, as universal, never
gave, nor he immediately receive, any such testimony. Much less is it possible,
in these present times, for any one man, or particular Church, to have any
distinct knowledge of any unanimous testimony of the Universal Church,
continued up to the Apostles times. For if there were any such testimony, it
must be known either by Histories of Credit, decrees of Councels, Writings of
particular men, or Bibles translated into the Languages of those Nations, where
the Gospel has been preached, and Churches planted. Yet all the Histories,
Canons, Writings of Christians, except very few, now extant have no Authors but
such as lived within the bounds of the Roman Empire. Though we must confess,
that within those Bounds, the Redeemer, and Canonical Writers were born, the
work of Redemption accomplished, the Gospel revealed, and the Canon of the New
Testament finished.

4. It being granted that the Scriptures of the Old, and New Testament, are the
Word of God, and of Divine Authority, it follows, that the Testimony of the New
Testament confirming the Old, and the predictions of the Old Testament, related
in the New to be exactly fulfilled, are of greater Authority and Credit, then
the Testimony of the Universal Church.

5. The Testimony of the Universal Church, including Christ and his Apostles,
with the Prophets, is infallible; but not, as the Testimony of the Church,
distinct from Christ and his Apostles.

6. The Testimony of the Universal Church (if we knew it) could not be a
sufficient ground of a Divine, but only an human, moral, fallible faith;
which Devils and wicked men may have, and that by nature without Supernatural
grace.

7. The Testimony of the Church, so far as it may be had, is a good
introduction, and also a rational motive to receive the Scriptures as the Word
of God. Yet this is not as a Testimony, nor merely, as Universal in some
respect, nor as ancient, and consisting with it self (for Antiquity,
Universality and Consent may agree to a false tradition of Idolatry), yet it is
more worthy of credit then other Testimonies.

First, In respect of the Persons testifying, The best qualified men in the
World, and such as did manifest by their profession, Practice, Sufferings, that
they had much of God in them.

Secondly, and principally in respect of the matter of the Scriptures testified
to be Divine. For,

1. It Is excellent, and such as cannot be found in any other Writings in the
World: There is nothing rational, or good, which tends to make a man better, or
more happy to be found in any Heathen or Mahumetan Books, which is not found in
It, and far more excellent then can be read in theirs; and the same pure,
without mixture of any such Errors, Absurdities, Abominations, as their
writings are polluted with.

2. The eternal rules of Wisdom and Justice, according to which the World, is
and ever has bin governed by a Supreme Providence, are recorded in these
Volums.

3. In this book we read more Truths, and the same more clear concerning the
Eternal Deity, the nature and employment of Angels; the nature, operations,
and qualities of the immortal Soul, than in any book in the World.

4. The Doctrine therein contained has had, and still has, such excellent
effects upon the souls of men, both to convert and comfort them, as never any
other had. And this is the more wonderful, if we consider the Success of the
Gospel. For the Doctine thereof, though contrary to flesh and blood, to the
errors of the Jews, the Religion of all Nations, yet was diffused, and that by
a few mean and contemptible men in the eye of the World, into all Nations; and
this in the midst of cruel and bloody persecutions, against all the opposition,
which the Devils of Hell, the greatest Scholars, the profoundest Statesmen,
the most Cunning Priests, the greatest and most Powerful Rulers, both of Jews
and Gentiles could make.

5. The most certain, clear, particular praedictions of future Contingents
fulfilled so exactly, many years after they were publicly declared, by word
and writing, do much, and very much argue, these Divine Writings to be from
Heaven.

6. There is an admirable Harmony, and Consent of all parts, though the Authors
thereof lived in several times, and at so great a distance, that there passed
near 2000 years, between Moses, and John the Divine and Evangelist, and near
1500, between Moses and Malachy. They all agree in the Principal Subject, the
Principal Scope, and the means conducing thereunto.

7. I never did Seriously meditate upon, and digest any part of it, so as to
understand the Scope and Method, but I did admire the excellency of it; and the
more I understood it, the more I admired it. And I am persuaded, that if we
clearly understood the parts thereof, we might easi^y disco^er the Divine
Characters, and plainly distinguish them from all other writings. Yet none of
these are of any great force, to such as are ignorant of them, and know them
only upon the Tradition of others; Neither is Universal Tradition, the
ordinary way whereby men are Converted: For most who do believe to salvation,
hear only one, or a few teachers, and the same not immediately infallible and
inspired; and by their Doctrine contained in these Scriptures, and the power of
the Spirit attain to a Divine and saving faith. For faith is by hearing, and
hearing by the word of God, preached immediately unto them; For so the place is
to be understood, Romans 10. 17. And no man can prove that the immediate Proposer
of saving truth should be infallible, but that the Doctrine taught be
infallibly true. No rational man can rationally reject any Doctrine, much
less this, except he have some reason for it; but there can be no reason of
any moment ever alleged against this Doctrine, or any particular thereof
rightly understood. It seems strange to me that any Christians, especially,
such as do confess the holy Scriptures in themselves to be Divine, should make
a question, whether they can be believed to be the word of God any other ways,
but by the Tradition of the Church. It is indeed some advantage to the Bishop
of Rome, and his Associates, and Vassals to make men believe, that their faith
and belief of the Divinity of the Scriptures depends upon the Tradition of the
Church in their Sense: For when all is well examined, they understand by Church
themselves, and their own present Church: Yet they cannot well agree amongst
themselves what this present Church should be; Whether the Pope in his Chair
alone as the Visible head, or he with a general Council: Yet this Church is no
ways universal, except, so far as she professes the universal faith (as
some of their Cardinals have observed): Neither is she any more infallible
then other Churches be. Yet men will believe that she is the Universal Church,
infallible, and the only infallible expounder and proposer of the Scriptures,
and can detain them, and Seal them up in an unknown Language, so as that the
Vulgar shall neither read them, nor hear them in a Language understood by them;
she will have some advantage. For by this means the people are kept in
ignorance, and unity; and so their unwritten Traditions, Doctrines and
Practices, so directly contrary to express Scripture, shall not be questioned,
but received by an implicit Faith. This argument of Tradition well examined
cannot advantage them of Rome, nay it is a Plain Disadvantage. For their
Tradition does prove a Chimera, and Some Protestant writers ascribe too much
unto it, and also speak too loosly and at random of it in this point especially.

But to return unto those ordinary teachers,

1. How they acquire their knowledge.

2. How they Communicate it to others.

3. How the People must receive it Communicated.

4. What God has promised to do, if both Minister and People perform their
duty.

1. They acquire their knowledge by such means, which God has given, and
ordained for that end. They do not receive it by immediate inspiration, as the
holy Prophets and Apostles did: God gives them natural parts and endowments in
the giving of them being, and some of them from their Mothers womb, are
designed for this work. But let their natural parts and endowments be never so
excellent, yet they must at first be taught and instructed, both in the Arts
and Languages, especially the originalls: and after some foundation is laid,
they may much improve themselves by the Learned works of others, their own
industry, Prayer, and Gods blessing. Lexicons, Concordances, Translations, are
great helps for the attayning the knowledge of the Original tongues:
Expositions, Commentaries, Systems, Treatises, do conduce much for the
understanding the matter of the Scriptures. God has done much for us in this
kind; but our neglect is great, and many have not the benefit of good education
and direction at the first. And there is a great disparity, between Ministers
of the higher and lower forms: yet no man is fit for this calling, who is not
furnished, with so much knowledge, and such a measure of utterance, as to be
able to declare to others, the whole Counsel of God, and ^each them all
things, necessary to Salvation. Yet many will take upon them to teach before
they have well Learned; and will be Masters before they have bin Scollers: And
the most insufficient will pretend the Spirit to cloak their ignorance. After
these ordinary teachers have once stored up a treasure, they consecrate
themselves to Christ, and engage to make it their work to do him service in
this kind.

Being rightly qualified, Catechisms, Expositions, Sermons, and other ways. The
first work, is to Catechize the Ignorant, and teach them the first principles
of the Gospel. To this purpose they have our Saviors Creed of faith in God the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; the Commandments of the Moral Law, contracted
into the Love of God and our Neighbor; The Lord's Prayer (as we use to call
it), and the Doctrine of the Sacraments. And these few understand; yet the
ignorant and unlearned, and Children should know, and that not only the words,
but the true and Genuine sense according to their Capacity. This (though the
foundation) is too much neglected: By Expositions they acquaint the people,
with the occasion, Scope, Method, and Meaning of several parts and portions of
the Scripture. By Sermons they explain and apply some Text of Scripture,
proposing out of the same some Divine axiom; which once un^olded and made
plain, they apply by way of Instruction in the truth; Confutation of error,
Reproof of the guilty, Consolation of the dejected stirring up to duty by
exhortation, restrayning from sin by Dehortation. Their Doctrine should be the
Pure word of God, made plain, dispensed wisely, delivered out of an heart
sincerely desiring, and intending the Salvation of the People, and ought to be
confirmed by the Teacher's example, and the Principal matter must be the
Mysteries of Gods Kingdom.

This is the duty of Teachers; which performed by them, God ex^pects also
certain Performances from the Persons taught; which neglected, the word of God
cannot enter into the immortal-soul, so as to work effectually, and be
manifested to be the Word of God indeed. For,

1. The heart of man must be prepared and that,

1. With an high conceit of the Doctrine of the Scriptures taught, that it is
the word of God revealed from Heaven, out of great love and mercy to man; that
it highly and very much concerns him, upon the knowledge and observance whereof
depends his eternal estate in the World to come; According to it he must be
judged, and sent to Heaven or Hell, and made eternally happy or miserable, All
errors and false notions contrary unto it, must be rased out of the mind: All
inordinate affections and unruly passions must be subdued: For we must lay
apart all filthiness, and Superfluity of naughtiness, and receive with
meekness the pure and genuine word of God, which is able to save our souls,
Jam. 1. 24. And we must lay aside, all malice, and all guile, and hypocrisies,
and envies, and evil speakings and as Newborn babes desire the Sincere milk of
the Word, etc. 1 Pet. 2. 1, 2. We must make our minds like blank Paper, and in
our hearts we must be like little Children; otherwise the Heavenly Doctrine
cannot make so li^ely impressions upon us.

2. When the heart is thus prepared, we must hear and read attentively;
consider what is heard or read, that we may understand it: We must apply it,
and lay it close unto our own hearts, and pray for the Spirit, to make it
powerful and effectual within us. As it is Wisdom, first, to teach; so it is,
first, to learn the Principles, and to understand them well: and being once in
these well grounded, they will not be so subject either to be seduced, or
wave^ing in their judgment; and it will be a great advantage to improve their
knowledge. And when once they understand the truth, it will discover their
woeful condition to humble them, and their Savior to raise them up again. It Is
a part of the duty of every one that is a Scholar in this School, not only to
understand the truth, but also to endeavor the practice thereof,* out of an
earnest desire of Salvation. And if a man neglect the means, use not the power
that God has given him, and seriously intend the principal end, it will be
just with God to desert him, and deny his grace unto him. Practice must be the
principal design, and Knowledge so far as conducing thereunto.

If the man being taught, God's Blessed Spirit, to teach him inwardly and
effectually, then God will remember his Promise, and will give him a new Heart;
and a new Spirit he will put in him, and will take the stoney heart out of his
flesh, and give him an heart of flesh: He will put his Spirit within him, and
cause him to walk in his Statutes, and keep his Judgments to do them, Ezekiel. 36.
26, 27. For this is a Promise of the Gospel, and the New Covenant; I will put
my Laws into their mind, and write them in their hearts, Heb. 8. 10. And, as
man teaches outwardly, God teaches inwardly; yet he never writes his Word in
an unprepared heart; neither does he write any thing within, but that which is
taught outwardly, out of the Scriptures: And, as the Minister, must teach, so
the People must hear, and heed; otherwise God will deny his Spirit. Man cannot
speak unto the Soul immediately, but by the outward and inward Senses: God
speaks immediately unto the Soul, pierces deeply into it, writes clear and
lively Characters upon the mind, and makes strong impressions upon the heart.
When the Ministers Doctrine is thus accompanied with the Power of God, and
brought home not only unto, but also into the Soul, then the Teacher is a
Minister, not only of the Letter, but also of the Spirit: and the Word is the
Word of God indeed, formally and properly, when God thus speaks it immediately
himself; and it will manifest it self by the Heavenly Light, Power of
Sanctification, and Consolation following thereupon. And then man knows the
Word, read or heard preached out of the Scripture, to be from Heaven, and God's
Voice; and that upon better grounds, then any Tradition possibly can be* By the
same Word, we are begotten, and born anew: By the same, we must grow and tend
unto perfection, the Spirit concurring with it. And the Spirit, by Divine
Institution, and God's Promise, goes along with it, except man, by his neglect
of the means, or some other deme^it give ca^^e to God to deny it.

The sum of all this, is,

1. That the Doctrine of the Scriptures is the Rule whereby we are directed in
the knowledge of God's Kingdom.

2. This Doctrine was in the mind of God, and known only to himself before he
communicated it to Men and Angels.

3. He did make this known by immediate Inspiration to the Holy Prophets and
Apostles.

4. By them he communicated it to others, both by Word and Writing: in both
which they were directed by him infallibly.

5. The Originals therefore were immediately of Divine Authority, and most
worthy to be believed; and the Transcripts and Translations so far, as they
agreed with the Originals.

6. The Tradition or Testimony of the Church may declare this; yet, as a
Testimony, it can satisfy no man fully.

7. God communicates this Doctrine unto men by ordinary Teachers, not
immediately inspired.

8. The Scripture is the standing Rule, to direct these ordinary Teachers: And
so far as they follow this Rule, so far their Doctrine is good, and no further.

9. The people taught, are bound to hear those Teachers, with prepared hearts,
and, in that manner, as God requires.

10. If they hear in this manner, God, according to his Promise, will make it
effectual to convert, justify, and comfort them.

11. This Spirit testifying, by real effects, the matter of the Scripture, to
be Divine, is not a private Spirit, but the public Spirit of Christ in the
Universal Church: and the thing testified by this Spirit is the Public
Doctrine, believed and professed by the Universal Church. It Is true, that it is
testified to a private Man, and, in that respect, it is not Public.

12 By this manner of ordinary teaching, with the concurrence of the
sanctifying Spirit, God works ordinarily a Divine Faith in the hearts of men,
and not by the Universal Tradition of the Church.

13. The Tradition of the Church, so far as it may be known, concerning the
Divine Authority of the whole Canon, is a ground of a probable Faith, against
which, No rational man, as rational, can except.

CHAP. III.
Concerning the ancient Creeds, and Confessions; and of Faith in general.
HItherto, Theological Systems, following the Rules of the great Philosopher,
have attempted to reduce the Doctrine contained in God's Book, into the form of
an Art or Science (as some use to speak). They determine the Subject of it to
be Man, (Quatenus Beatificabilis) as capable of Spiritual and Eternal
Happiness. The Object of it must be (Deus, quatenus Beatificans) God, as the
Fountain and Cause of Eternal Bliss. And the end is, to direct the Spiritual
Acts and Operations of the Immortal Soul; so that by them, well regulated and
fixed upon their due Object, man may tend unto, and, in the end, attain the
full fruition of that Eternal Being in whom he shall be for ever blessed.
According to this determination, some reduce the Doctrine of the Scriptures, to
Truths, Promises, Duties; yet this is imperfect. Others make three Heads of
this Doctrine: 1. The first is the Being and Perfection of God in himself. 2.
The second, the Works of God. 3. The third, His Commands: Yet this, as the
former, proves defective, and no ways exact. Others, tell us, that the
Scriptures represent God to us. 1. As to be known: And, 2. As to be worshipped:
And so make the Parts of this Divine Doctrine, to be



1. Knowledge.

2. The Worship of God: And this has much affinity with that Distribution of
Theology, into Faith and Obedience; that is, the Rule of Faith, and Obedience.
These conceive all things in the Scripture, especially conducing to Salvation,
to be credenda, or agenda: The things to be believed, the Object of Faith; the
things to be done and performed, the Object of Obedience. For this, they think
that they have a sufficient ground in the Mandate, and Commission of our
Blessed Savior, Go and teach all Nations, baptizing them in the Name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; Teaching them to observe all
things whatsoever I have commanded you, Math. 28. 19, 20. And that of the
Apostle seems to confirm this; Hold fast the form of sound words, which thou
have heard of me in faith and love, 2 Timothy 1. 13. I will not examine these
distinctions now; but only say this much, That Faith and Obedience, or
Observancy (as some call it) according to the intended sense of these two
places, are only Duties to be performed by sinful man, Redeemed, and Called,
according to the Commands of their God-Redeemer; and so do not reach the utmost
bounds of this Heavenly Doctrine. And, even in this respect, they refer to
Government, and belong only to that One Head, and part thereof, The Commands
and Laws of God Redeemer, requiring obedience: And Faith it self is but one
part of this obedience, as it is a Duty. So that these things may be some ways
true, but no ways accurate and perfect. And if they may be allowed, mine
intended method, I hope, may pass without any harsh censure. For, I know no
reason to the contrary, seeing it is evident, that the Principal, if not the
adaequat subject of the Holy Scriptures, is the Kingdom, and Government of God:
The Doctrine whereof is methodically contracted in ancient Creeds and
Confessions, which take in the (Agenda, or) things to be practiced, as well as
the (Credenda) things to be believed.

Of these ancient Confessions, it may be observed; that,

1. Though they differ in words and expressions, Irenaeus, and Tertullian) yet
they agree in the matter and the principal method.

2. That diverse of the Ancients inform us, that the first Planted Churches
received the Forms of Confession, though different in some words and
expressions; yet the same for matter, and the general and principal method from
the Apostles; the Apostles from Christ; Christ from God. Thus, amongst others,
Tertullian.

3. They were received from Christ: 1. In that Mandate and Commission to the
Apostles; Go and teach all Nations, baptizing them in the Name of the Father,
and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. 2. By Inspiration of the Holy Ghost.


4. In those Words we have 1. God the Father Almighty, making Heaven and Earth
by his Word. 2. This Word and Son made flesh, redeeming sinful man. 3. The Holy
Ghost, by whom Christ was conceived and anointed, the Prophets inspired, the
Church sanctified unto Eternal Glory: For so the Ancients understood it, being
directed by the Apostles.


5. This Form thus understood, was: 1. A Tradition unwritten, and of Divine
Authority, as taught by Christ and his Apostles, before it was written: But, 2.
Being written and more fully explained in the Canon of the New Testament, it
can be no longer an unwritten Tradition: And whosoever, reading the New
Testament, does not find, and that in several places, both the matter, and
method of the ancient Confessions, understands little.


6. No particular form of Confession, considered as a Tradition of the Church,
since the time of the Apostles, can be of equal authority with the Scriptures.

7. That which we call the Apostles Creed, which we find in the Works of
Cyprian, and Russinus, with an Exposition, is no more, nor so much the Apostles
Creed, as some ancient Creeds, in form differing from it.

8. Those words of our Savior, and his Rule of Doctrine, concerning the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, with the three glorious Works of Creation,
Redemption, Sanctification, is a divine and wonderful Abridgment of all the
Doctrine of the Scripture especially of that which is necessary to Salvation.

The Confession and Creed of the Patriarchs, Enoch, was thus: God is, and he is
a Rewarder of them who diligently seek him, Heb. 11. 6. For they believed, That
there was one God most glorious, and blessed in Himself; who, by his Wisdom
and Power, made, preserved, and governed the World, and especially Mankind. For
to Reward, is an act of judgment: Judgment presupposes Laws; Laws, a
Governor; a Governor, Subjects made, and to be governed. So that in their
ancient Creed, we have God considered,

1. In Himself.

2. As a Governor of the World made by him, and especially of Men and Angels;
and that by Laws and Judgments. The obedience to these Laws is to seek God
diligently, according to the direction of those Laws; and the reward of this
Obe^ience is Eternal Life, as the punishment of Disobedience is Eternal Death.
And after the Fall of Man, no man in himself was capable of this Eternal Li^^
because all were guilty. Therefore they sought this glorious Reward by Ch^i^^
to come, whom all their Ilastical Sacrifices did typifie, as they sought their
God by Him.

The ordinary Analysis of that which we call, The Apostles Creed, as delivered
by more understanding Catechists, and Authors of Theological Systems, is this:

God being the Subject of that Confession is considered:

1. In himself, as God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

2. As in his Works.

1. Of Creation. 2. Of Providence. Providence preserves and governs all things
created, especially Man. Man made righteous, holy, happy,
1. Falls;

2. Is restored. He is restored by Redemption, and the Application of it. The
Redeemer, for Person, is the Word, and Son of God; for his Natures, God and
Man, for his Offices, Prophet, Priest, and King. His Work of Redemption has
two Parts.

1. His Humiliation.

2. His Exaltation, in his Resurrection, Ascension, Session at his Father's
righthand, and investiture with all power in Heaven, and Earth; whereby he is
made Lord and Judge of the World.

The Application, whereby we are made partakers of the Benefits of Christ's
Redemption, is made by the Spirit and Word, working Faith, whereby sinful men
are made Members of Christ, and of the Universal Church, which is the society
of Saints.

The benefits of this Redemption applied, and whereof the Church is partaker,
are Remission of sins Resurrection, and Life Everlasting.

Amongst many other Forms of Confessions, Creeds, delivered by the Ancients, I
thought good to pitch upon one in Tertullian; especially that in his
Prescriptions against Heretics, where we read thus:

REgula est autem Fidei, ut jam hinc quod credamus profiteamur illa seilicet
qua Credimus. Vnum omnino Deum esse, nec Alium prater Mundi Conditorem, qui
universa de Nihilo produxerit, per Verbum Suum primo Omnium ^missum: Id verbum,
Filium ejus appellatum, in Nomine Dei vary visum Patriarchis, in Prophetis
semper auditum, Postremo delatum ex Spiritu Dei Patris, et virtute in Virginem
Mariam, Carnem factam in utero ejus, et ex ea natum Hominem, et esse Jesum
Christum: exinde Praedicasse Novam Legem, et Novam Promissionem Regni Coelorum,
virtutes fecisse: Fixum cruci: Tertia Die Resurrexisse: In Coelos ereptum
Sedere ad Dextram Patris: Misisse Vicariam Vim Spiritus Sancti, qui Credentes
agat: Venturus cum Claritate ad Sumendos Sanctos in Vitae aeternae, et
Promissorum Coelestium Fructum, et ad Prophanos judicandos igni perpetuo, facta
utriusque Partis Resus^itatio ne cum Carnis Resurrectione. Haec Regula a
Christo (ut probabitur) instituta.

The reason why I propose this, Irenaeus and Tertullian: Concerning which,
several things are observable:

1. That it agrees with all the rest for Matter and Method.

2. It Is most exactly Consentaneous to plain and clear Scripture.

3, The Method is grounded upon our Saviors Creed.

4. It more fully and perfectly, out of the Scriptures, informs us of the
Person and Natures of Christ, and so of his Incarnation. For that Word, by
which the World, and so man, was created, was made flesh.

5. As in it, we have God the Father, creating the World by his Word, and the
same Word by the Spirit, assuming flesh redeeming man: so we have the same God,
by his Spirit, sanctifying man, more expressly delivered then in any of the rest.

6. We may observe, that that Word, which was first uttered and spoken in the
Creation before any thing could be created, was uttered and produced from
everlasting, as a lively Representation of God himself to himself.

7. That as the Spirit, so the Word was in the Prophets, as Prophets; as
without neither of which they could have been Prophets.

8. The Government of God Redeemer, is therein more expressly declared, then in
most of the other Forms. For the Government of Creation being presupposed, 1.
The manner of acquiring a New Power, by the Humiliation of the Word made flesh.
2. His Investiture with this Power, in his Exaltation. 3. The Exercise of it.
1. In giving the New Law, with a Promise, of Heaven's Kingdom. 2. In adjudging
men, either Profane to everlasting fire, or Holy unto the enjoyment of Life*
everlasting, upon the Resurrection of both, in the last, and Universal
Judgment, are in these few Words delivered plainly, and clearly.



9. This Form was received by the Church from the Apostles; and by the Apostles
from Christ.

10. That not any, but Heretics, did question any thing in this Creed.

11. Seeing these Heretics professed themselves Christians, and did
acknowledge Christ, and this had continued from Christ and the Apostles
Universally, and without controversy before these Heretics did arise,
therefore it did sufficiently prescribe against all Heresies, which different
from it did arise afterward.

The Analysis of these Creeds, Confessions, according to the ensuing Discourse
intended, takes in the matter and method in general of the former; yet is
delivered in other expressions. To understand it the better, you must observe:

1. That it presupposes the principal Subject of the Holy Scriptures, to be
the Kingdom of God; and that the Doctrine thereof is contracted in the Ancient
Creeds, and Forms of Confession.

2. That in a Kingdom, or Government, there must be a King or Governor,
invested with Power; which is, 1. Acquired. 2. Exercised: It Is exercised, 1. In
constituting a Commonwealth. 2. In the Administration of the same.



The Commonwealth is administered by Laws and Judgments: Laws determine the
Duties and Dues of men: Judgment renders the Dues of Rewards, or Punishments,
according to the observation or violation of the Laws. These things observed,
We have in this Kingdom

1. The KING.

2. His Government: The King is God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, who alone
is worthy of all honor, glory, power, and dominion for evermore. His
Government presupposes his Power; which is

1. Acquired.

2. Exercised. It Is acquired by Creation, as it is continued by Preservation.
For immediately upon the Creation, he became the Supreme, Universal, and
Absolute Lord, and continues so for evermore by his perpetual Preservation. For
seeing he made all things, even Men and Angels, of nothing, and they do always
for ever wholly depend upon him; therefore he must needs have an absolute,
full, and perpetual Propriety in, and Dominion over them, and they must needs
be his Servants and Vassals. This Power thus acquired, began to be exercised
immediately upon the Creation:

1. In the general Government of all things.

1. By a constitution of an Order amongst them. 2. By a Direction of them,
according to that Order, to their ends.
2. In the special Government of the immortal, and intellectual Creatures, who
alone were capable of Laws, Rewards, and Punishments. These special Creatures
were Angels and Men. Amongst the Angels he

1. Established an Order. 2. According to that Order, he does govern them, and
exercise his Power:
1. In giving them Laws.

2. In judging them according to those Laws: Some of the Angels continued loyal
and obedient, and were confirmed in perpetual estate of Holiness and Happiness,
which was their Reward. The disloyal and Apostate Angels were cast down from
Heaven, and reserved in everlasting Chains under Darkness, unto the Judgment of
the great day, Jude, v. 6. This was their Doom, and the judgment of God upon
the Angels. The Government of Men is twofold: The first, of Justice: The
second, of Mercy: Of Justice, in the first Adam: of Mercy, in the second. In
the first, after God became his Lord, and Man, his Subject, in a special
manner, he gives him Laws both Moral, and Positive: and whilst man is
obedient, his estate is comfortable: But this not continuing long, he is
tempted, sins, and so is judged: yet so, that the Sentence, in part, might
be reversed, and the Eternal Punishment deserved, was made, upon certain
conditions, avoidable, and might be prevented. And least man should perish
everlastingly, this Government is altered, and God acquires a new power by the
work of Redemption, and does exercise it by the Redeemer. The Redeemer is the
Word, who was God, and the Son of God, made flesh, and anointed with the Holy
Ghost, by whom he was conceived; to be a Prophet, Priest, and King. As Priest,
he offers himself a Sacrifice upon the Cross, satisfies God's justice, merits
man's salvation, and his own eternal glory; and upon his Resurrection he is
invested with that glory and power, which he had merited, and God by him begins
to exercise his new acquired power, 1. By constituting a new Kingdom, whereof
the Head must be his Son at his right hand, and the Church his body Politic,
2. By the administration of this kingdom with victorious power unto the end.
For Christ must reign till his enemies be made his footstool. In this
Administration, he

1. Appoints officers who must Publish the Laws of his Kingdom, and endues them
with the Holy Ghost from Heaven. Their doctrine to^ether with the Power of the
Spirit, is made known and effectual in all Nations, and some believe, some
love darkness rather then light. The Believers make up the Body of the Church,
Unbelievers constitute the body both of Rebels and Enemies; and both are the
subject of the judgment of God Redeemer by Christ. This judgment is executed in
Rewards and Punishments, in this life, upon particular persons, severally and
successively considered, and is fully consummate upon the Resurrection, at the
Universal or general Assizes; when the Wicked with the Angels, shall be cast
into everlasting fire* and the Righteous shall be rewarded with eternal glory.
The punishments determined by this Judgment, as also the rewards, shall be
perpetual: And in all this, there is in the matter or the method, no
difference or variation from the Ancient Creeds, or in the expressions from the
holy Scriptures.

Before I conclude this Chapter,

1. These Sums and Methods are called Creeds; because the matter of them is
(Credenda) things, or rather truths concerning things, to be believed: And
Confessions, because the Truths believed in the heart must be Confessed with
the mouth; For with the heart man believes unto Righteousness, and with the
mouth Confession is made to Salvation, Romans 10. 10.

2. If we consider the Doctrine of the Holy Scriptures, contracted in these
Confessions in respect of man's duty; all things therein are proposed,

1. As Truths,

2. Some things as Commands or Laws. As Truths, man's duty is to believe them,
as Commands to obey them. Thence that distribution of Divine and Saving
Doctrine into Faith, or Obedience: The truths, and so the knowledge and
unbelief of them, are first in order: And because the matter of some truths are
commands, therefore Commands and Obedience follow as the second in order. Both
are contained in the Scriptures, expressly. In the Creeds, the Commands and
Obedience are implied: Yet, lest we mistake, we must distinguish between the
knowledge and obedience of Angels, and the knowledge and obedience of man. And
both these may be considered in respect of man innocent, man fallen, man under
the Law, man under the Gospel: For in all these respects, they are different
(as will appear hereafter).

3. Man's knowledge especially since the fall is imperfect, and is not so
evident as demonstrative and intuitive knowledge is, and therefore called
Faith, which cannot perceive the things known clearly or immediately, but by
virtue of a Testimony. To define which faith in general it must needs be proper
unto Logic, which is the rule of man's understanding, whereof faith is an act,
and in general, that which we call assent, allowing the connection of the terms
of a proposition, and yields unto it as true. Yet this Assent though firm and
certain, is not so perfect as that which is grounded upon immediate Evidence of
the things represented by the Terms. Therefore. As quore^ Camer acensis.
Lincolniensis makes the Genus of it to be Opinion, and says that fides est
opinio, And that faith which is grounded only upon probable reasons can be no
more then Opinion, which always is an Assent, yet not firm and certain, as
this Faith, we speak of, must be. For it is divine and immediately grounded on
the testimony or word of God, certainly known to be such: It Is not the word of
God immediately to me, as spoken by man either fallible, or infallible; but
either as attested outwardly by miracles or gifts of the Holy Ghost, or some
other way; or inwardly by some real effects of the Spirit, writing this word in
man's heart powerfully to affect it, and incline it to obedience. A Speculative
and general assent without any Saving effects the But the devils can make no
application to themselves, because they were not made to them, but to Men.
Devils may have. The Tradition of the Church or testimony of any man cannot
possibly represent the word of God, as the word of God, immediately to the
Soul. The Practical divine assent is a great part of our Regeneration, and the
Principle of all divine and noble actions, as it is of all Spiritual Solid
Comfort.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Divine Essence and Attributes in General.
IN the Kingdom of God, 1. The King. 2. His Government.


The King must be considered.

1. In himself. 2. In his Legal Capacity, or as King.
As in himself he is God the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost. The term
or word GOD puts us in mind of the Essence and being of this King; and the
terms, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost of his acting in himself; and those
Wonderful and hidden productions; Whence arise several Relations and Relative
properties. But before I proceed to speak of these deepest Mysteries, I must
say something of our knowledge of God, and the way, how he does represent
himself unto us, so that we may understand some little of him in the darkness
of the World, till we see him face to face, and more fully and clearly in
Eternal Glory. Such is the excellency of this King, and such the brightness of
his Glory, that it denies any near access to Silly mortal man, who must not
curiously Pry into these Secrets, but humbly adore and at a great distance.
That God is most intelligible in himself, is certain: For the perfect Being, is
the most perfect object of understanding. But it is one thing to be so clearly
visible in himself, another to be so to us. An Infinite and Eternal Being must
needs be far above a finite and limited understanding. Such especially ours now
is: For our Capacity is Shallow and Narrow, and can in no wise Comprehend the
Incomprehensible, or apprehend that which is so far above* our Sphere. That God
is, will be granted of all, a few gross Atheists excepted: Yet such is the
want of due instruction in some, the extinction of Nature's light, by neglect,
and sin in many, and the Judgment of Divine desertion, whereby men are
delivered up into a Reprobate mind, that many do deny that God who made them,
and in whom they live move and have their Being, and will not be convinced of
the truth of his Eternal Existence. So that the great Cardinal of Cumbray, had
some cause to say, That by us it could not be evidently known that God is, but
only by the gratuitous union of God with our understanding, representing
himself as a Visible Object, sufficiently clear and shining in his own light
unto the understanding rightly disposed. Bacon and O^cam seem to be of this
mind: And surely if God withdraw his light, man presently is so blind, that no
reason alleged by any wit of man, can make him see this truth that God is,
though it be the first of all truths. Yea though we may know this that he is,
and does exist, yet, no man can tell what he is; Something the Heathens knew of
God by Tradition, and the light of Nature: For his works did speak of his
Eternal Power and Godhead even unto them. The Jews knew more; for they had
Moses and the Prophets: The Christians most of all: For they have not only the
light of nature, the great Book and Volum of the World, and Moses with the
Proph^ts, but also Christ, and his Apostle^, with the light of the Gospel. Yet
notwithstanding, our knowledge is imperfect, not only in respect of God, who
fully knows himself, but in respect of Angels, who know him clearly though not
fully and infinitely. The most accurate Logic in this particular, can little
advantage the most piercing understanding: Yet so far God has manifested
himself unto us, especially in the Gospel, as will be sufficient for our
eternal glorification, in which estate we shall know him more fully, even so
much as will make us fully happy.

The manner whereby we know our God is by many Attributes, one Individual
Being by one act, he has given himself Several, and many attributes, that so
by many and several acts, we may know something of that which is one in it
self. Of these Attributes many things are observable, as here they follow.

1. It was Gods gracious condescension, both to the manner, and measure of our
imperfect understanding, to manifest himself by these Attributes.

2. They are called Attributes, because God attributes them to himself, and
affirms them of himself; Properties, because we conceive them as proper unto
God, and such as can be praedicated only of him; So that by them we distinguish
him from all other Beings; Perfections, not that they are perfections, but
because they are several representations of that one perfection, which is
himself; Names and Terms, because they express and signify something of his
Essence; Notions, because they are so many apprehensions of his Being, as we
conceive of him imperfectly in our minds.

3. These Attributes, whether we call them names or notions, do truly agree to
God; and by them we truly conceive of him.

4. The reason hereof is, because that one individual Being* may be truly
represented by several distinct representations, and so apprehended.

5. There can be no inequality between these Attributes, as considered in
respect of God; For they all signify but one infinite Being: Yet, as they may
be exercised, not only Severally but unequally; So they may be apprehended as
unequal in respect of the subject, wherein they may be exercised. For God may
exercise his Justice, in punishing the wicked more then his Mercy; and his
Mercy more then his Justice, in the salvation of his people.

6. Though the Unity, immensity, Eternity, Understanding, Will, Wisdom,
Justice, Mercy, etc, of God in respect of their several distinct
Representations, and our apprehensions do differ, yet in respect of God, they
no ways differ either really or formally, because they are one individual
essence.

7. Though Father, Son, Holy Ghost, Creator, Preserver, Lord, Lawgiver,
Judge, be truly affirmed of God, yet they are not properly Attributes, as they
are usually taken; because Attributes are intended to represent the essence;
those other terms are Extrinsecal Denominations, in respect unto the
Creatures, and are grounded upon his Works, or else upon the intrinsecal acts
of the Deity upon it Self.

To understand these things the better, we must not be ignorant, how our
understanding acts upon things and beings intelligible. Logisms, or Logical
affections, which we call Arguments. For by these the thing irradiates and
becomes visible to the Soul, and so is perceivable. These affections are like
Colors upon the Surface of the thing, without which it is not perceivable by
the eye. These affections and arguments upon the which the understanding so
much depends, are cause, effect, subject, adjunct, whole, part, and the rest.
God who knew this better then we our selves do, was willing to represent this
his glorious essence, in such a manner as man by several acts might know
something of him. For this purpose he in his blessed word did give himself
these Attributes, which are like unto Logical arguments, but are not such* for
God has no cause, neither is his Being in its self a cause: He is no effect,
no subject, adjunct, whole, or part: These do not agree to him. The word of God
therefore is the rule of our understanding, and directing it in the knowledge
of his essence, is our Supernatural Logic, and the Attributes are our Divine
Topics. For the Logic which we now have composed by man, serves only for a
rule in the understanding of things created: We must have a far higher and more
excellent Logic, to understand the Being of our God.

These Attributes by some are numbered, Essence and Subsistences, and make the
Essence intelligible by his Names and Properties (for so they call the
Attributes) which are either Incommunicable or Communicable by Analogy. Some
inquire what God is,

1. In his Essence.

2. In his Li^e: And thereupon inform us that some Attributes agree unto him in
respect of his Essence, Some in respect of his Life: Some rank them under 3
heads:

The first whereof agree unto him, in respect of his Being;

The second, in respect of his Life;

The third, in respect of the perfection of his Life.

Some divide them also into 3 sorts, in another manner: For, some (say they)
show what he is; Some, how great; Some, how good he is. I desire to have the
Liberty that these and others have taken. Before I come to the Particular
handling of these Attributes, wherein I shall not differ much, from some of the
former, it is to be observed,

1. That some of the Names given to God in Scripture are Attributes; some not.

2. That God cannot be defined according to the rules of Logic.

3. That which we call a definition of God, does comprehend all the Attributes;
So that by good consequence all of them may be deduced from it.

4. The Definitions I intend to speak of are two.

The first, is that of Doctor Amyes, out of Mr. Richardson, That God is a
Spirit living of himself. In this, it is supposed,

1. That Spiritual Substances are more excellent then bodily.

2. That Living Spirits are more excellent, then such as have not Life.

3. That Such as have intellectual, and moral Life, are most excellent of all
Created beings; These are, Men and Angels. Yet these do not Live in themselves
independently: For they depend on God. From all these presupposed, it follows
that God being a Spirit, Living with the most excellent Life, and in himself
independently, must needs be every way, the most Excellent Substance, and far
above all others.

The second definition is, God is a being absolutely perfect; Some, if not all
understanding Heathens, did conceive that God was (Ens praestantissimum) the
most Excellent Being. Whereby they did acknowledge,

1. That God was; because a Being, and

2. That He was an Excellent Being:

3. That of all others, he was most Excellent. And this was to be a most
perfect Being: God is a Being; and not any kind of Being, but a Substance,
which is the Foundation of other Beings: And not only a Substance but
perperfect. Yet many Beings are perfect in their kind, and in a certain measure
of Perfection; yet limited and finite. But God is absolutely, fully, and every
way infinitely perfect: And therefore above Spirits, living Spirits; above
Angels, who are perfect comparatively, and in an high measure. But their
Perfection is infinitely short of God's perfection. This absolute Perfection
includes all the Attributes, even the most excellent: It excludes all
Dependency, being after not being, Composition, Corruption, Mortality,
Contingency, Ignorance, Unrighteousness, Weakness, Misery, and all
Imperfections whatsoever: It includes necessity of Being, Independency, perfect
Unity, Simplicity, Immensity, Eternity, Immortality, the most perfect Life,
Knowledge, Wisdom, Integrity, Power, Glory, Bliss; and all these in the highest
degree, and the Abstract. And though by these we may know much of God in this
Life; yet all our knowledge here on Earth is nothing to that we expect in
Heaven: And the knowledge of Angels is nothing to the knowledge, wherewith God
knows himself: For he being infinite, knows himself, as infinite, infinitely.
We may know that he is infinite; but as infinite, we know him not. We see but,
(if we may so speak) only the Outside; nay, but the Back parts of God: We
cannot pierce into the secrets of this Eternal Being. Our Reason comprehends
some little of him; and when it can proceed no further, Faith comes in, and we
believe far more then we can understand. And this our Belief is not contrary to
Reason; but Reason it Self dictates unto us, that we must believe far more of
God, then it can inform us of.

CHAP. V.
Of the Divine Attributes in Particular.
THese Divine Attributes,

1. The Greatness of GOD. 2. The Goodness of GOD.
The Heathens did give unto their great God, whom they conceived to be King of
their Petty Deities, the Titles of Optimus and Maximus, and so made him the
Best and the Greatest. Whence they had this Light, I know not: Clemens
Alexandrinus tells us, that many of their greatest Scholars were Thieves, and
did steal out of the Scripture, and from the Jews (whom they would never
acknowledge their Masters) the choifest Truths in their Writings. Howsoever,
this is very certain, That to be great and good, is to be like unto God; and
the greatest and the best, are the most like unto him: and to be absolutely the
greatest, and the best, is to be God. The Scripture speaks very much of the
greatness and goodness of God. And by these two, God is sufficiently
differenced from all other Beings, and is manifested by them, to be far above,
and infinitely more excellent then all.

God's greatness is that, ad extra, and is the same with Potentia, which is an
Attribute indeed, but in another sense, Neither is it the greatness of
Quantitative extension; for that is Mathematical, and agreeing only to Bodies,
and Bodily Substances: Yet,

1. If He were not great Essentially, he could not be so great in Dominion and
Strength.

2. This greatness is manifested in the greatness of Dominion, of Strength, and
of great and vast extensive Bodies, especially the vast Pile of the World.

His Greatness is either Unity, infiniteness of Being.

The Unity of his Being, is that Whereby He is one only God; so that there
cannot be another.

Philosophers tell us, that Quantity follows the Essence of things quantitative
immediately, and is so near unto it as that some conceive, that Quantitas is
nothing else but Substantia quanta, and adds no entity to the substance. This
Quantity makes a thing measurable two ways:

1. By Number.

2. By Magnitude. And though the greatness of the Divine Essence be neither
Physical, nor Mathematical; yet for the Explication thereof, we use the terms
of both, yet abstracting all imperfection. God, for number, is one; for
measure, infinite: and he is infinite, that he may be only one and the
greatest. That He is One, we often read in Scripture, yet so, that his Unity
sometimes signifies his Constan^y; sometimes his Immutability, sometimes his
Monarchical Dominion: But so it is not here taken. Though this Unity be a
general Affection, agreeing to every Being; so that it cannot be a Being,
except one: yet this Unity of God is proper to himself, and agrees to nothing
else as it agrees to him: Some things are so one, as that they are many,
because compounded, and have parts; but God is a pure Act, and has no parts;
neither is compounded, but is a Pure simple Being: And that which some make a
distinct Attribute, and call Simplicity, belongs unto this Unity. Some things
are so one, as that their Being admits of many Individuals of the same kind; as
Men, Angels, and other Creatures. Yet God is so One, that there are no other
Gods, though there be other Beings. Some things are so one, as that there are
not actually any other of that kind: So there is one Sun, one Moon, one World,
one Heaven, one Earth: yet there may be, and might have been more, if it had
pleased God to make them. But God is so one, as that there is not, there cannot
be, another God. Therefore, he is only one, and takes up the Deity so fully,
as that he can admit no fellow.

That God is only One, the Scriptures testify: Is there any God besides me?
Yea, there is no God, I know not any, Isa. 44. 8. Thou art God alone, is the
confession of the Psalmist, Psalm. 86. 10. and of Christ himself: This is Life
Eternal, to know thee the only true God. These, and many other places
represent Him, not only as One, but as the only One, so that there cannot be
another. He was alone, and the only One without Superior, Inferior, equal
God: Nay, without any Being, but his own Eternal Being, before the World was.
This Unity was manifested in the Creation and Government of the World: For as
He was the only one Being in Himself from Everlasting; so He is the only one
Creator, the only one Governor, Universal and Supreme, and shall be so to
Everlasting. He is the only one Redeemer and Sanctifier; from whom, the
streams of everlasting Bliss, do, and shall for ever issue. This Truth,
concerning God's Unity, was so imprinted in the very hearts of the Heathen,
that though they did acknowledge and worship many gods, yet they believed that
there was only one Supreme God, who was King and Lord of all the rest.

The infiniteness of God,

Hence arise two Attributes Immensity. Eternity.


All Creatures have their Bounds; within the compass whereof, their Being is
confined: Neither Angels, nor the Heaven of Heavens are infinite or boundless.
But great is our Lord, and great is his Power: his understanding is infinite,
Psalm. 147. 5. The Power and Understanding of God are God: They are not
accidents, and extrinsecal to his Being, but they are his Being: And if his
Power be great, and his Understanding infinite, so that there is no number of
it, then his Being is infinite. There is no searching of his Understanding,
says the Prophet, Isa. 40. 28. In which Chapter, from ver. 22. to 26. is
described, and that in most stately terms and expressions the greatness of God.
The terms, indeed, are suitable to our capacity, and may inform us, That he is
far greater then we can possibly conceive. And this Being is, in some measure,
manifested to be infinite, and unmeasurable, by the great abundance, and
unsearchable depth of his Wisdom in his Judgments, and his ways of special
Providence, Romans 11. 33. The Creatures, even all, and every one of them; yea,
the World it self have their utmost Circumference of space, and the periods and
terms of their Duration. The space which they take up, is finite; so is the
Duration of their Being, though drawn out in greatest length. Space of place,
and length of time, with their Periods, do measure all* Yet this Being is
beyond the Circumference of the World, and the Periods of Time. Neither Time,
nor Place, can circumscribe or measure him, that is Absolutely, and every way
infinite: For he is Immense and Eternal.

His Immensity is that, Dimensions of length, breadth, thickness, or depth: And
the Being of Spirits is confined. The World, and the Heaven of Heavens have
their utmost Bounds, and therefore are measurable: But this glorious Lord and
King has no Dimensions; and therefore is immense, or unmeasurable. The
understanding of the Angels, perhaps, knows the measure and utmost boun^s of
all things created, even of the Heaven of Heavens; yet never knew, or can know
any out-most circumference of the Divine Being. God alone does comprehend
himself, and is comprehended of himself. Because this God is immense, therefore
he is incomprehensible, and omnipresent. Hence his Incomprehensibility.
Ubiquity, or Omnipresence.


His Incomprehensibility is that, whereby he cannot be contained of any thing
but contains all things.

God says, Heaven is my Throne and the Earth is my Footstool, Isa. 66. 3. And
again by another Prophet, Do not I fill Heaven and Earth? Jer 23. 24. And
Solomon confesses unto God, 1 King. 8. 27. That the Heavens of Heavens do not
contain him.

The first place informs us, that God is so in Heaven, that He is on Earth; so
on Earth, that He is in Heaven; and in both at the same time. Yet,

Because one may be in some part of Heaven, and some part of the Earth, at one
and the same time, yet not in every part of both; The second Scripture tells
us, that He fills Heaven and Earth, and takes up both wholly. Yet,

Lest we should think the outmost circumference of Heaven, to be the outmost
bounds of his Being and Presence. The third place signifies plainly, that He is
not confined within those Bounds; so that He must needs be beyond all place,
and imaginary space. This Incomprehensibility of God's Being, though not in it
self absolute; yet is represented unto us, by the largest extent of things
created: yet so, as that his Presence extends beyond the World, which cannot
contain him; but He contains it, and therefore is called Hamakom, the Place.
(...)


From his Immensity follows also his Ubiquity, Omnipresence, whereby he is in
every place. --

This is described also in respect of place, and signifies the presence of God,
and the extent thereof, which is so vast, that there can be no place, where God
is not; yet no place where God is in it, as containing him. The words of the
Prophet; I fill Heaven and Earth, do prove this: For, by Heaven and Earth is
signified the whole World; beyond which, there is no place: And to fill the
World, is not only to be in some, or many parts thereof, but to be in all, and
every part: so that no part can be empty of God, who is where anything is.

He takes up the whole vast space of the great Body; yet he can neither be in
any part, or in the whole, so as to be contained, or concluded in it. The
Scripture ^ets forth this Attribute by an enumeration of places, affirming
God's presence in every on^: Whither shall I go (says the Psalmist) from thy
Spirit? Whither shall I fly from thy presence? etc. That is, If I go into
Heaven, into Hell, into the utmost parts of the Sea, into darkness, or the most
secret places of the World, there shall I find thee, and meet with thee. The
Philosophers tell us, that everything is in some place, either
circumscriptively, as Bodies; or definitively, as Spirits; so that both are
limited: yet God is so in all places, at all times, as that He cannot be
contained in any one, or all, but is far beyond all. How this should be, Reason
cannot understand; such Knowledge is too wonderful for us. Thus God is always
every where present, not only by his Power, but his Being too. And le^t we
should mistake this Immensity of God, we must know that this agreed unto him
before there was any place or World. His Being was neither contracted, nor
extended upon, or by, the Creation; for he was essentially, great, infinite,
and incomprehensible, when He dwelt in His Eternal Being by Himself alone.

As God is infinite in his Being, Duration: For He is Eternal.

His Eternity is that Duration of his Existence, whereby he is always
necessarily the same.

This does presuppose.

1. His Existence.

2. The perpetual continuance of his Existence.

3. The necessity thereof: For He so ever was, that He cannot but ever be This
is that they call necessitas essendi and necesse esse; the absolute necessity
of Being.

4. He does so necessarily always exist, that he necessarily is always the
same: and hence his immutability, whereby he is not subject unto, but free from
all change.

1. God is always, and the continuance of his Being is perpetual; Because he
had no Beginning, no interruption, nor ever shall have end of his Existence. He
has no Beginning: For before the Mountains were brought forth, or ever thou
had formed the Earth, and the World, even from everlasting to everlasting,
Thou art God, (says the Author of Psalm. 90. v. 2.) By which words, we
understand,

1. That God created the Mountains, the Earth, the World.

2. That He was, and did exist, before they were created.

3. That He was before them, from everlasting, without any beginning.

4. That He continues without any interruption, to everlasting, without end.
This long and perpetual Existence, is sometimes represented by His Co-Existence
with all times, or rather with all things in all times: For He is acknowledged
to be the Lord God Almighty, which was, and is, and is to come, Rev. 4. 8. He
was in all times past, is in all times present, and shall be in all times to
come. Yet Time is not His Measure, it is too short, and cannot measure his
Everlasting Being, which infinitely exceeds the Duration of the World. He did
exist, when nothing did exist; when nothing could co-exist with Him.

2. He necessarily always exists: For He had no cause of his Being without
Himself, neither could He be a Cause of His own Being: For then He should have
been before Himself, which is impossible. Neither is there, or can be any
cause, either within, or without Himself, destructive of His Being. He stands
immoveably fixed in Himself, so that it is impossible to give, or take away the
least Particle of His Being.

3. He is always necessarily the same: For though the Heavens shall wax old, as
a garment, and as a vesture be changed; yet he shall en^ure, and be the same,
and o^ his years there shall be no end, Psalm. 102. 25, 26, 27. He is
incorruptible, Romans 1. 23. Alone has Immortality, 1 Timothy 6. 16. In this
Perfection of Immutability, he far exceeds and excels all created Beings, even
the most excellent. The Angels now are; yet once they were not: They had a
Beginning of their Being, after not being at all; and are subject to return to
nothing again. That they are in some respect immortal, and shall never ceale to
be, it is extrinsecall unto them. The continuance of their Being without end,
depends upon the Will of the great King their Creator, without whose support,
they cannot exist a moment, upon whose Will their Being always, does depend:
And in that respect it is not necessary, but contingent. Besides this essential
change, they are accidentally mutable, and may of holy and happy, become unholy
and miserable, as was evident by the Apostate Angels. Therefore, in all
Creatures, even in Angels, we find a mutable Succession of Being, after
Not-being, and a Subjection to Not-being after Being, and a Being so and so,
after Being otherwise. But there can be no Succession in this eternal and
unchangeable Being, which is every way perfect, without any imperfections at
all. Yet if any thing exist, it must necessarily co-exist with it. And in this
respect, that of Boethius may be true, that it is tota simul, because free from
all mutability* and not subject any ways to any mutable Succession. Therefore,
the Eternity of God infinitely differs from the Successive Duration of Angels;
yet the Duration of their Being is the most perfect of all Created Durations.
The Decrees of God, which have things, ad extra out of God* for their Object,
are not properly Eternal. For that is Eternal, which has nothing antecedent as
a cause, and is absolutely necessary. But the Decrees of God presuppose the
Divine Essence and Subsistence, as antecedent, and the Will of God as the
cause; and are contingent: Because it was in the Free Will and good-pleasure of
God, whether he would Decree any thing out of himself or no; and also whether
he would Decree this or that; thus, or otherwise. If not so, all things would
have been necessary, and as necessary as God; and the World had been a
necessary effect of his Eternal Power. How this unity and infiniteness, in
Immensity and Eternity, necessarily concur to the greatness of God, is evident
to any un^erstanding man, according to our manner of Understanding: But how
they necessarily conduce to make him an Universal, Supreme, Eternal King, and
Monarch; and an Universal Fountain of Eternal Bliss, shall be declared
hereafter. Take any of these away from God, he is neither absolutely Great, nor
Perfect. And by all these, we may easily perceive, that our finite
understanding, can have no perfect notion of him that is Infinite: but we
rather know what he is not, then what he is.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Goodness of GOD.
THE Goodness of God follows next after his Greatness, He is one infinitely
good. For this Goodness, we conceive it after the manner of a Quality, though
it be no Quality, but his Essence; according to that Axiom, Nihil in Deo, quod
non Deus, and cannot be conceived aright without his Greatness: For, conceive
of any goodness, as not essential, one and infinite, it cannot agree to God.
Therefore, Divines do affirm the former Attributes of Unity, infiniteness, and
Eternity of this goodness, and all the Particulars thereof. Some attribute this
goodness to God; as, Vivens, Living; and his Greatness to him as Being.

Greatness, without Goodness, is no absolute Perfection; therefore, God is not
only great, but good: yet not only good but great; that his goodness may be
great, and that, as he is the greatest, so he may be the best, Here I will not
speak particularly of Metaphysical, Natural, Moral Goodness, but only say
this, That whatsoever kind of Goodness there is in any thing, the same must be
in God, and that infinitely more in him, then in any thing e^^e* There is no
Creature, no not the most excellent that is good* but only by Participation.
But there must be an essential goodness, which is the original and measure of
all other goodness, and that is God. What the proper notion of Goodness is, we
can hardly determine: But this all grant, that whatsoever is excellent, comely,
beautiful, sweet, amiable, desirable, that is good. And those Creatures are
more excellent then others, that can produce the most noble Acts in the most
perfect manner. And therefore,

-- The goodness of God is that whereby he acts most perfectly. If God act most
perfectly, then he acts, and acts perfectly: And hence Two kinds of Attributes,
His Acts. Perfection in acting.


Some call these two sorts of Attributes, His Faculties, whereby he acts.
Ver^ues, whereby he acts perfectly.


Faculties, and Habits, (such Virtues be) are reduced by Philosophers to
Quality. A Faculty is an active power; an Habit is an higher and more perfect
degree of Power. Both of them have their Root in, and their Rise from the
Essence: yet they are not the essence of things endued with Faculties and
Habits. Yet there are neither Qualities, nor Faculties, nor Habits in God: Yet
certainly God does act; and there can be no excellent active Faculty in any
Creature, but the same must be most eminently in God. Yet those which we
conceive in him, as Faculties, Habits, Acts, are not different, as in him, but
one, and the same Essence.

The Acts of God are Understanding, Will, Productive Power.


The most noble and excellent Acts, of the most noble and excellent Creatures,
which most resemble God, are Understanding, Will, Power. These three Acts of
God, are employed in those words of the Apostle, informing us, That God works
all things according to the Counsel of his Will, Ephesians. 1. 11. In which words,
we may observe,

1. The Counsel. 2. The Will. 3. The working of God.
Counsel, is an act of the Practical Understanding.

Purpose, mentioned in the same Text, is an act of the Will; and Working an act
of Power.

Counsel, contrives and directs. Will, purposes and determines. Power,
executes.
The Will determines, according to the Counsel of the Understanding. The Power
executes, according to the determination of the Will. Yet that place does not
speak of them properly as Attributes, with reference to the Divine Essence, but
as exercised and manifested in his Works out of himself.

These three may be considered, either as Acts or Faculties: yet Faculties, in
proper sense, cannot agree to God, to men they may, Yet it is a noble and famous
Question, both amongst Philosophers and Divines, Whether the Understanding and
Will be two distinct Faculties (as generally they are taken to be) or only
different degrees and extensions of the same Faculty, in respect of one and the
same Object differently considered, as some of the subtillest Wits have
conceived and determined.

It Is certain, that there is not a distinct Intellection, without some kind of
Volition: No Volition, but essentially includes intellection: No intellective,
productive Power, without both. All these three Acts, may be referred to the
active power of intellectual Beings, and are distinct, and accidental in the
Creature, but essence in God; yet we know little of them, as in our selves,
much le^s in God. These Acts are exercised either upon the Deity it self, as an
infinite, eternal, adequate Object, or upon something out of the Deity. Seeing,
Hearing, Knowledge, Understanding, are attributed to God as Intellective.
Purposes, good pleasure, love, hatred, anger, are given to him as Willing.
Productions, Executions, Existences, agree to him as actively Powerful. These,
in respect of things possible, future, present, are not his essence, but acts
of his essence, ad extra, and in some measure manifest what God is, ad intra,
and teach us that there is no perfection in the Creature, but the same is in
God, and infinitely more excellent.

The perfection of these acts,

These perfections are called Habits, and Virtues, yet in proper sense they are
not. For though in the Creature they be accidents, yet in God they are essence;
and may be attributed unto him, and predicated of him either in the Concrete or
abstract: For with the Scripture we may say that God is wise, just, holy, or
that he is Wisdom, Justice, Holiness, and that truly too; yet considered as
Attributes, and in God, they are essential: yet the exercise and manifestation
of them in his works are accidental.

These perfections are of three sorts; such as refer to His Understanding,
Will, Power,


The proper Act of the understanding is Knowledge, and the Perfection is to
discern things certainly, clearly, fully: And the perfection of Gods knowledge
is to know himself, and all things besides himself, and his own being most
certainly, clearly, and fully. The Scriptures in many places, attribute
Knowledge unto God; and in many places imply*

1. That He knows himself, otherwise he could know nothing.

2. That he knows a^l things even the most secret, is often expressed.

3. That he knows all things most perfectly, is evident out of Several places.

This knowledge in respect of things past, is called Memory; in respect of
things to come Prescience, or foreknowledge; in respect of things present,
barely knowledge or sight; in respect of the object and extent Omniscience, his
Universal knowledge of all things. Its a Brutish ignorance and stupidity in man
to think, that there is any thing which man does know, or can know, that God
can be ignorant of: For shall not he that planted the ear hear! Shall not He
that formed the eye see! Shall not He that chastises the Heathen (or Nations)
correct or instruct and convince! Shall not He that teaches man knowledge,
know, Psalm. 94. 10, 11. In which Words, we may observe,

1. That man hears sees, understands.

2. That God gives him power to Hear, See, and Understand,

3. Therefor, God must needs hear, see, and understand, and that in a more
eminent and perfect manner then man can do; because he is the cause and giver
of all these unto man. The word of God is a Discerner of the thoughts, and
intents of the heart, neither is there any Creature that is not manifest in his
sight, but all things are naked and opened to the eyes of him, with whom we
have to do, Heb. 4. 12. 13. These words inform us;

1. That Gods knowledge extends to the most secret things, the very thoughts
and intents of the heart, which he knows afar off, Psalm. 139. 2.

2. It extends to all things; not any Creature hid or unknown to him; all
things are in his sight and eyes.

3. The knowledge of all things, even the most secret, is clear and full: For
they are manifest and naked, and opened to his eyes. Man may know many things,
uncertainly and imperfectly: He may know somethings certainly, and clearly, yet
few things fully. Angels may know many things clearly and fully; yet many
things they know not at all; much less know them, and all things, clearly and
fully.

There are many other distinctions of this knowledge: entities or their
ordination. He knows all things in their present existence, and all things, and
every thing, after they cease to be and exist. He knows all things, which upon
supposition would come to pass, if he did concur, and not determine otherwise.
This Knowledge is not acquired by Observation, Experience, Discourse, or any
other way of imperfection. For, because he knows himself most perfectly,
therefore he must needs perfectly know all, (as they use to speak) intuitiv^ly,
and at once. This Knowledge does contrive and order all things in an excellent
and wonderful manner; and this appears most in the ordering of future, free,
contingent acts.

The perfection of God's Will is that,

As the perfection of his understanding, eminently includes all intellectual
Virtues; so the perfection of his Will, all Moral Virtues, which are purely,
such. And there can be no virtuous act of the Will, either of Men or Angels
which does not agree to God in a far more excellent manner and measure. Moral
Virtues presuppose intellectual; and they arise and have their Spring from the
Will rightly informed and disposed. It Is then rightly disposed, when it is
firmly inclined unto, and fixed upon that which is just, and hates that which
is unjust. This may be called integrity, rectitude, righteousness, as it
includes all Virtues. But this Rectitude in Men and Angels, is accidental, and
separable. Therefor, both men and Angels may sin, and have sinned. The Rule of
their Acts may be in them, but not essentially, nor necessarily. That the
glorified Saints shall never sin, is not ab intrinseco, not from their Being,
or any thing in themselves; but from without, even from God, who will
certainly, and infallibly support them; so, as to prevent all Error, and all
Sin. But the integrity of God's Will is essential; and as his Essence is
necessary, so his Integrity must needs be. And he is necessarily just and holy,
because he necessarily loves himself, who is righteousness it self, and hates
every thing contrary to himself. In this respect, some Schoolmen have
determined, that God could not make Man or Angel impeccable. For then he should
have made them Gods. Some Creatures never sinned, nor shall sin; yet they are
subject to sin, as they are in themselves. This Integrity of the Divine Will,
is manifested very much in the Government of Men and Angels: yet God does not
necessarily love the Righteousness, and hate the iniquity of these intellectual
Creatures, as necessarily to reward or punish them. He does freely, and not
necessarily will their Being; therefore he does not necessarily will any thing,
belonging, or added to their Being. If they be just, he loves their Justice,
because he loves himself: If they be unjust, he hates their injustice, because
contrary to himself. He lovs sinful man, and shows him mercy, pardons him,
rewards him, delivers him, makes him happy: yet not necessarily but out of his
free goodness, which he might deny, and would deny, if it were unjust. If he
gives Laws, execute them in rendering punishments, or rewards: he does all
justly, and that necessarily; yet he neither gives Laws, or executes judgments
necessarily, but freely. The Judge of all the World must needs do right, yet
there is no necessity he should be a Judge, because there is no necessity that
there should be a World. All his ways, are Ju^gment; A God of truth without
iniquity, just and right is he Deuteronomy. 32, 4. He hates evil, and is of purer
eyes, then to behold evil; he cannot look upon iniquity, Hab. 1. 13. Unto this
Rectitude of Gods Will, many refer Mercy, Bounty, Clemency, and distributive
Justice: But these are not his essential justice and integrity, but emanations,
or acts of it, being exercised ad extra, out of Himself. And it is to be
observed, that to love, to show kindness, to pardon, to relieve, to deliver,
are not absolutely virtuous acts and perfections, but as they agree with this
rectitude and integrity: yet as they are agreeable to it, so they are
excellent, and such as God delights in. To punish, oppress, vex, torment,
destroy, make miserable, are not evil, except unjust, and inconsistent with
this integrity: otherwise, God would never punish, and that with Eternal
Punishments, his most excellent Creatures. And as it is impossible for God to
cease to be (...), and to be defective in his integrity, either in himself, or
out of himself; (...) impossible for him to cease to be happy, or defective in
his happiness.

The perfection of his power, Understanding and Will.

This Power, being the Essence, must needs be pure Act; and therefore not
properly called Power, but as we take Power for strength. And as this is in
God, it is difficult for us to conceive of it, as distinct from his
Understanding and his Will: And some have affirmed, that his Will is his Power,
which is true, ad intra, not ad extra. By this Power, as by an eternal and
infinite strength, he stands fixed irresistibly, and eternally, in his own
Being. It Is that whereby he acts Eternally, and necessarily upon himself. And
this strength and Power is exercised, and does manifest it self in all his
glorious Works; in some more, in some less: Yet all that is exercised out of
himself, is nothing to that power and strength, which is infinite in Himself,
and is Himself. The Schoolmen dispute much of this Power; but always
understand it, as exercised out of Himself: And they distinguish of
Producibile, and Factibile. The Application of this distinction is. That God's
power is Almighty in respect of Factibile, that which may be produced made,
done out of Himself; but not in respect of Producibile, within Himself. For the
Father produces the Son, and the Father and Son produce the Holy Ghost: And in
this respect, the Father may be said to be Almighty; but not the Son, nor the
Holy Ghost. But the reason of this Curious Speculation, an needless Conceit,
is, the misunderstanding of this Power, as referring to the Essence: And as it
is too curious, so it may occasion Error.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost.
GOD does know Himself, Himself: and not only the Principal, but the first
Coadequate Object of his Understanding (and that from everlasting, to
everlasting) is his own Being. The clear and full contemplation of this most
glorious Being, produces an infinite and Eternal Knowledge of himself, as most
perfect, and most excellent: Thus he cannot know himself and be known of
himself; But he must love himself, and be infinitely and eternally enamoured
with his own Beauty, which is sufficient sully and perpetually, to satiate, and
content himself within himself: And hence arises his full happiness.

For he is fully happy to all Eternity, without any Man, Angel; without Heaven,
Earth, the World, or any Creature, by acting thus upon himself. Therefore,
perfect and full happiness, is accounted one of the Attributes of God. And if
he were not happy, he could not make the intellectual Beings for ever happy, by
a more full communion with him, and enjoyment of him. From these immanent acts
of the Deity upon himself, some conceive, arise the Relations of Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost; and that stupendous, and profound mystery of the glorious
Trinity: The Doctrine whereof, is so far above Natural Reason, improved to the
highest pitch, that the greatest Wits in the World have been confounded in the
search thereof; and many have denied, and are offended with the Terms of
Trinity, and Persons, as not found in the Holy Scriptures. But, first, let us
hear, what the Scripture says of this great mystery. The Apostles Commission
and Charge from Christ, was, To teach (or Disciple) all Nations, baptizing them
in the Name of the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost, Math. 28. 18. And
there are Three, which bear Record in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the
Holy Ghost, 1 John 5. 7.

In the former place, we may observe.

1. One Name of three, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. And whether we take the
Name for the Eternal Deity, (as the word in the Hebrew, sometimes signifies) or
for Worship, or for Power: yet there is but one Name, one Worship, one Power of
the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

2. The Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, are three.

3. That the Father is the first; the Son, the second; the Holy Ghost, the
third, in order.

4. That the Father, as the Father, is not the Son, nor the Holy Ghost; nor the
Son, as Son, either the Father, or the Holy Ghost; nor the Holy Ghost, as the
Holy Ghost, either of them.

5. The Father has relation to the Son, as the Father of the Son: the Son, as
the Son of the Father, to the Father: and the Holy Ghost, being the Breath and
Spirit of the Father, and the Son, has relation to both, and both to Him.

6. Here are three distinct Relatives, and three distinct Relative Properties.

7. The Father, as God, has no relation to the Son, but as the Father: no^ the
Son, as God, to the Father, but as the Son: And so the Holy Ghost, not as God,
but as the Holy Ghost, to them both, as breathed by, and proceeding from both.

In the latter place, 1 John 5. 7. we may observe,

1. That there be three, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

2. That the Father is first, the Son is second; the Holy Ghost is third, in
order, (as before).

3. He that, in the former place, was called the Son, is here called the Word.

4. That the Word was in the beginning, was with God, was God, and by it all
things were made. And by the Son it is said; All things were created, and all
things consist by him, Col. 1. 15, 16. From whence it follows, That the Father,
and the Son, are but one Creator, and so but one God together, with the Holy
Ghost, to whom the incommunicable Perfections, and Works of the Deity, are
attributed. For as the Spirit of Man is the same Substance and Being with man,
and knows the things of man; so the Spirit, which searches and knows the
deep things of God, must needs be one and the same Substance and Being with
God. The Father was the Father, before he created the World, or sent his Son:
The Word and Son of God, was the Word and Son, before the Word was made Flesh:
And the Holy Spirit was the Spirit, before he sanctified either Man or Angel:
Yet the Father was more clearly manifested to be the Father, by sending his Son
into the World; and the Son, to be the Son, by the incarnation and work of
Redemption: And the Holy Ghost, to be the Holy Ghost, by the Work of
Sanctification. The Word which was made flesh, was coeternal, and coequal with
the Father though the Humane Nature assumed by the Word, was neither coequal,
nor coeternal.

These Three are called Persons, Greek Fathers, and most of the later Latin
Christian Writers. A Person was defined long ago by Occam, to be Suppositum
intellectuale, an individual intellectual Substance, subsisting by it self: And
in this strict Sense, three Persons, (as three Angels, three men) are three
distinct individual Substances. But thus, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, are
not Three Persons; for then there should be three Gods, whereas they are but
one God, and one Divine Substance, though they be considered, as they are
represented, according to these three distinct Relations, and Relative
Properties. These three are so intimately united, that they are but one
individual substance: And this Unity of three, is called by the Greeks, (...),
by the Latins, Circumincession. So that there can be no inequality amongst
them, in respect of Time, Power, Dignity, or any other ways. One may be
considered before another, in respect of order, or origination, (as some of the
Schoolmen speak.) The Generation of the Son, and the Spiration of the Holy
Ghost, which are wonderful, and to us unsearchable, had no beginning of Time,
nor can have end of Duration; for they are Eternal. In these high and glorious
Productions, the Essence cannot properly be said to be communicated.

Some of the Ancients, Trinity of Persons, and the Deity of the Son, and Holy
Ghost. The Socinians argue against both:

1. Against the Trinity of Persons, alleging that three Persons are three
individual distinct Substances; and thence they infer, that if there be three
distinct Persons in the Deity, then there are three distinct Gods, In this
Argument, they take for granted, that in this great mystery, the word Person,
is taken properly and strictly, which no understanding Christian ever thought:
And this is gross and intolerable, especially in men otherwise learned and
judicious.

2. Against the second, they argue; That because the Father, in some places, is
said to be the only true God; therefore, neither the Son, nor Spirit, can be
properly Summus ille Deus, that Supreme God. For example, Crellius, one of the
most learned and judicious of them, from those words of our Savior, This is
life Eternal, to know thee, the only true God; argues to this purpose, That if
the Father be the only true God, then the Son, and the Holy Ghost cannot be
God. This is so unworthy, that it deserves no answer. In that place, the Son is
considered as Man, and flesh assumed, and so sent; how el^e could he pray and
make intercession? For God cannot pray, or desire any thing of a Superior. And
his Prayer is directed to his Father, as God, and the supreme Cause, and
Fountain of all those mercies desired in that Prayer; and, as such, he cannot be
personally considered. And it cannot any ways follow, that because he, to whom
flesh assumed did pray, was the only true God; that therefore the Word
assuming flesh, which was in the Beginning, before there was any flesh to be
assumed, and the same with God, so that he was God, is not God. The Text, Joh.
1. 1. expressly says, He was God, and that God by whom all things were made.
But he that makes the Holy Ghost to be a Quality and Virtue residing in God,
and issuing from God upon man, as Crellius does, can hardly be reckoned amongst
sober Christians.

The Master of the Sentences, and the Schoolmen, following him out of Austin,
Bacon is resolute, according to his Title (Doctor Resolutus), and says, that
the Trinity is, Deus intellectus, et amatus, a Seipso; God understood, and
beloved, of himself: Yet they agree not, in what respect, the Soul is this
Image, Whether in respect of the Substance, or the Faculties; or the Substance,
and two Acts; as Cameracensis, and others, do determine: which is most probably
the sense of St. Austin. If the Soul understand, and love it Self understood,
it is the same one individual Substance, which understands, which is
understoood, which is loved: Yet the Soul, as Understanding differs from it
Self as understood; and, as understanding, and understood from it self, as
loving and loved: yet this Image, and Representation, is very imperfect; not so
much for Peter Lombard's Reasons: But,

1. Because we do not understand, how the Eternal and infinite Deity does act
upon it self.

2. The Soul has no perfect Knowledge of it self, as God has of himself.

3. Man's Soul, as the Object of it self, known and loved, is but the Soul
intentionally, and so the Productions are not real, but imperfect; but the
Divine Productions are perfect. But it is our Duty to be wise and sober, and
restrain our inclination and propension to curious Speculations, in these great
Mysteries. And we must know, that the Predications and Expressions used in the
Scripture, concerning God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, transcend the Rules
of Humane Logic, Grammar, Rhetoric. And I am verily persuaded, that the
mystery of the Trinity is more fully and clearly delivered in Scripture, then
we understand it.

By all this,

1. He is absolutely, and every way most perfect: so that there is no
imperfection, nor possibility of imperfection in him.

2. That he knowing and enjoying himself fully, and for ever, must needs be
infinitely and eternally delighted with himself, and fully for ever content in
himself.

3. That he is the most noble Object of the Understanding, and Will of Men and
Angels.

4. His Beauty is such, that if we could see but some little of it, it would
enamour and ravish our hearts, and wrap us into such an Admiration, that all
other things (even the most excellent) would appear to be base and vile in
comparison of him. He is that Fountain, whence the streams of everlasting joy
perpetually issue. His Majesty is so excellent, as that he is worthy to be
adored with the greatest humility and reverence. But oh! How little of his
Excellency do we know? How seldom do our choicest Contemplations fix upon him?
How frozen and congealed are our hearts, and affections toward Him? Oh! Let us
improve our knowledge of him, that our love may be more ardent; our desires of
him more quick and lively; our Longings after him more vehement; our Hearts
more purified, that we may hasten to the full enjoyment of him in Eternal
Glory! The great business, in this life, we have to do, is to be cleansed in
the blood of Christ; that, in the end, we may be fully consecrated, and so fit
to enter the Temple of Heaven, and see the brightness of his glory; that so we
may be fully, and for ever happy, in the presence of this Great, and
everlasting King.

All his Perfections do inform us; He alone is to be an Universal, Supreme
Eternal Lord and King. For his most perfect Being, tends to make him a most
Perfect King. His absolute Unity is such, that there can be no Competitour, to
lay claim unto the Sovereignty; and so it is a Foundation of perpetual Peace.
His Immensity is such, that he can be, and is personally present in all places
of his Dominion. His Eternity makes him King in all times, as his Immensity
makes him Lord in all places. His Knowledge and Wisdom are such, as that he
alone can contrive, and model the best Government, and administer it in the
best manner. His Integrity and Rectitude is absolute: so that his Laws and
Judgments must need be just, and he cannot possibly do any wrong. This is his
proper Prerogative: His Power, is Almighty and irresistible, and always
regulated most exactly by his Wisdom and Justice: So that he alone is able to
give absolute and perpetual* Protection, and render unto his loyal and obedient
Subjects, Eternal glory, and afflict his Enemies, and the Wicked, with Eternal
Punishments. So that He, and He alone, is worthy to reign, as He, and He alone
is able to make us for ever Blessed.

CHAP. VIII.
Concerning the Regal Power of God, and how it is acquired.
AFter the Declaration of the absolute Perfection of the glorious and Eternal
God in himself, essentially constitutes a King or Govenour, is his Power: And
Supreme and Absolute Power inherent in one Person, makes a Supreme and Absolute
Monarch; and such God is, and more^: Therefore, he must needs have, not only
an absolute and Supreme, but an Universal, and Eternal Power: Seeing he must
rule and reign universally and Eternally, the Nature and Qualities of this
Power will be more easily understood, after that we know how he does acquire
and exercise it. Therefore, we must examine How it is Acquired. Exercised.
It Is Acquired, by Creation. Continued, by Preservation.


Power must be had and possessed, before it can be exercised; and therefore,
God first acquired his Power. It was, indeed, virtually in him, from
everlasting; and he was from everlasting worthy of all Power, Honor, and
Dominion: yet ^overning power actually he had not, before he had Subjects: For
Power is a Relative. Subjects he had not before the Creation: And the beginning
of his Creation, was the beginning of his Actual Power. For the Creatures were
no sooner made, but they were Subjects, and God was King, and so continues to
this day; and shall be King to everlasting. But before I show, how the
Subjection of the Creature, and the Dominion of the Creator, did arise from
the Work of Creation, something must be said of the Works of God in general,
and, in particular, of Creation.

The Works of God in general, Acts of God, whereby he produces some Effects
out of himself, wherein he manifests his Perfections. These are ascribed to his
Active Power, in respect whereof he is said to be Almighty. These Works, and
this working, whereby God in some sort issues out of himself, presuppose the
Essence, and the Immanent Acts of the Deity, upon it self, and are the effects
of God the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit; and so may be considered, In Respect
of the Essence, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.


This working in respect of the Essence, by some, is called his efficiency, and
is well described to be,

That whereby God works all things according to the Counsel of his Will,
Ephesians. 1. 11.

This text, observed before with reference to the Essence, may be resumed and
handled with respect unto Gods Works, which may be considered,

1. As prepared in himself.

2. As produced out of him, and standing in their own proper Being. Before
their actual existence, they were virtually in the understanding, will, and
working-Power of God. The Counsel of his understanding had contrived and
disposed them; his will had decreed them; his power was ready to produce and
effect them, according to the Counsel of his understanding, and the
determination of his Will. This informs us that every work of God, Presupposes
his Understanding. Will. Power.


The Understanding, Almighty power. And it is often called in Scripture his
Wisdom; and is conceived by us as an act of Practical Knowledge: It is not
Counsel, as Counsel implies any defect or imperfection as in man it does. That
Counsel of man, which most clearly sees the end, and the means and order of
them, conducing effectually to the end, does most resemble it, though it come
far short of it. The object of this Counsel is not properly God, but the Works
of God; and these not as done, but to be done, or in doing. It appears and
manifests it self in all the works of God, and especially in those of the
Government of Men and Angels; in which it is so profound and wonderful, that
though we knew something of it, yet the bottom we can never sound. So that
exclamation of the Apostle implies; Oh the depth of the Riches both of the
Wisdom and knowledge of God! How unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways
past finding out, Romans 11. 33. That God by wisdom made the World, and orders
all his works, the Scripture teaches in many places. The Psalmist, after his
serious meditation and contemplation both of the Works of Creation and
Providence, breaks out into these words; Oh Lord! How manifold are thy works?
In wisdom thou have made them all, Psalm, 104. 25. And it is so far above the
Wisdom of man, as his Works are above the works of Man. This is the reason,
why, when he beheld his works of Creation* he saw that they were very good and
beautiful. He saw no defect or imperfection in them, because they were made
and effected in perfect wisdom. And this is true of all his works: and as then,
so now, he may look upon his works, and keep his Sabbath when he has finished
them; which sinful man cannot do. And here is the proper place to say
something of the Idea of all things. For there are no first Samplars and
Patterns of all things, but in the counsel of God. For the World, and all
Creatures were distinctly contrived by the wisdom of God, before they did
exist. The whole frame and System of the World thus considered is called by
some Mundus Idealis; And the several Creatures and things thus conceived are
said to be Rations rerum in Men^^ and Cognitione Dei; the Creatures and things
contrived and known before they were effected or produced, which were not
properly God, but things and Creatures modl'd and known of God. Therefore said
Occam, that Ideae were Creaturae a Deo cognitae. And these may be conceived
either Antecedently, or Consequently to the decree of his will. There is a
famous question held affirmatively by some: An dantur in Deo rations boni and
mali, aeternae and indispensabiles. And as it is affirmed, it is opposed to
another question, maintained affirmatively by others: Whether things be good
only, because God wills them, and not because good in themselves. This
controversy Bradwardine touches upon, and seems to determine it by a
distinction. For he informs us, that some things are morally good or evil,
antecedently to the will of God; Some consequently; Some partly antecedently,
partly consequently. Yet this does not satisfy; because the Will of God may be
considered, either as an attribute, with the perfection and integrity thereof,
or as a decree, or as a Law. Now,

1. No quality, disposition, habit, or act of Man or Angel can be morally good
or evil, antecedently to the will of God, and the perfection thereof, as it is
an Attribute.

2. Nothing can be morally good or evil, antecedently to the decretive and
legislative will of God, except it have some intrinsecal conformity to the
Rectitude to the will of God, as an attribute; neither can it rationally be
conceived so to be.

3. Nothing can be morally good or evil, so as to be immediately Praemiable, or
Punishable, antecedently to the Legislative will of God. For the obligation to
punishment, and right to reward, ^ollow immediately upon the Will of God,
consi^ered as observed or violated, and expressed in the promises or threats of
the Law. By this the judicious reader, will be able to judge of the
controversy. But ^intend not to trouble him with these Speculations. Let this
suffice us, firmly to believe that God is necessarily just, and though he
freely determins commands, and effects all things; yet all his Decrees,
Commands, and Works, are necessarily just, and there is no iniquity in him.

The will of God is that,

By will in this place, is meant an act of Gods will in respect to things out
of himself; yet so that it presupposes the will of God as an Attribute; And
this act is called a Decree. And here is the proper place to speak of Decrees
in general, which in the Scriptures are called the thoughts and also the
purposes of God. That there are Decrees is evident out of the word; but how
they are made of God, we know not: the manner is unsearchable. This is certain,
They are all agreeable to his Counsel, and that most exactly: For as his Wisdom
did dictate, so his Will determined, and no otherwise: and without this will
and determination, nothing could have bin done or effected. From it all things
future rec^ive their ^ututition, according to the School-mens expression. These
Decrees are not strictly and properly eternal, (as was observed before): Yet
they are Antecedent to all time as it measures the Existence of things: They
are said to be many, and may be conceived in a certain order according to the
multitude and order of the things decreed. That this Will should first decree
the end, and then the means is but a fancy, and has no ground either in
Scripture, or in solid reason. Yet though they be many, yet they may be reduced
to two sorts: for they may be said to be general or special.

The general Decrees are those, which extend to all things: For there neither
was, nor is, nor shall be any thing which God did not Determine.

The special Decrees are such as are limited to Angels and Men, in respect of
their Spiritual and Eternal estate, and especially to men. These are called
by a Synechdoche, Predestination, and Reprobation. And these presuppose,

1. Their Object, intellectual and immortal Creatures, especially men
considered in a spiritual capacity as dirigible to an eternal estate.

2. The Counsel of God contriving a certain order, according to which men were
to be directed to their final estate. The nature of them in special is to
determine and, according to this order, to direct certain individual persons
unto their last end. For in these decrees we may observe.

1. Persons. 2. Means. 3. End.
The End is eternal Happiness, or Misery; The Means, Laws and Judgments; The
Persons, such as are capable of Laws and Judgments. But of these Decrees more
particularly, hereafter.

These Decrees are free: Wisdom and his Justice. Neither did these bind him to
decree any thing at all; but only, if he did decree any thing to decree it
wisely, and justly. Both the Creature, and every thing in the Creature, were
nothing before they did Exist; and as such, could have no influence to move or
incline the Will of God. Neither could the Prevision of perfect obedience in
the Angels, or final faith in man, determine the Will of God; much less
necessitate it to give them eternal glory. Neither can final disobedience or
unbelief do any such thing as foreseen; or actually existent, determine, much
less necessitate God to pass the Sentence of Eternal Death upon them, or to
execute the same. The determination of Gods will is freely from himself, not
from my thing without Himself. God my foresee the highest degree of obedience
in the Creature, and yet be no ways bound to reward it. There is no necessary
connection between obedience, and reward; or between the foresight of obedience,
and the decree to reward: only the decree it self freely ties them together.
There can be no efficient cause out of God of the decree of God: Some material
objective, Logical cause, there may be. The decree to give Christ unto Death
for enemies; To call Wretched man dead in his sins and trespasses, by
repentance and says unto eternal glory, was not only free, but also the
issue of unspeakable love, and compassion; and to destinate man upon faith in
Christ, foreseen is an act of free grace. Faith it self can be no efficient,
because it is not, neither can the foreknowledge or prevision of this faith,
(though final) be any such thing: For God may foresee final faith, and yet not
determine to reward it; though without prevision he cannot decree to do so. The
reason of all this is, because nothing but the Being of God, and the acting
upon himself is or can be necessary.

These Decrees are not only free, Wise, Just, and Stable. They are wise,
because made according unto and directed by Wisdom. His Wisdom and Knowledge
are Antecedent to his Will; and must be conceived by us so to be; otherwise we
should affirm that He decreed things ignorantly and rashly: But so to think is
impious and absurd. There are many works (and so decrees) of God, whereof we
can give no reason, but his absolute will and power. He may love Jacob, hate
Esau, without respect to any merit or demerit in the persons, and decree the
elder to serve the younger: Yet thus, As it was done, so it was decreed wisely
and according to Counsel. We can give no reason of this, yet He can: The reason
indeed is secret to us, as not revealed* yet known to Him. And though many
things may be done by him, above the Laws given in Scripture, yet they are not
against them. Though his decrees may be truly said to depend upon his
knowledge, yet they depend not upon the things known. As they are wise, so are
they just, though sometimes they seem to us to be otherwise. The wicked prosper
many times, when the Righteous are afflicted and chastened very much. And the
innocent suffer, and sometimes temporally perish with the Wicked; and the
children often bear the heavy burden of their Fathers sins, and yet are not
guilty of their crimes. These things may seem to be unjust; yet are not so, but
exactly agreeable to the eternal rules of justice. The reason why they must
needs be just, is because he is essentially and necessarily justice, though his
justice in his secret judgments does not appear to us. He made no Decree
whereby man or Angels was necessitated to Sin. He indeed did decree the
freedom of their will, their subjection to his power, their obligation by his
Laws. Yet as he did not Decree that they should sin, so he did not decree to
prevent all sin; but decreed, that if they should sin, they should be liable to
punishment. He made (as he decreed) the Will of man mutable; Yet this
mutability was no disadvantage to him, or any necessary cause of Sin: And in
the last judgment it will appear that Sin was from the Creature, but not from
the Decree of the Creator. They are also stable: For the Counsel of his Will
stands for ever, and his thoughts to all generations, Psalm. 33. 11. And
though there be many Devices in the heart of man, yet the Counsel of the Lord
shall stand, Prove. 19. 21. The reason hereof is because they are made in
Wisdom and Justice, and there can be no cause of alteration: Besides, he is
Almighty, and cannot be hindered to do what he has once determined. Upon the
stability of these decrees depends the stability of the world, and stability of
the Church, and the certainty of our Eternal glorification.

The power of God is that whereby he is able to effect all according to the
Counsel of his Will.

This power is not Passive: for God can neither receive nor suffer any thing.
It Is active and efficient, yet truly Power, because it was not, is not, shall
not ever be totally in Act. For he does not effect all things which he can, but
those things which he will. He is said to be pure Act in respect of his
Essence, and eternal acting upon himself. And this power as an Attribute is
pure act, and in that respect is properly actual strength, not power physically
taken. It extends to all things possible, and is able to produce them. But we
must not think that they are possible or producible in themselves, but in
respect of this power. And it is to be conceived, first as able to effect,
before it actually effect any thing; as it actually effects all things that
are effected. It Is the root and original of all created active Power; and all
Created causes are effects of it, and act as acted and moved by him. How it
acts and concurrs with free Agents when they sin, the Wit of Man cannot clearly
understand and satisfy it self. But this is certain, that as the Decree, so
the Power is always regulated by the Wisdom and Juctice of God. It Is great and
irresistible: For though men and Angels may disobey his Laws, yet they cannot
resist or hinder his power. For he is in the Heavens, and has done whatsoever
he pleased, Psalm. 115. 3. And whatsoever the Lord pleased, that did He in
Heaven, and in Earth, in the Seas, and all deep places, Psalm. 135. 6. Therefore
if God promise great things, and such as to man may seem impossible, we may
safely rely upon Him: What is said shall certainly be done.

Thus ^art the Works of God have been considered in respect of the Essence:
Authors of Theological Systems inform us of two things. Their Cooperation.
Distinct manner of Working.


The Cooperation is that whereby the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, concur as
one Individual efficient cause of every Work and effect out of themselves.

In this respect that is true that Opera Trinitatis ad Extra sunt indivisa: What
one is said to do, all are to be understood to do. The Father does not create
without the Word, nor was the Word made flesh, nor did redeem without the
Father; nor the Holy Ghost sanctify without the Father and the Word; neither
do the Father and the Son any thing without the Holy Ghost. For all the Works
of God, ad extra, do necessarily presuppose the immanent necessary acts of the
Deity upon it self. Yet we must not conceive them as any ways unequal, either
in themselves, or in their working: nor as three distinct agents uniting their
forces jointly to produce one and the same effect. For one Individual Essence
must needs, if it act, be one Individual Agent, in the production of all
Creatures, and effecting all his works. Therefore we find the Creation and
other Works of God ascribed as well unto the Word and Spirit, as to the Father,
and for the most part to them all as to one God.

The manner of their concurrence is that,

This does imply that the manner of their Work is distinct; yet it is very
difficult to conceive the distinction, or difference. We read that the Father
does many things by the Word and Spirit, but never that the Word or Spirit did
any thing by the Father. All things were made by the Word, and without him was
not any thing made that was made, John 1. 3, And by him were all things
created, and by him all things consist, Col. 1. 16, 17. And God the Father is
said to have made the Worlds by him, Heb. 1, 2. The Father will quicken our
bodies by his Spirit dwelling in us, Romans 8. 11. And he revealed the deep
things of his Gospel by his Spirit, 1 Cor. 2. 10. And God elected the
Thessalonian Christians to Salvation, through the Sanctification of the Spirit,
2 These. 2. 13. We have some resemblance hereof in the soul of man, which being
one individual essence, is one individual agent. It con^riveth all its works
by the counsel of the understanding, determines them by his will, and is ready
to effect them by his active power. When it actually produces any thing, the
Will commands, the understanding directs, and the power executes. The Will is
first and begins, the understanding is the second, and goes on, the power is
the last, and finisheth the Work. And these three inseparably and individually
concur efficiently to produce the effect as one efficient: And the Will directs
by the understanding, and executes by understanding, directing the power, and
by the Power Acting according to the Understanding. How Redemption is
appropriated to the ^on, and Sanctification to the Holy Ghost must be
considered hereafter. In these things We must be sober, and not Curious. We
must neither confidently affirm any thing as a Divine Truth, which is not
evident unto us out of the Scripture, nor Peremptorily deny any thing because
We do not clearly see it in the Scriptures. For so the Sadduces denied the
Resurrection, because they could not see it, in the Book of God: Though it was
in that book, as our Savior made it evident.

These things premised concerning the Works of God in general, Some bring these
under two heads; the first, of Creation; the second of Providence; And by
Providence they understand both Preservation, and Government: But this is but
difference in Words.

The first work whereby the Eternal King did first acquire his power, is
Creation. Which is a Work of God, whereby in the beginning, he created Heaven
and Earth, and all things therein. This work must be considered, Absolutely in
it self. Respectively as aground of absolute power.
And in it self Generally. Specially, in respect of man.


In it self generally, it is A Work or Act of God; yet this Act is not immanent*
but emanant, and transient, yet far different from the Acts of any Creature;
and from many other Acts of God. It had an obj^ct logically considered, no
subject existent: For the Creature, as existent, was an effect and not the
subject of it. As Cameracensis does distinguish of Predestination; That
Praedestinatio Activa est Deus Praedestinans, Passiva est Res Praedestinata: So
Creatio activa est D^u^ creans, Passiva Res creata. So that in Creation, we
have God and his Creativity (as Occam and Bacon express it) and the thing
created. It is a proper Act of God, and can be truly affirmed of nothing else:
if it were not so, God by this work could not be distinguished from all other
things, as, by this act, we read in Scripture he is. The first part of the
Creation presupposed no matter; and the other parts no matter, immediately
capable of a ^orm, to be either introduced into it, or educed out of it by any
agent, but by God. So that God supplied wholly all the causes: And when we say,
that God Created all things, either mediately, or immediately of nothing; the
word Nothing does neither signify the matter, nor properly the term of that
act, but is a Negative, and denies all pre-existent matter in the first part of
Creation. Neither does the word Create in Ancient authors signify to make a
thing of nothing, as some think it does: Therefore we must learn what Creation
is from the Scripture, not from this or that word. God by this Act did so
clearly manifest his eternal power and Godhead, that it is evident that he
alone is the efficient cause and Maker of the World; and that without the
advice or assistance of any others; and also without any tool or instrument. It
was a fr^e act of God: For he was no ways necessitated to make the World, or
to make it before or after, or at that time when he did make it; or to produce
it in this or that order, or manner, rather then another. For he Created all
things, and for his pleasure they are and were Created, Rev. 4. 11. He Created
Heaven and Earth in the beginning --. The word may signify the Beginning of
time, as its the measure of things existing, and standing out of their causes
in their proper entity: Or it may referr to the first part of the Creation,
teaching us, That in the beginning and first of all God created Heaven and
Earth, which was void and without form; and afterward he made Light, the
Firmament, and other things: or it may referr unto the whole Creation; and
signifyes unto us, that the first Work of God was the Creation of the World in
six days. And in this sense Creation was the first issuing-forth of his
Almighty Power, to make and do some things out of Himself.

This was the Act of Creation, Effects were all things Created. All things
jointly taken together, are the World; and the principal parts thereof are
Heaven and Earth. And because Heaven and Earth are not Vacant places, as it is
written that the Heavens and the Earth were finished with all the Host of them,
Genesis 2. ^. Where the word Host signifies all things in Heaven and Earth. And
these are called The Host of them.

1. Because they are Many.

2. Because they were all Created in an excellent order: So Paraeus on the
place.

3. Because they were the Ornament and beauty of Heaven and Earth; Thus the
Word (...) u^ed by the Sepruaguit does signify. By Heaven and Earth, some
understand, by a Metonymie and Synechdoche, all things Created; as though these
first words of the Scripture were an abridgement of the first Chapter of
Genesis. Others, and upon better grounds, do interpret Heaven to be the Heaven
of Heavens, and the Host thereof, which is the innumerable multitude of
Angels; And Earth to be the Mass, which was void and without form, and the
first rudiment and Seminary of all things Created-afterwards. The first works
of Creation, therefore were Heaven, and Angels. The Scriptures tells us that
there is an Heaven of Heavens which is sometimes called the Throne and Temple
of God, the third Heaven; the place into which Christ ascended, and where he
will keep his residence till he come to judge the World. No doubt its a Stately
Glorious piece, a place of Beauty and incomparable delight, and therefore called
Paradise. In it are many Mansions, where the Saints of God shall ever rest, and
enjoy their most excellent Inheritance. Yet this highest place, which is the
Circumference of the World, was not Created without the Host thereof, which is
the innumerable company of Angels. These were concreated with the Heavens, and
are called the Angels of Heaven, and by Creation as the Heavens, so they, are
incorruptible and immortal; Spirits, which once began, but shall never cease
to live: They are endued with a most piercing understanding, Free Will, and an
admirable executive and active Power. They were all at first righteous and
holy, like unto their God, and had been for ever blessed, as now the Holy
Angels he, if they had continued subject and obedient to the everlasting King,
who made them. They were made, and that in the Beginning, as appears from
Psalm. 104. 4. They were made before the foundation and Cornerstone of the
earth was ^ay'd. Job. 38. 7. That they were Created long before the World, was
Jeroms groundless conceit; And it was Austins fancy to think, God made them,
when he said, Let there be Light.

The Heaven of Heavens with their Host, Beginning, and with them the earth as
co-aeval and concreated. By Earth as appears from the Text, Genesis 1, 2. was not
meant this lowest part and Basis of the World, as now it is* for that was
Created the third day; but (if we may so speak) that first draught, and
imperfect Being, which was (as it were) the rudiment and Seminary of this
Lower world, as distinct from the Heaven of Heavens, and all things therein.
And if any thing may be called the first matter, this surely is it which was so
imperfect, that only the skill and power of God could inform it. And he did
inform it, and out of it made first the Elements, and out of them all Mixed
bodies. The first Elements was light which may be called the fire, which is the
purest, the most subtle, and active of all the rest, and soared aloft into the
highest place; and the nature of it such, that it has great affinity with a
Spirit, and is next unto it. The next was the Firmament, which we call the Air:
And it was spread like a Curtain round about the Globe of the Earth, and Water;
and takes up the space between them, an the Ethereal light or fire: a fit
receptacle or subject to receive the Beams of light, and being transparent to
transmit them to the earth. The third was the Water which first covered the
earth, and stood above the Mountains, but afterward by the mighty power of
God was reduced to the fluid substance which now we see it to be; and gathered
together into deep and Vast Channels of the earth, whence the main Ocean and
the narrow Seas: and its diffused into every part of the Earth, through secret
subterraneal Passages, as through so many veins: And hence our Springs,
Rivers* Lakes.

The last, the lowest, and the dullest Element, was the Earth: And with it were
created Minerals and Vegetables, as Grass, Herbs, Plants, and all Manner of
Trees: And with these he first furnished and beautified the earth the third day.

The Fourth, he returns unto the Aetherial Part, and creates the Sun, Moon, and
Stars: The two first, as greater Lights; the one, for the Day; the other, for
the Night, together with the Stars. These are the Lights and Lamps, placed
under the Roof, and highest part of the Lower-World. These were made not only
for Beauty and Ornament, but also for the benefit of the Lower Globe; upon
which, by light and motion, they have great power: And, as the order, wherein
they were placed, and their motion in a certain Line, according to a certain
Rule, which they always observe, is excellent; so the use and benefit of them
is manifold and wonderful.

Between these, and the Earth, we have the Meteors, which sometimes are
Natural, sometimes Supernatural, and Prodigious.

The Heaven thus adorned, the Glorious Creator descends into the Water, and
thence produces Fish, to live, spawn, and swim in the Water, and the Fowl to
fly in the Firmament of Heaven, and build and multiply upon the Earth. Amongst
the Watry-Creatures, the Whales, and Sea-Dragons are most eminent and terrible.

After all these finished, He concludes his Creation with Beasts, Cattle,
creeping things, although animate, yer irrational.

And last of all, with Man, a rational, and noble Creature; whose Creation
requires a more particular and distinct consideration. And this is the Genuine
Order of Physics, or Natural Philosophy, which should inform us not only of
Bodies, but Spirits; which have Nature and Being, and Original of Being, as
well as other Creatures.

The Creation of Man, living soul: and Woman of a Rib, that they might have
Dominion over the Sensitive Creatures and the Earth, Genesis 1. 26, 27* and 2. 7,
22. Or more briefly, It is that, whereby he made man Male, and Female,
according to his Image.

To know the Creation of man, does nearly, and very much concern us; not only
because we are men, and also excellent Creatures; but also because this
knowledge gives much light unto the knowledge of this Kingdom, and tends much
to the glory of God, and our eternal happiness. He is the Abridgment of Heaven
and Earth, and is virtually the whole World; and therefore styled the
Micro-cosme or Little World. His Body has affinity with the Earth; his Soul
with Heaven and Angels: Like those precious stones, which, though Earth, yet
participate of Heaven. He is the Horizon of Time and Eternity, and dwells in
the Confines of both, as being contiguous both to the one and other. He was
stamped with the Image of God, and was made capable of Heaven, and Beatifical
Communion with this Eternal King.

To understand his excellency the better, we must consider his Parts and
Perfections.

The Parts are two: the Body, and the Soul. The Body was made of Dust, and Dust
of nothing, at the first. As there was a great distance betwixt Dust and
nothing; so there is between Dust and the Body, if we look upon it but as a
Carcass; much more if we consider it, as animated by the presence, union, and
power of the Soul; and most of all, as glorified. This distance between Dust,
and a Body, is so great, that nothing but the Hand of Heaven, and the Art of
the Almighty, could make it so excellent a piece. The Matter was base, the
Workmanship was excellent and will more gloriously appear, when God, who made
it out of the Dust, at first, a Natural Body, shall raise it again out of the
Dust, to make it a Spiritual Body.

The Perfections of the Body, are these: The Organs, the orderly Composure of
them, and the Faculties: For though it be but a Body, and far inferior to the
Soul, yet of all other Bodies it is most excellent, as being a fit Habitation
for the Immortal Soul, as no other Body can be, -- The Organs and Members are
many; their order, composure, and dependence one upon another, excellent and
curious: the Faculties and Motions are wonderful: They who know it best, admire
it most; and know, that the very Conception, much more the Creation is a kind
of Miracle. It is not only a fit Tabernacle for the Soul, which was breathed
into it from Heaven, but also a fit Instrument and Servant to perform the Works
of Righteousness and Holiness, jointly, with the Soul, as directed by it. And
as it concurs with the Soul to do good or evil, so it shall partake with the
Soul in rewards and punishments: And no Body, but this of man, can be the
Temple of the Holy Ghost: and though it be corruptible, and may die, and by
reason of sin is condemned to the Dust, from whence it was taken; yet this
punishment lies upon it but for a time: and as it is capable of Immortality, so
it shall be immortal and glorious upon the Resurrection.

Yet that which does more ennoble, animate, act, and guide it, being concreated
and made with it, and may, and does live, when separated from it, The Union of
them is wonderful, yet dissoluble, and for Sin is dissolved. It Is said, God
breathed in his Nostrils, or his face the breath of life, and man became a
Living Soul. What Expositors say upon the place, I will not now report; but
only observe,

1. That these words speak of the Creation of the Soul; yet especially, as it
did animate the Body.

2. That it was not created first out of the Body, and then put into it, but
created in it, as it always is: For God creates the Spirit in the midst of Man.

3. That though God breathed it into Man; yet it was no part, nor particle, of
God's Essence but an effect of his power.

4. That his Soul was reasonable, and far more excellent then that of Beasts;
and therefore termed by the Chaldy-Paraphrast, A speaking Soul; for to speak
is a proper effect of Reason.

5. This Soul was created immediately and invisibly from God, in an unspeakable
manner, as is signified by those words; And God breathed in his face: And in
the face it does most appear, and manifest it self, according to that saying,
Vultus est index Animi.

6. By the Breathing, it was united to the Body, of which it might have kept
possession for ever, if Sin had not been a Cause of Dispossession. Yet the
second Union by the Resurrection, when God shall breathe upon the Dust again,
shall be so firm, as that it never shall be dissolved.

What this Soul of man is, we do not perfectly know: And it was well observed
of Learned Vives, that God gives us these Souls, not so much to know their
Essence, as to use them. Something we know of them, by Reason and Discourse;
something by Experience: but most of all, by the Holy Scriptures. The
Excellency thereof is clearly known by the Acts and Effects thereof; it
understands, and freely wills. The Understanding reaches all things, and in
some manner and measure knows God, and reaches Eternity. In this respect
it is said to be all things; because it has some affinity, and cognation, with
all Objectes; and a kind of magnetical, and attractive Power. By this, we
discern good and evil; and, according to the Representation made, the Will is
affected, or disaffected: For upon a simple Apprehension of a thing, as good or
bad, follows naturally and necessarily a Complacency, or Displicency, though
not a real and effectual prosecution. It has also an Executive and Productive
Power, to work according to the knowledge of the Understanding, and
Determination of the Will, and can imitate the Works of God, though at a great
distance. As it is ingenuous in the imitation of Nature, so it models States
and Kingdoms, and resembles God, who has given it so rare an active power, and
a principle of its own Actions within it self, without any necessary direction
or determinati^n from any Creature without. This active vigor, does declare
the curious and excellent frame thereof; which, if we understood well and
truly, we might from thence conclude, that it is a Spiritual and Immortal
Substance; and, in some sense, a Ray of Eternal Light.

The Perfection of this Soul and Body, For GOD created Man in his own Image, in
the Image of God created he him, Genesis 1. 27.

This Image was the Habit of Righteousness and Holiness, arising from the
Spirit of God sanctifying him.

The Perfection of his Understanding was this, That he knew his God, and many
things else; even all things needful for his Happiness, without any Error.

The Perfection of his Will, was the integrity thereof, whereby he was inclined
to an Universal Obedience unto all God's Commands, and to love that which was
just and good, and hate that which was evil, as he had a power truly and
certainly to know them.

The Perfection of both in respect of the Body, was this, that he had a perfect
Dominion over it, and the sensitive Appetite; and there was no distemper and
disorder in the body to incline it unto evil, contrary to the direction and
command of the Soul: Neither was it apt to rebel against the Counsels thereof,
as now sometimes it is: so that both Soul and Body stood in a direct posture,
looking and moving toward God, as just and holy, and was capable of Eternal
Felicity. Yet this Harmony and Integrity of Body and Soul, at first, were not
such, as that man was indeclinably fixed upon that which was truly good, either
by Nature, or extrinsecal Confirmation, as one day he shall be: but there was a
Possibility to sin, and dye. To be essentially and necessarily holy and happy,
is proper unto God: To be confirmed in Righteousness, upon Obedience, by
prevention of all sin is a privilege of the Holy Angels; and, in the end,
shall be the happiness of true and sincere Believers. This Integrity is that
whereby Man is so like unto God, who is essentially holy and just. This is that
Image which shall be restored and renewed upon the merit of Christ, by the
operation of the Spirit, which Adam had in the day of Creation. The Spirit
wrote in his heart the Precepts of the Moral Law, as purely Moral: yet this
Perfection was not Essential, but Accidental, because Man continued Man, after
he had lost it.

Besides the Parts and Perfections of man, Sex, which was neither the of
Essence of, nor proper to man, but to all Sensitive Creatures. The end of it
was Multiplication by Generation. For though all the Angels were created as so
many Individuals at first, and never shall increase or decrease: yet it seemed
good in the Divine Wisdom, to make of one blood all Nations of men for to dwell
on the face of the Earth, Act. 17. 26. And therefore, he first makes only one
man, and out of him, and of one of his Ribs, Woman; and of them, all Mankind.
Therefore is it said, Male and Female created he them, Genesis 1. 27. So that we
have

1. The Creation of their Being.

2. The Image of God stamped upon them.

3. The Sex: So that if we examine the Original of Man, we find him.

1. Nothing. 2. Dust. 3. Man, without any Woman. 4. Woman of Man, without any
Mother. 5. Man of man, and Woman. 6. Christ, of Woman, without any Man.
Woman was made after man; of man, for man: Therefore, man by Creation, had the
Excellency, Priority, and Superiority. Yet Woman, in respect of her body, was
of the same Dust and Mould, though not immediately, and of the same Model, and
had a reasonable Soul, and the same immortal; was stamped with the Image of
God, in the same Spiri^ual condition, subject to the same Lord, bound to same
Laws, capable of the same Felicity; and if she sinned with him, liable to the
same punishments. She differs only in this, that she is a Woman, the Female;
and he, the Male. He must beget, she must conceive, bear, bring forth, give
suck; and so both jointly, must propagate Mankind. She was made of a Rib of
man, to signify how near she is to man; and how, as they were one flesh at
first, so, upon Marriage, they were made one again. And the Society of Man and
Wife, is the nearest in the World, and requires the dearest love, and should
be the sweetest comfort: And this was the end why God created Woman; not only
Generation, but mutual Society, Help, and Comfort: For God saw that it was not
good that man should be alone, Genesis 2. 18. Man did no ways actually concur to
the Creation of Woman; he was merely Passive. God took a Rib from man, without
doing the least harm: yet, of this Rib, none but God could make so excellent a
Creature, which was animated by a reasonable and immortal Soul, and beautified
with his Image.

In this great Work of Creation finished, we may observe three things: The
first, proper to man. The second, to him, and the Sensitive generative
Creatures. The third, common to all. The


First, Proper to Man, was the Dominion over the Creatures of the Lower Part of
the World: For he was made Lord over them, and the Earth. Therefore, God said,
Subdue the Earth, and have Dominion over the Fish of the Sea, and over the
Fowls of the Air, and ever every living thing that moves upon the Earth, Genesis
1. 28. And he made him little lower then the Angels, and crowned him with glory
and honor. He made him to have Dominion over the Works of his hands: He put
all things under his feet, etc. Psalm. 8. 5, 6. And though this same be in a
special manner applied to the Humiliation, and Glorification of Christ, Heb. 2.
6. yet it did agree to man in the first Creation. The reason of this Dominion
was, because man was a more noble and excellent Creature, was endued with
Wisdom and Power, to subdue and order them: They were made for his
preservation, service, use* God gave them into his hands. And such was the
Power of God, that he put the fear of man upon them: and such was the Majesty
of Man, continuing in his Integrity, that his Countenance and Presence did
strike an awe into the greatest, stronget, and most comely Creatures. Some make
this Dominion a part of God's Image: and it is true, that man, in this,
resembled God, as Lord and King; and as God's Vicegerent was a Petty God, and
Lord of the Lower-World. The

Second thing common to man, with the Sensitive, and generative Creature, which
propagate, and perpetuate their kind by a successive generation, is God's
blessing of them, whereby he gave them a generative power to multiply, and
replenish the Earth, and the Waters. This power of Generation, is a wonderful
and strange Virtue, which God alone can give, and take away at pleasure: and if
he take it away, or deny it, then it is above the power of Nature to generate.
The

Third thing is, That general quality of all Creatures, as they came from God.
For, God saw every thing that he had made, and it was very good, Genes. 1. 31.

1. Every thing was good, beautiful, and perfect in it is kind: there was no
defect, or blemish, in the Being and Constitution of it.

2. Every thing was good and perfect, for the end and use he had created them.

3. Every thing was good in it is order, by which all things were united, and
one subordinate to another, and did complete the Beauty of the whole, and made
up the great and glorious Frame, which we call the World. The reason of this
goodness was, because they were made by a perfect Rule, and every thing
severally, and all things jointly did fully answer, and were exactly
conformable to that most excellent Model, and Idea, contrived by his Wisdom: So
that there was no need, that God should continue this Work of Creation any
longer, but might rest, and keep his Sabbath, and take content in his Works.

If God, Beginning, thus created Heaven and Earth, then it follows,

1. That the World had a Beginning; it was not from Everlasting: For there was
a moment, a first point and period when it began, and before which it did not
exist; and before which God only had his Being from Everlasting, fully
perfect, and happy in himself, and could have no need of the World; for it
could add nothing to his happiness.

2. That the World, in this respect, was a Work, and an effect, which must
needs have a cause, and depend upon it, for its very first Being; without
which, it had never been.

3. The efficient cause and Workman, which did contrive and make this curious
and excellent piece, was God: For nothing but God had any Being, or Existence
before this Work of Creation: Neither could there be any Power of Wisdom, but
his, sufficient to produce the least thing from nothing into Being.

4. This great Work, once made, must needs manifest the glorious Power, Wisdom,
and Perfections of the Maker: For, The Heavens declare the glory of God, and
the Firmament shows his handiwork* Psalm. 19. 1.

5. By this Work, God is sufficiently differenced from all other Things, as of
far more excellent, and of a far more admirable power: So that by this it is
evident, there can be no other God but He: For whatsoever cannot make a World
is not God as he is.

6. Therefore He, and He alone, must needs be God: there neither is, nor can be
any other: For He is great, and does wondrous things, and is God alone, Psalm.
86. 10. And before: Among the gods, there is none like to thee, O Lord, neither
are there any Works like unto thy Works.

7. It Is the duty of Men and Angels to behold these glorious Works, and
seriously therein to observe his wonderful Power and Wisdom, that so they may
admire his glorious Excellency, and with all Humility, adore his Eternal
Majesty, who alone is worthy of all honor, glory, and power, for evermore,
even for this Work of Creation.

6. If he created all things, and that first of nothing, then all things are
wholly his: He has an absolute Propriety in them, and full power to order
them, and dispose of them at Will and Pleasure. And by this we understand, how
he did acquire his Supreme and Universal Power.

Hitherto Creation has been considered, and none can govern without Power
acquired one way or other. This Power was acquired by Creation, because, by it,
God obtained an absolute and perfect Propriety in the whole World, and every
part thereof. Amongst men, whosoever makes any thing by his own proper Art and
Labor, and that of his own stuff, he must needs have a full right unto it, and
a full power to dispose of it: yet no Workman ever made any Work without some
matter: yet God made all things without any matter Pre-existent. And in this,
is far above all other Workmen, who never made their stust or matter. In this
respect He is the sole and total cause of the whole world and every thing
receives its whole Entity, and every Particle of it from the Creator. From
hence it follows, that seeing the whole Entity is Gods, therefore his Propriety
is entire and absolute. And if it be such he must needs have an absolute Power
to dispose of all things, and to order them as he thought good. And because of
this absolute Propriety it is, that they wholly depend upon him for Being, and
all things else, and are wholly subject unto him. Therefore, he may give them
what Rules he pleases, order them to what ends he thinks good, and he has
made them capable of; and also by these, regulate all their inclinations and
motions, and bind them to observe his Order, upon what terms he will. This
Power, acquired by these means, and grounded upon this Propriety, is original,
absolute supreme, universal, Monarchical everlasting. It Is originally and
primarily in him, as in the Fountain: it is not in the least measure derived
from any other. It Is absolute, and no ways limited: It Is supreme, and no ways
subordinate or dependent upon any higher, and above it: It Is univeral, and
extended to the whole World, as his Territory: It Is Monarchical, because the
Power wholly resides in one: It Is everlasting: and after it is once begun, it
continues, and shall for ever abide.

In these respects, it is not only different from, but most excellent, and far
above all other Power.

And as it is acquired by Creation, so it is continued by Preservation, which
some make a part of Providence, as in some sense it may be. For by whatsoever
his Propriety, and the dependency and subjection of the Creature is continued,
by the same his Power is continued: And as by Creation all things were made; so
by Preservation, which is a continued Creation all things continue his.

There is, indeed, some difference between Creation and Preservation, not only
in this, that Preservation presupposes, and necessarily requires, the
Creation, and all things existent in their Actual Being: But, Creation
presupposed nothing but his Almighty Power; but also in this, that in Creation,
he made no use of the secondary Causes, and means, as in Providence he does:
yet these means and secondary causes are not used out of necessity: For what he
does effect by them, he can easily do without them. Therefore, the use of them
is merely voluntary; and to let us understand so much, he many times omits
them. Some things are preserved by Food, which is like Fuel to the fire, which
continually seeds upon it; and when it is wholly consumed, or withdrawn, it is
presently quenched.

Thus the life of man is preserved by Bread; yet God makes this Bread, gives it
to whom he will, and denies it when he will: and his Blessings gives it Virtue
to preserve that Life; which it cannot restore, once lost; or give, where it is
not: Yet man lives not by Bread alone, but by every word which proceeds out
of God's mouth. Where it is had and used, God is the principal cause; and when
life is preserved without it, He is the sole Preserver. The continuance of the
Creature's Being, does so necessarily always depend on God, as well as his
Powers and Operations, that he need not let loose one contrary against another
for their mutual Destruction: but if he once withold his hand, the most
excellent and incorruptible Creatures return to nothing, and lose their entity
they obtained by Creation.

For as it is said of sensitive Creatures, Thou take away their breath, they
dye, and return to their Dust, Psalm. 104. 29. So it is true of all other things,
both severally and jointly; Thou deniest thy preserving Power wholly; they
cease to be, and return to their former nothing. Therefore, God in the Holy
Scriptures, is so often said to uphold all things by the Word of his Power: and
it is said, that by him all things consist.

CHAP. IX.
Concerning the Exercise of God's Power in general.
GOD having thus acquired this transcendent Power, Superior Understanding, a
Superior Will, a Superior Strength: and the more excellent the Wisdom, the
more just the Will, the more irresi^^ible the strength of the Governor, the
more excellent the Government will be. Seeing therefore, all these concur most
eminently in God, His Government must needs be most perfect; as no doubt it is.
This Government may be considered, as General, of all things. Special, of some
special Creatures.
And in both we may observe the Constitution. Administration.


For God first constituted an exact Order; and, after that, administered and
disposed of all things, according to that Order: This Order was ready
immediately upon the Creation: For he did not first make the Creatures without
any Order, but in an excellent way: For all and every one of them were made
Ordinable to some certain end; and to this they were inclined, and set in
direct Positure toward their Perfection. Yet, because Inclination was vain
without Motion, he gave them power to move. But yet Motion, without a Rule,
might wander and come short of the end; he therefore gave every thing a Rule,
that the motion might be Regular, tend directly to, and so reach it is end: and
the Rule was imprinted in the Creature, as the Pure Morals in Men and Angels.
As there were several and distinct Ranks and Degrees of Creatures, so there
were several ends. And these ends were not separated at a distance, nor
contrary one unto another, but were disposed in an excellent order, and united
like so many Links in one Chain. Some were Superior; some Inferior; and one
last, and supreme, to which all the rest were subordinate; yet like so many
lines did tend unto, and end in that highest, as in one Center: And that end
was not the particular end of some particular Creature, or Creatures: but the
universal end of all, which some means did reach immediately; others, at a
distance.

In the Administration, the Rules were, as Laws, prefixed by God; and the
Events of every Motion, were as Judgments and Determinations. And there are
some generals in Men and Angels, which come within the compass of this general
Administration. And though the Supreme Lord bound all Creatures, by certain
Rules, and limited them, yet be reserved a Power to himself, to act above, and
besides these Rules at Will and Pleasure; and, if his Wisdom should think good,
to new-model the whole Frame of his Government.

Hence the Distinctions of mediate and immediate; ordinary, and extraordinary
Providence: under which last Head, comes in that of Miracles, which are works
of transcendent Power, above the activity of the Creature; wherein God does not
observe the Order established in Creation, whereunto he bound the Creature, but
not Himself. They serve, as they are fit for these ends, to let men know, that
there is a great difference between his Works, and those of inferior Agents,
though he may use their petty efficiency in doing of them: They rouz and
quicken the dull and drowsy minds of Men, who are not so much moved with
ordinary Works, though excellent.

The Sun it self, that glorious Light of Heaven is no strange thing unto us,
because it gives us light every day; whereas, if it were newly made, and we had
never seen it before, we should be amazed, and wonder at the excellent beauty
and brightness of so goodly a Creature. They let men know, that they have no
need of ^econdary causes: He can do as much, and far more without them, as with
them. They confirm the Doctrine of his Messengers, and make those high and
mysterious truths, which are strange, and above the Rules of Reason to be
credible.

They are not frequent least they should prove ordinary, and not so effectual
to mo^e the hearts of men: And they are either Works of Mercy, as those of our
Savior were, or Works of Judgment; and so they manifest not only his wondrous
Wisdom and transcendent Power, but also his Justice, and his Mercy. They supply
the de^ects of inferior causes, and manifest, that God is not tied to the
Order prescribed to the Creatures, in the Creation.

In this Providence, eternal estate, we might observe the Instincts. Virtues,
Operations, Multitude, Variety, Order, and use of things oreated, and the
universal extent of their Administration. As the Creatures are many, and to us
innumerable, and very various, according to their Forms and Characters
imprinted upon them; so their Instincts, Virtues* Operations, are many and
various, as their effects also be. And whereas this Multitude and Propriety,
might be a cause of Confusion, and turn them into their Old Chaos, and also
would distract and perplex all the Wit and Wisdom of Men and Angels to prevent
it; yet this Administration is such, that they are all, and every one, by it,
kept in order. Every one severally, and all jointly, have their rule, keep
their place, observe their order, and by the Eternal Power, and Wisdom of God,
are governed with ease, as though they were but one single Creature. The use of
all this is, to make them all, and every one subservient to the main end, to
minister unto man; to be Instruments in the Execution of the Judgments, and
Collation of the Benefits, which the great and everlasting King does distribute
in that higher Administration of his special Kingdom; and to manifest that
there is a supreme, intelligent Agent, who makes, moves, orders all things. Yet
we take little notice of this, but look upon the Works of God like Children, or
rather irrational Brutes: Otherwise, we might see the hand of Heaven in every
thing, even in the least; much more in the greatest, and most of all in the
whole Body.

This Providence extends not only to some few things, excellent, but to all
and every one. For, are not two Sparrows sold for a Farthing? and one of them
shall not fall upon the ground, without your Father. But the very hairs of your
head are (all) numbered, says our Savior to his Disciples, Math. 10. 29, 30.
For he that makes, and preserves all, and every several thing, must needs order
them; and all events, even the least, and also those which are ascribed to
Chance and Fortune, come under the Regulation and Limitation of this
Providence: Yet God's care of the Whole, is greater than of the Parts, and of
the most noble, than of the meanest Creatures.

CHAP. X.
Of the special Government of Angels.
AFter the general Government of God,

The Subject is the intellectual, and immortal Creature, endued with Free Will,
and considered in his Moral and Spiritual Capacity.

The Rules are properly Laws, binding to obedience, or punishment.

The End, is a more eminent Manifestation, of the Divine Perfections, in the
Rewards and Punishments, not only Temporal, but Eternal, of those noble and
most excellent Creatures.

Therefore, it may be described to be, An Ordination of God, whereby the
Intellectual and Immortal Creatures are directed, or ordered to an Eternal
state of Felicity, or Misery.

Government, properly so called, according to some, is an Order of Superiority,
and Subjection. And to govern, is a Moral Act, and presupposes a Superior
invested with Power, and certain persons subject to this Power. The general
nature of this special Government, is Ordination: and herein it agrees with the
former Providence. This Ordination necessarily required, that an Order should
be established, and then observed. The subject of this Ordination, is the
intellectual and immortal Creature, endued with Free Will, as he is such. For
the subject must be intellectual, or else he cannot understand a Law; and must
be Immortal, or else he cannot be capable of an immortal and eternal estate.
And must be endued with Free Will, or else he can neither voluntarily submit
unto a Superior Power, or so obey, or disobey, as to be capable of
Punishments, and Rewards.

The Rules of this Ordination, are Laws binding to Obedience, which is the
condition of Reward promised; or unto Punishment, upon Disobedience threatened.
The Rewards and Punishments, are rendered by a just Judgment, upon certain
Evidence of the Violation, or observation of the Laws. This Government is of
Angels. Men.


For these only are Intellectual and Immortal, and capable of an Eternal
Estate. The first, is that of Angels, whereof the Scripture speaks little, as
being revealed and written for man. In this Government, the power of God was
exercised, both by the Constitution of some certain Order, and observation of
the same. The Constitution delivers and determines that Fundamental Law of his
own Sovereignty, and the Angels subjection. As by Creation, God acquired a
Properiety in them, as well as in other Creatures, and a power of Dominion over
them, and by it they were absolutely subjected to him, as intellectual Spirits.
This subjection was natural and necessary: for God could not create them
independent upon his absolute Power because then they had not been Creatures:
yet he might make them subject unto himself, and not bind them to subjection,
upon some positive Penalties, as he might bind them unto it, without any
promise of Reward.

Again, he might, by Law, bind them to obedience or punishment, without any
solemn Contract or Covenant, wherein they should engage themselves by a
voluntary submission to his Power: yet it is very likely, as in all Government,
the first thing is, the establishment of the Sovereign Power of the Prince, or
Governor; and the Allegiance and Fealty of the People; so it was here. This
was the order which God observed in the Constitution of the Polity of Israel.
They must enter into a Solemn Covenant, and promise subjection and obedience
unto him as their Lord and God before he publish his Laws, Exodus, 19. 8. This
Fealty they likewise promised unto Joshua, before he took upon him to command
them Josh. 1. 16, 17, 18. So likewise Saul, and David, though both design by
God, yet must first, before they can resign, be acknowledged by the People.

And it is most suitable and agreeable to the Government of intelligent and free
Agents; That the subjection, which does arise and result naturally, necessari^y
and immediately from the Creation, did not make them liable to, though deserving
of punishment, if they should do something that was not just, seems to be
imp^yed by that of the Apostle, The Law works wrath: For where there is no
Law, there is no transgression, Romans 4. 15. Where we may observe,

1. That Wrath is punishment.

2. That Punishment, is from transgression going before.

3. That there can be no Transgression, where there is no Law: This
Establishment and Determination of the Sovereign's Power, and the Peoples
subjection, is the Foundation of all Government, and might be called, The
Fundamental Rule and Law.

After the Constitution,

1. The Legislation. 2. The Judgment of God.
For (no doubt) God gave them Laws; and according to their obedience, or
disobedience, judged them: for both these are evident out of Scripture. What
Laws God gave them, in particular, we know not: That they were bound to
continue righteous, and holy, as God made them, and to love God, and one
another, there can be no question. These were Principles written and concreated
(if I may so speak) with them: yet, that upon the Performance, Eternal Glory,
and Security of the same would follow; or, that upon the Nonperformance,
eternal punishments would be inflicted, could not be so clear, by Creation,
unto them.

There was another Law, whereby they were obliged to observe that order amongst
themselves, which he at first instituted: For there is an Order and Polity
amongst the Angels; but whether Monarchical, or some other, we know not. If the
Devils, those Apostate Angels, do observe the order of their Creation, it seems
to be Monarchical: For we read of the Prince of Devils, the Prince of the
World, the Prince of the Power of the Air (or Darkness) as the Word does
sometimes signify. What their Duty was, in respect of Man, or of the other
Creatures, is not so evident. It Is certain that the Holy Angels are Ministering
Spirits for the good of Gods servants, and Sons, since the fall. Though the
Pure and General Morals of the Decalogue did bind them; yet, as that Law was
given to Adam, to Israel, or to the Church-Christian, it could not bind them.
For therein there be Duties proper to Man, and such as no ways can agree to
Angels: And here I might take occasion to explain the Moral Law, but this I
reserve till I come to speak of the Laws of God as Redeemer by Jesus Christ,
exalted at his right hand, and reigning in the Brightness of eternal Glory.
For there were Laws of Righteou^nesse, and Holiness, and moral duties given
to Angels, to Adam, to the Heathen, to Israel, to the Church-Christian, as
shall be made manifest hereafter.

After Laws Moral and Positive, Assizes, wherein all the Angels were convented,
and rewarded to punished according to Observation or Violation, of the Laws
given to them. The rule of this judgment were those Laws; The Object, Angels,
obeying or disobeying; The Retribution was, of Rewards or Punishments. That
many of the Angels sinned and transgressed those Laws, and many did obey them,
the Holy Scriptures make evident. And here it is to be noted, that the Sin of
Angels was personal. For in one sinning, all did not sin; in one condemned,
all were not condemned, though by one man sin entered upon all mankind; and by
sin, death: Some one o^ few of the Angels might be leaders in this Apostasy,
and by their example and Persuasion pervert many. That vision of the Dragon,
and his Angels, Revel. 12. 7. may seem to imply some such thing: But whether it
be so, or otherwise, it is certain, a multitude of Angels sinned and revolted
under one Head and Prince, under whom they continue Revolters unto this day.
And here I might take occasion to speak of sin in general: but I defer it till
I speak of the fall and sin of Man. What the first sin of these immorall
spirits was in particular, is not so clear, as it is clear they did sin. And
therefore we must ob^erve,

1. That they sinned. 2. Were judged and condemned.
1. They sinned, 2 Pet. 2. 4. They kept not their first estate, or
Principality, but left their own habitation, Jude v. 6. which seems to imply
their Ambition, through which they aspired higher, as discontented with their
Station, wherein God placed them at first, and so violated the order
established by him* were murderers and liars from the beginning, and abode not
in the truth, Joh. 8. 44. And he sinned from the beginning, 1 John 3. 8. That
they sinned, signifies unto us their Disobedience in general: That they abode
not in the truth, kept not their first state or Principality, seems to be their
first sin. That they were liars and murderers, does point at their Envy and
Malice against man, which moved them to seek and contrive his ruin. And upon
this, many think their condition desperate, and their e^ernal punishment
unavoydable: But this is certain, it did aggravate their former sin, and made
their punishment more grievous: which punishment is expresed in the said texts,
That God spared them not; that he cast them down to Hell* as some turn it. But
Jude explaines the meaning; That they are reserved in everlasting (or
invisible) Chains, under darkness unto the Judgment of the great day. And he
accursed them: The sentence, passed upon them, was a sentence of cond^mnation,
and the execution was that curse of excommunication, and their Banishment out
of Heaven, and the light of glory, the confining of them in darkness, and the
binding them over to the Punishment of the great day of Final Judgment; and so,
that their eternal misery and torment is inevitable. And these places, with
others, inform us, That their Punishment is not Consummate; but shall be far
greater then now it is, When at the great and last day, they shall be cast into
the Lake of fire and Brimstone, and tormented with eternal pains without any
intermission. Their Punishment for the Present is loss of Heaven, and Light;
Darkness, imprisonment, fear and torment, in the remembrance of that dreadful
day. And this judgment passed upon them is an example to us sinful Wretches,
to take heed of their sins, lest we be sent into that eternal fire prepared
for the Prince of Devils, and his Angels.

The judgment of the rest of the Angels was passed at the same time.

1. Their obedience. 2. Their reward.
Their obedience is employed by the disobedience of the Apostate Angels: For i^
this was their sin, that they abode not in the Truth; then the obedience of the
rest of the Angels, was, that they abode in the truth, were contented with
their Station, and ^oved man upon whom Gods Image was stamped. They were found
humbly subject unto the Power, and obedient to the Laws of their glorious, and
Eternal Lord and Sovereign: and that in the day of their great trial, when
the rest of their fellow-Angels revolted, rebelled, and became murderers of
mankind.

Their reward was agreeable to their loyalty and obedience: And it may be
considered as inch^ate, and received in part; or, as Consummate.

As begun and received in part, they continue in the happy condition, wherein
they were created, and are confirmed, and secured there in: And their joy and
happiness must needs be great; because they enjoy the Glorious habitation of
Heaven, though many times sent from thence; They see the face of God, have free
access unto, and stand before the throne of the Eternal King. Their glory
peace and joy are never interrupted by fears, troubles, grief: And though
their confirmation be not expressed, or expressly delivered, yet its several
ways employed. For we never read that any of them sinned, or fell from God,
since the time of their first trial; That they are called the Holy, and Elect
Angels, That they are Angels of Heaven, of light, and not of darkness: that
they do his Commandments, hearkening to the Voice of his Word, Psalm. 103. 20.
That they ever praise God; that they protect the heirs of Salvation, and are
Ministering Spirits for their good, that they execute Gods judgments, and are
his Servants and Ministers in the government of the World, and are subject and
obedient unto Christ now glorified: and all this may amount to a Confirmation.
Yet their reward may seem as yet enjoyed only in part, and not consummate,
neither shall be till the last Judgment. For as yet the work is not finished;
all enemies are not subdued; the date of Christ's Commission is not expired, the
number of the Saints is not yet finished, the dead not raised, and therefore
neither they nor Saints are fully glorified, nor compacted into one entire body
under Christ their he^d, and one day they shall be, when the Sun of glory shall
shine upon them in his full strength, and perpetually abide in his Meridian.
Gods will is, that they should not be perfect without us: That these Angels
continued in obedience, it is an excellent example to persuade us after we are
once converted, and born from Heaven, to Persevere unto the end: The race is
not long* and the Prize is incomparable: We shall be as they are. Their
Confirmation and Assurance of eternal glory, and full bliss may much encourage
and comfort us: and so much the more; because they rejoice at our conversion,
are Ministering Spirits for our good, pitch their tents about us, have a charge
to keep us, protect and guard us in all our ways. And they will do what they
can, (and much they can do) to promote our eternal Salvation: and the least
and meanest of Gods Saints is not without a guard of Angels. That they
continued Loyal and obedient, was not from themselves, but from God who made
them, and did assist and strengthen them, so as to prevent their fall: And
their confirmation, and glorious reward, issued from Gods free love. Therefore
they are bound to give all Glory, Praise, Honor, and thanks to him that sits
upon the Throne and lives for ever, and ever. That their fellow Angels sinned,
it was not from any desertion of God, but their own free will and choice.

CHAP. XI.
Of the special Government of Man.
AS God Created the Angels before he made man; endued with Free Will: and so
capable of Laws, punishment, reward: they are both ordinable to an immortal
estate; They have both the pure moral Laws, and rules of Judgment. Yet as they
differ much in themselves, to the Ordination of them is different in many
particulars. Angels are Spirits without bodies; Men are bodies with spirits:
And according to this difference the government was different, as shall appear
hereafter. This government of man, as it is the principal Subject of the
Scriptures, so it shall be of this discourse, and takeup the rest of the
Doctrine following: wherein I shall be far larger then formerly I have bin.

This special government of man is twofold:

1. That wherein God exerci^ed his power acquired by Creation: 2. That wherein
he exercised his power acquired by Redemption: or more briefly, it is, The
Government of God as Creator. Redeemer.

As God by Creation became an absolute Lord, and had an unlimited power, so he
reserved the same in part both in the government of Angels and men. For though
he bounded and limited them, yet he sometimes exercises an Arbitrary power
above his Laws, and has bound himself only by his promises: And therefore
when men had Violated the order and Laws of Creation, he was at liberty, and
took occasion to alter, and new model his government. And hence the twofold
government of man, which take up the greatest part, and, in some respect, the
whole book of God in the Historical, the Doctrinall and the Prophetical parts
thereof, And hereafter I will call the one the first, the other the second
government or ordination of man.

This government is neither the natural government, God; nor that civil
government, whereby man as God's Vicegerent rules over man as his Subject: but
it considers him in his spiritual capacity, as he is ordinable to an immortal
estate. It Is true, it presupposes the three former ordinatious, and makes use
of them all, especially the Civil as subordinate unto it. It Is certain that
mankind once (...), and divided into several societies, could not long
continue in any tolerable condition, without some order of government in
Families, Vicinities, and greater Communities. Therefore as God assigned them
their several habitations upon the ^ace of the Earth, and divided them in
several tribes, and Societies according to their Vicinities; so he ordained an
order of superiority, and subjection amongst them, and communicated some
portion of his power to some: in which respect they become Gods deputies, and
are called Gods; and subjected others unto them: always reserving a Power to
himself, to ca^^ down one, and ^et up another, and sometimes one or more out of
the dust, from the Dunghill, and of the basest of the People. For the Crowns,
and Scepters of the World are in his hand, and he disposes them at his Will
and Pleasure: Besides, He has given them certain rules of Wisdom and Justice
together with a great strength, and power of the ^wo^d; whereby they are
enabled to Model and Administer Commonweals of great extent, makes Laws, and
Officers, and execute Judgment. And the end of all this is Peace and Concord,
that men may serve that God in obeying the Laws of this Spiritual and eternal
Kingdom, and attain a more glorious and excellent estate of eternal felicity.
The differences between these two governments are many: For in the Civil the
Governor is man; his power reaches only the body and temporal estate; His
wisdom and justice is imperfect; his immediate end is justice and honesty
amongst men for temporal Peace; His Laws, Judgment, Execution tends no
further; He is subject to God and accountable; and his power is perpetuated by
Succession, and in the end shall totally determine, and be dissolved. In this
government, God is the Governor, the souls and consciences of men the
Subjects; the wisdom, justice and power thereof perfect, the end is Spiritual
Righteousness and eternal peace, to which the Laws and judgments do
effectually tend; it continues for ever; and the estate which it orders men
unto is everlasting; and it has the Civil government subordinate unto it, and
in some respect a part of it.

That there is a first,

It Is Gods ordination of man, whereby he bound all mankind, in one man, made
holy and righteous, and subjected to Him, unto Perfect and perpetual
Obedience, or death: and according to his Obedience or Disobedience passed
judgment upon him.

That there was such a government may be proved from many places in Gods book.
I will instance in that one: As by one man, sin entered into the World, and by
sin death: As death passed over all men, etc. Romans 5. 12, 13, 14. In which
words we may observe,

1. That there was sin entering into the world:

2. That sin presupposes a Law; a Law the power of the Lawgiver, and the
subjection of the party sinning.

3. We have the sin of one man, and the sin of all men.

4. That this sin entered by one man, and was from him derived unto all.

5. There was death which is Punishment, and the death of one man, and the
Death of all, and that for sin, and the sin of all.

6. This death presupposes Judgment, and the execution of the same because
death passed and reigned.

7. This sin and judgment began with one man, and that was Adam.

8. As there can be no judgment or punishment but of sin, so there could be no
sin without a Law.

9. This Law was given to Adam, and it was the Law of the Tree of knowledge of
good and evil, annexed to the moral Laws: All this may be clearly understood
by the History of Moses, Genesis the 2d. and the 3d. Chapters.

In this description, We may observe,

1. The constitution of the government, in the Sovereignty of God* and the
Subjection of man.

2. The administration in the Laws Judgment
of God.

For the subjection of man unto God his Sovereign, we must consider, that it
may be threefold, according to a threefold ground* For it may arise

1. From his total and absolute dependence upon God, both in his Creation and
Preservation. 2. From his Voluntary submission. 3. From Gods Command.
The two latter add nothing to Gods Power, which by his absolute Propriety is
absolute, and so great that it cannot be greater: yet it may add unto the
obligation, and bind man more strongly both to subjection and obedience. There
is some resemblance of these degrees of subjection in the Israelites, who
though they were subject unto God by Creation, and Preservation, as all other
men were, yet as they were free men, they received a new and better kind of
Being, by that great deliverance from Egypt, and the Egyptian bondage, and so

1. Became Subject to God in the first degree.

2. They voluntarily submit, and receive him for their Lord and God, and engage
themselves, to serve him and obey him, Exodus 19. 8. Deuteronomy. 5. 27. And they
avouched the Lord their God, Deuteronomy. 26. 17. This was their allegiance and
fealty, whereby they became his Servants and Vassals.

3. God commanded, and said, They must have no other Gods.

This Voluntary submission, and Promise of obedience on man's part, and the
Promise of Protection* and reward on Gods side, seems to be a kind of
contract, and together with the condition, a Covenant. That there was any
foederall contract between God stipulating, and man restipulating at the first,
is not so express in Scripture. But that, in the constitution and fundamental
Law of Gods Sovereignty, and man's subjection unto God at first, there was
something Positive, wherein God limited his absolute Power; is certain. And
this is evident from the tree of Life, and the Law concerning the tree of
knowledge of good and evil, and the threatening of Death, and that God made Adam
the head of mankind, and as such did stipulate with him, and bound both him and
his, by the same Law. And the Contract seems to have bin confirmed by
solemnities: For the two Trees in the midst of the Garden imply so much. And
whereas some make the Promise, and the threat to be a Sanction to confirm the
Law, it is certain that the Command of God did bind with full power without any
such Sanction: only the Promise did bind God upon man's performance of his
Duty; and the threatening made man liable to Punishment upon Disobedience.

After the Constitution follows the administration of this first Government:
Sovereign and Subject; and after that it is once animated, and has received
Being, and life Political, it begins to Act: The Sovereign begins to Protect,
and Direct, and order by Laws, and judgments; and the People continue their
subjection, loyalty and obedience, and acco^ding to their regular or irregular
motions they are judged. And this I call Administration, whereof There are two
Parts, Laws, Judgments.


The first Work of God after the constitution, was Legislation or giving of
Laws: For so God dealt with Israel.

1. They avouch him to be their God, and submitt unto him, and promise
obedience: And after that,

2, He gives them Laws which are not only rules to direct, but have a binding
force, so as to give the obedient a right to rewards, and make the disobedient
liable to punishment. So Jethro's advice to Moses, as Governor of the People
as subjects, directs him,

1. To teach them Laws, then

2. To appoint officers, and judges, and so to proced to judgment.

This Legislation was the first part of the administration, whereby God bound
man holy and righteous, to perfect and perpetual obedience, with a promise of
Life upon that condition, or unto death, if he once disobeyed.

The party to whom God gave these Laws was Adam, and in him all Mankind: and
he being made in the Image of God, righteous and holy, had power to understand,
and perfectly obey these Laws, and continue in subjection and obedience. The
obligation was strict, and required perfect obedience; without any promise of
Pardon, if he once offended, and by constant obedience he might obtain Life.

These Laws are Moral, Positive.
And both may be considered, as a rule of Man's Obedience. Gods Judgment.


I mean by Moral such as are contained in the Decalogue, and tend more
immediately unto Righteousness, and holiness, and issue more immediately from
the Love of God, and our Neighbor, which are the Principal duties of that
eternal Law.

Positive are such as require obedience in things intrinsecally neither good
nor evil, but indifferent. That there were Moral Laws given to Adam, no man
can doubt, because he was certainly bound to continue Righteous and holy as God
made him, and to love his God and his Neighbor, and to perform such acts as
were intrinsecally, and necessarily just. That he was bound by Positives, is
clear and evident, as appears by the Prohibition to eat of the Tree of
Knowledge of good and evil. The moral precepts required the continuance of
man's Fealty and Subjection, and prohibited Revolt, Rebellion, and Apostasy in
the first place; and in the next place Obedience to all other duties depending
upon, and derived from that loyalty and fidelity, and forbad all other
disobedience. The Positive law was not merely, concerning a solemn rite for
confirmation of the Covenant, as some do conceive, but*

1. To signify the absolute Power of God whereby he could bind man to
obedience, even in things indifferent, whereof man knew no reason of obedience
from the thing, but merely from the Will and Pleasure of God.

2. To try man's heart, and whether he would deny his own understanding, and
renounce his own Will, and wholly resign up himself to the Wisdom and Will of
God: and in these two respects the breach of a Positive law may prove most
heinous. Man's dominion over the Creatures, and giving them names, and Marriage,
are rather reducible to the more general Providence, though the duties
following upon Marriage, and required in the Use of the Creatures, may have
their place amongst the Moralls of this special government. What other
Positiv^s* besides these, concerning the Tree in the midst of the garden is
not easily determined, neither is it needful to know them, if there were any
other. But these Moralls, and Positives, were the rules of man's obedience, in
respect of the precepts and prohibitions: The one bound man unto good, and so
to conform to the Will of God; The other bound him, not to do evil, or any
thing that God did not approve.

These Laws are a rule of Gods judgment in respect of the Promises, Motive
unto Performance of duty. By the Commination, he made man liable to punishment,
if once he disobeyed: and death was so terrible, that, to the rational
Creature, it was a mighty and strong restraint. The thing promised was Life,
and the same not only bodily and spiritual, but eternal: Yet this life was
not a new being, but the happiness of the former Being. And this happiness
was not merely a continuance of that present estate, he enjoyed in Paradise
but a far higher condition which might reach Heaven, and come near the bliss
of Angels: This seems to be intimated, because the Tree of Life is used by the
Spirit to signify that Eternal Life which is to be enjoyed in the Heavenly
Paradise, Rev. 2. 7. Death which was threatened, was not only a dissolution of
Soul and Body, begun in the miseryes of this Life, but also spiritual and
eternal punishments. For it is opposed to that eternal Life we obtain by
Jesus Christ, Romans 5. 21. and 6. 23. Without this Promise man could not have
had upon his obedience any right unto, or certain hope of, eternal Life, and
that felicity which was suitable to his intellectual and immortal being. And
if man obeyed, God was absolutely bound by this promise to reward: If he
disobeyed, Man was liable to be punished, though God was not absolutely bound
to Punish: Yet to vindicate the honor of his Law, his will was, that some
punishment must be suffered before he would Pardon and Save.

CHAP. XII.
Of Sin in general; and the first Sin in particular.
AFter that God had given man Laws, jurisdiction, not by Delegates and
inferior Judges, but by Himself. The proper subject of this judgment was man,
as subject to Gods Power, under his Laws, and observing or violating the same.
For, As the Law determins jus observandum, and so prescribes man's duty; So
judgment considers jus aut Observatum, aut Violatum, as Observed, or Violated
already. The Act of this judgment was to render to man according to his Works
in general; and in particular as men's works are good or bad, agreeable or
disagreeable to his Laws, to reward, or punish. For judgment is a Retribution,
and the end of it is justice in the execution of his Laws, for the happiness
or misery of Man, according to his doings. And here by the way we may observe,
that as the Law is de actibus futuris, of future works; So judgment is of Acts
past. And here it may be doubted, Whether God gave any command of Habits? And
this is easily resolved: for God bound man to habitual righteousness, and
holiness, so far as Habits did depend upon Acts: For as an habit is acquired
by Acts, and former habits strengthened and improved, and demerit prevented; so
by disobedient Acts, the Active Power to righteousness is not only Weakened,
but in danger upon demerit to be taken away by the just Judge. God gave man
sufficient power to continue such as he made him, and to perform perfect
obedience, if he by sin did not deprive himself of that Power.

According to man's obedience, sin instantly, and immediately upon his Creation,
but continued subject and obedient for a certain time. But how long we cannot
punctually determine. But long it was not before he was tempted and did
transgress. Whilst he performed his duty, and observed his Creator's Laws, his
condition according to Gods promise was very comfortable: His Dominion over the
Creatures was continued; Paradise his habitation; the holy Angels his Friends;
the Creatures his Servants. He had free access to the Tree of Life; enjoyed
sweet Communion with his God, who continued his Sanctifying Spirit in him, and
all necessary assistance unto him, His peace, joy, content, hope, were
excellent, He was free from that fear, shame, misery, pain, curse, and
punishment which followed upon his Sin: and happy he and his had been if he had
walked constantly with his God. And thus whilst he was innocent without any
fault, and obedient without any sin; God dwelt with him, and made him happy,
without any misery. Only this was wanting, that as he had not perfected his
obedience, so he was not confirmed and secured in his blessed estate, as the
holy Angels are, and the Saints shall be in glory. What his happiness should
have been, and when consummate, if he had Persevered, we do not certainly, and
distinctly know. The hour of Temptation seems to have been the hour of Trial;
and it is very Probable, that if in that conflict he had proved steadfast and
Victorious, he and his might have been blessed for ever.

But Man being in honor abode not: Divines take occasion to speak of sin in
general: And though I might have entered upon this subject, when I spoke of
the fall and condemnation of many of the Angels, yet because the Scripture
speaks most of the sin of man, therefore I will follow their example and
practice; and

1. Speak of sin in general.

2. Of the particular Sin of Adam.

The general nature of sin, is, disobedience to the just command of a
Superior: and because disobedience is opposed to obedience, therefore it will
not be amiss to enquire a little into the nature of obedience. Obedience is
not of Physical, but moral and political consideration. For it presupposes
an intelligent, and free agent, and the same subject to the Power, and bound by
the Laws of a Superior: for where there is no Superior Power, there can be no
Law; and where there is no Law, there can be no obedience, or disobedience.
Whether the immediate subject of obedience be acts or habits was formerly
determined in some manner: but here you must observe, that intelligent and free
acts, inclinations, habits, especially Acts, are the subject immediate and
proper of obedience: and the proper and first subject of it is the will, and
heart, the acts whereof are intelligent and free, and no other acts else. This
is the reason why God so much requires the heart, and will not accept any, the
greatest offerings and services if performed without the heart. To this
obedience it is necessarily required, that the will freely subject it self to
the power of the superior, and exactly conform unto his will, and command in
all inclinations and motions, so far as it is bound: in which respect the will
must be no will in it self. In this particular whereof we speak, the subject is
man, who is an intelligent, and free agent; The superior is God according to
the power acquired in Creation: The rule of obedience is the Law, both
Positive, and moral: and his obedience is a conformity both in subjection and
acting, according to the will and command of God. The Principal subject of this
obedience as an adjunct, and cause of it as an effect, is the Will and heart of
man; which is the proper seat of Integrity, and Perverseness: For other Acts
are so far good or bad, as they depend on the Will, and are so called
extrinseca dominatione, and by Participating their qualification from the Will.
As it is in, this particular obedience required of Adam at the first, so it is
in all the other acts of obedience performed to God.

Sin in general is opposed to this obedience, Sin is the transgression, or
rather disobedience to the Law of God, 1 John 3. 4. For so the Apostle is to be
understood as appears by the context. This Sin is so unbeseeming that nature,
and place of men and Angels, wherein God created them, as nothing more; and so
stains them, that when they see themselves, they loath and abhor themselves,
so as they cannot endure to look upon themselves. It Is the basest thing in the
world, and most pernicious unto him that is once guilty of it. It Is a Deviation
from the best rule of divine Wisdom, and a disagreement with the most just and
holy God: It Is a contempt, or at least a neglect of the eternal power of this
glorious King. It makes our own imaginations, and the suggestions of the Devil
our rules, and our own lusts our Masters, as though we were not subject unto
God. It deprives us of eternal light, and is the perpetual fuel of Hellfire:
and the desert thereof is very dreadful. For these reasons God hates it,
forbids it, threatens it, gave both men and Angels at the first, power against
it; and for it, not repented of and pardoned, he casts both men and Angels out
of his presence into utter darkness, and torments them with eternal fire.

Yet all Sins are not equal,

1. For the kinds and distinctions, they are many: For we hold that some sins
are against the Law, some against the Gospel, some against God, some against
man; Some of omission, some of Commission etc. And these distinctions may be
tolerable in some sense.

2. The degrees and aggravations are very many, and might be observed out of
Scripture* and reduced into method as is done by the Learned and most judicious
Doctor Chapel, in his Method of Preaching. The Crucifying of Christ, the Lord
of glory was an heinous crime; yet some who had an hand in it were ignorant.
For so our Savior prays, Father forgive them, for they know not what they do,
Luke 23. 34. Yet others did it maliciously, and contrary to the clear light of
their Conscience: and concerning these the supreme Judge is solicited, and
desired to add iniquity unto their iniquity, Psalm. 69. 27. And there is a sin
against the Holy Ghost, which according to the rules of Gods eternal justice
renders the parties sinning incapable of remission. Such is the Blaspemy
against the Holy Ghost, Math. 12. 31. and the Apostasy of Christians, having
once received the knowledge of the truth, Heb. 10. 26, 27. Paul was a
Blasphemer, a Persecutour, and injurious, yet he sinned ignorantly, and in
unbelief: and upon his repentance obtained mercy, 1 Timothy 1. 13, 16. The knowing
Servant neglects to do his Masters will; so does the ignorant Servant too: yet
the sin of the former, is greater then the sin of the latter; and their
punishment must be commensurable to their sin, Luke 12. 47, 48. These places I
observe, to let you understand and put you in mind,

1. That sin is not in the outward act properly and immediately: for several
persons may do the same act, and yet not be equally sinful: there may be a
great inequality in the sin.

2. That there are degrees of sins, as there shall be of punishments.

3. That the more of will there is in any sin, the more heinous the sin is and
it is the principal, and intrinsecall aggravation of it.

This greater measure of Will appears to be, and manifests it self

1. In such as have helps, means, power to do that which is just, and many and
powerful restraints from sin, and yet commit it.

2. In such as have many helps, means, motives to repentance, and yet continue
senseless and secure.

3. Those are most heynons, which proceed not from ignorance and infirmity
within, nor from violence of temptation, opposition, and impediments without,
but from the pure and mere malignity of the Will. Ignorance, infirmity, and
strength of temptation, make sin, less, the more excusable, and pardonable.
Yet we may wilfully, or at least carelessly cast our selves upon temptation; be
ignorant through out negligence or willfulness; we may go on in sin, till it
prove habitual, and make us Slaves unto our own lust; We may give way to one
sin, as Drunkenness, Covetousenesse, or Ambition; and so necessarily entangle
our selves in other sins, which those once having possessed our hearts make
unavoydable. In these cases sin is less excusable, because we are the cause of
our ignorance, infirmity, and disadvantage. If any say, that to intend murder,
and act it, is more then barely to intend it; the Answer is easy: That if any
not only intend it, but proceed, if not hindered, to act it; that does manifest
more of will and inclination to be in the heart, then if he should only intend
it, and yet when he has power, does not act it. And so of Adultery and other
sins.

3. There be aggravations extrinsecal, as from the qualification of the party
offending; from the party offended; from the circumstances of time and place,
and such like; which I pass by, and come to the consequents of sin: And they
are of three sorts: Such as follow,

1. In respect of sin it self.

2. In respect of the Lawgiver and the Law.

3. In respect of the Judge and judicial process.

1. In respect of sin it self, the consequents are

1. Stain, because it is filthy. 2. Shame, because it is base. 3. Weakening the
inclination to good, because it is contrary.
2. In respect of the Lawgiver and the law, the Consequents are,

1. Offense. 2. Blame; for it makes the party accusable and chargeable with it.
3. Guilt, because it makes liable to punishment.
3. In respect of the Judge and judgment, the consequents are, fear, sorrow,
conviction, condemnation, and suffering of punishment, if not pardoned. And the
punishment deserved by m^n, and inflicted by God, is, not only loss of that
good which we enjoyed while obedient, and by obedience might have obtained, but
the pressure of all evil threatened in the Law, which the party has justly
deserved. For God does punish men in their Persons, Bodies, Souls, Name,
Friends, Goods, and other ways; and does not only take away blessings
received, but denies, and that justly, mercyes promised; but man suffers many
positive evils even in this Life: and yet all these are but the Beginning of
Woe everlasting; if not by man's timely repentance, and Gods great mercy,
prevented.

These things concerning sin in general premisd, ^. VI.
I proceed to the first sin of Adam in particular, which was the subject of the
first judgment passed upon Adam, and all mankind. And therein I will consider,

1. The Sin it self. 2. The causes of it.
1. The sin it self was the disobedience to a Law of God, and more particularly
a positive Law; that positive Law concerning the tree of knowledge, of good and
evil.

This sin in respect of the matter, and the outward Act of eating the fruit of
the tree seems not to be heinous. And certainly if there had been no divine
prohibition, the act was in it self indifferent: Morally and intrinsecally it
was neither good nor evil. But to eat of that fruit contrary to Gods
prohibition, and peremptory commination, was heinous; as being a contempt of
Gods absolute powers and a breach of the first and great command, from which
all the rest derive their morality. And it was a contempt not only of his
absolute power, but of his severe justice. And he that does not regard the
supreme and legislative power of any Prince, will not fear to disobay any of
his Laws. And it was more grievous for other reasons: For the observation of
that Law was very easy, because the thing commanded was the forbearance of,
and abstinence from, the fruit of one only Tree, whereof he had not the least
need, as having such plenty and variety of so many kinds of delicates. He that
will not yearly pay a pepper-corn in acknowledgment of the eminent dominion of
a chief-Lord, for a vast estate freely given him upon such easy terms is most
unworthy of it. Again the law was clear, and easy to be understood, and he
knew it well, and had full and perfect power to keep it, and that without any
difficulty. Besides, upon this petty act of obedience the eternal welfare of
him, and mankind his Posterity did depend and if he once tran^grest it, he had
not the least color to expect any thing, but absolute condemnation to eternal
death. Neither could all the Powers of darkness force or necessitate him to
touch ^ast the forbidden fruit. To ear it therefore must be a complication of
a multitude of heinous sins, as ingratitude, unbelief, cruelty to himself and
his posterity. Yet though it was so heinous, yet it came short of, and was
less grievous then the first revolt of Angels. For he was tempted, surprised,
circumvented; but so they were not.

After that we know,

Blameable were the persons tempting, and the Persons tempted. The parties
tempting were the Devils united in a body Politic under the Prince of
Devils, their General and Commander in chief. To understand this better, I
will enquire into the nature of temptation; examine, Who the tempter, and what
this temptation in particular is.

1. Temptation unto evil and Sin is opposed to the truth of God, to his law,
and therein to his Precepts, prohibitions, promises, threats, as they are
means to inform the understanding in the truth, and move the Will unto
obedience. The end of it, is to blind the understanding, and pervert the Will.
It blinds the understanding, either by taking away or hindering the clear light
of the truth, or deluding it with falsehood or errors, by representing that as
good and just which is evil and unjust, or that which is just and good, as
evil and unjust; and if it once cause the mind to doubt of, or deny the truth,
it is likely to prevayl^e. For by this means it takes away the fear of
punishment threatened, and allures the heart with some hope of good which God
did never promise: and this is the way to deal with man, being an intelligent
and free creature, whose will in matter of practice can neither be forced, nor
necessitated. The weakness of the party tempted, is from the imperfection of
knowledge, and integrity. And the more (...), active, resolute, importunate the
tempter is, the greater must needs be the danger of the party tempted. Yet this
is to be observed, that no temptation though violent and subtle can
necessitate the will of man. Thus Bradwardine proves excellently and fully,
that Voluntas non potest necessitari a causa secunda: No second cause, no not
the Devil himself, can do it.

This is the general nature of temptation,

2. Who was the Tempter? The History, Genesis 3. makes mention only of a Serpent:
Yet no doubt the principal tempter, was far above that Serpent which was a
B^ast of the Field, and irrational. Yet from other places we are informed,
that there is a Dragon Captain-generall with his Angels, Rev. 12. 7. And lest
we should be ignorant, who this Dragon is, it follows that it was the old
Serpen^, the Devil, and Satan, who deceives the whole earth, verse 9. For he
is the grand-impostor and cheater-generall, as all his temptations are cunning
cheats and juglings. He it was* who by his lies deceived Eve at the first, and,
by her, en^iced and surprised Adam, and so murdered all mankind: For this cause
is he said to be a Liar, and a murderer, Joh. 8. 44. Though the great temper
was the Devil, yet in this temptation he used, or rather abused a Serpent
which was more subtle then any beast of the field: In which respect our
Savior advises us to be as wise as Serpents, Math. 10. 16. A Subtle Creature
was a fit instrument of a subtle Devil. Why he should not immediately tempt
the Woman, without making use of a Serpent, is not mentioned in that short
History, where the heads of things are only and that briefly related. Whether
it was because he being a Spirit could not so well converse with Woman a bodily
Creature, without a body assumed: or because the Devils, and so good Angels,
can do many things by bodies assumed, which without them they cannot: as by man
they act far more upon man for good or evil, then without them they could do.
Yet in this design, if he must make use of a bodily Creature, and he was not
permitted, neither could it then be convenient, to assume the body of man; a
Serpent of all other was the fittest for his turn. And it is strange that in
many places, almost in all times, he should be worshipped in the form of a
Serpent, as we are informed, he is at this day in many parts of the East-Indian
Countries.

But in the

Third place the temptation is chiefly to be considered. ^. IX.
It was a conflict and encounter between Angels, and all mankind, and the event
was of greatest consequence: and no battle like this; till, many generations
after, the Son of God made man did encounter the Prince of Devils, and all his
power of darkness upon the Cross, gave him a fatal blow, and foiled him for
ever, in revenge of this cursed design, whereby he intended the eternal ruin
of mankind. This business was contrived, and managed with greatest power, and
policy. For

1. He makes use of a Serpent, the most subtle beast of the field: and though
we do not understand it, yet he certainly knew there was some special advantage
in it.

2. He does not encounter Man and Woman jointly, and at once; but severally.

3. He begins with the Woman.

4. He does not single out any of Gods Moral precepts or prohibitions: For
these were too deeply imprinted in the soul, and of clearer light, but he makes
choice of that positive precept which was not so obvious to reason, and seemed
to have some mystery in it, and to admit some latitude for a Subtle discourse.

5. He does not instantly deny this Positive Law, but begins to question the
sense of it, till at length he caused the Woman to doubt.

6. In the end he assures her, there was no danger, as she seated and fondly
surmised in eating of that fruit, but certain hope of some great good: and
therefore persuades her to look upon that goodly fruit, and consider whether
there was any probability of the least evil to follow thereupon.

7. By the Woman he persuades the man, who dearly loved her, and according to
his affection could suspect no evil in any wise from her. And here it is
observeable that the first advantage the Woman gave him, was, in that she did
not strictly, and peremptorily insist upon the plain and simple sense of he
Law. For when we once forsake the simplicity of the Word of God, the subtlety
of Satan is such, that he will speedily and easily deceive us. This was Paul's
fear, lest by any means, as the Serpent beguiled Eve through his subtlety, so
the Corinthians minds should be corrupted from the simplicity that is in
Christ, 2 Cor. 11. 3. And now it is the grand design of Satan by his Agents
to detain people in the ignorance of the Scriptures, or, if that cannot be, to
Question the Divine authority of, them; or if they be persuaded of it, yet to
put them to prove it, and prove it evidently and demonstratively to them. Yet
if notwithstanding all this, they will adhere to these records as Divine, they
will argue against the sufficiency of them without unwritten traditions. But
let the sufficiency be proved, they will controvert the Transcripts and
Translations, and make the sense, in plain and necessary things, to be obscure;
or divert them from necessaryes to doubtful disputations in things needless,
and no ways conducing to Salvation. The Scriptures are the great and mighty
engine of God against all the power of Satan and if we clearly understand,
certainly believe, and constantly practice the Saving Truths thereof, then we
may foil him, he cannot prevayle against us. His endeavor therefore is to
puzzle our understanding, shake our Faith, hinder our practice, and persuade us
that there is no danger, but safety, and advantage in sin, or at least tempt us
to presume upon Gods mercy. The inward motive which set the Devil on work in
this cursed, damned design, was envy, malice, and delight in doing mischief,
which presupposed his Revolt from, and Rebellion against God: And in this
respect he is said to be a Lyat: For this was the first grand lie and Sophism
in the World: and also a Murderer; for by this means he slew mankind, and had
for ever undone him, if God had not prevented it.

By this attempt the parties tempting had made themselves deeply guilty, V^nome
of the Serpent infected Soul and Body. Neither staid it here, but did diffuse,
and Communicate it self to man, who hearkened to his Wi^e, and did eat, and so
transgress: Upon which the victory became complete. And though the temptation
and plot was deeply laid, and managed with greatest subtlety, yet they could
not be excused. For the law was plain, the power to observe it sufficient, and
God did in no ways desert them in any thing necessary. They did both willingly
consent and yield. They were too precipitate, and did too hastily determine and
resolve, before they had sufficiently considered the matter either severally,
or jointly together. And their sin was, in the issue, so much the more heinous,
because they believed the false suggestions of the Devil, and harkened to his
damned Counsel, contrary to the clear Command, and peremptory Commination of
their Creator: In all this they had not the least cause to complain of God:
Their Sin, and misery was from themselves: and there was much of will in the
transgression. The Woman was first in the sin, and was deceived: Yet the Man
followed her example: Otherwi^e it might have been better with all mankind. And
in this place something may be said of the permission of sin, and Gods
providence in respect of the same. No doubt God could have prevented, both the
sin, and the temptation, yet being no ways bound to do either, he suffered
both: And this is one of the deep Coun^ells of God, whereof man can give no
reason. Arminiu^ does discourse of this subject, and observes the acts of
Divine providence about sin to be reducible to three heads:

1. In respect of the Beginning. 2. Of the Progress. 3. The Consummation of it.
In respect of the Beginning, the Acts of Providence, are either permission or
hinderance;

In respect of the Progress, Direction, and Limitation;

In respect of Sin, Consummate Punishment, or Remission.

But he that will accurately discuss this Point of Doctrine, must distinguish;

1. Between the first sin of Angels, and the first sin of Man; and other sins
following these: For in respect of these later, that which we call permission,
may be a Desertion, and to a Punishment, which in the first sins cannot be.

2. He must put a difference between a Moral, and a Physical permission; and
also between the sinful Disposition, and immediate Act of the Will, as sinful,
and such Acts as follow; and are not formally and intrinsecally sinful, but b^
participation.

3. He must discern, which of these Acts belong to Judgment; as the two last
evidently do; and which not.

4. It should be distinctly known what this Permission is: For it is not any
License or Liberty to sin given by God to the Creature; nor any toleration,
connivence, indulgence; much less any approbation of sin. The proper and
immediate first subject, and cause of sin, is the Will as free: Therefore, when
Scotus had defined sin to be Carentia justitiae actui inesse debitae; Occam
corrects him, and defines it to be Carentia justitiae voluntati inesse debitae.
And whereas many, out of Austin take it for granted, that Peccatum non habet
causam efficientem, sed de^icientem: He ^aith That Is true only of sins of
Omission, not of Commission; and does positively ^ffirm, that God is the Author
of every sin of Commission because in Commission there is something positive,
which is forbidden by the Law directly as well as that which is privative; yet
gives the reason, why man is guilty, and God not, because man is under a Law*
and bound; God is not. And whereas some, in sins of Commission, distinguish
between the Act, whereof they grant God to be the Author; and the Sinfulness of
the Act, whereof he is not the Author; He answers, That in sins of Commission,
the very Act is forbidden; and therefore the very Act is so sin, that you
cannot make it the subject of sin, is any ways different from sin. In this
making of God the Author of all sins, he seems to be very bold, and heterodox,
though very acute. But let his Judgment, in this, be true or false, these
things are certain:

1. That all the difficulty, in this point, arises from our ignorance, of the
manner how God concurs with the Free will of man in sin.

2. That God could prevent all sins, and every sin, though he does not:

3. That God does not necessitate, much less force the intelligent Creature to
sin; for then sin could be no sin.

4. That let Permission be what it will, yet he so permits sin, that he can
justly punish it in the Parties guilty who alone are chargeable with it.

5. The reason why God does not, cannot sin, is not only because he is under
no Law, but because he is absolutely just, and holy, and hates sin; as he does
forbid it, threaten it give power against it, and punishes it.

6. We must not think that God does so permit sin, as not to order the sinner,
and out of evil bring good; as once out of Darkness, he created Light. To think
that God, who is the Universal Judge, is a bare Spectator of sin, must needs be
an Error.

The cause of this sin, blameless, was the Law, which did forbid sin, command
obedience, promise life to the Obedient, threaten death to the Disobedient.
This could not by any inward native power or quality, be a cause of Sin or
Death; for it was spiritual, holy, just, good, and so contrary to sin: For
every thing acts according to the inward power, and quality: And how should
that be for sin, which was the Rule of Holiness; and for Death, which was given
for Life? Yet a cause of sin it might be, though not per Se, yet per Accidens,
(as the Logicians speak): Not by any thing in it self, yet by something from
without, in Man, or the Devil. Some, instance in the dashing of a Pitcher
against a Wall, so that it is broken: The breaking of the Pitcher is an Effect;
but the Cause thereof is rather the force of him who purposely casts it against
the wall, then the Wall it self: yet this Comparison is not so fu^l and
perfect. If there had been no Law, there had been no sin: For where there is no
Law, there is no Transgression* says the Apostle, Romans 4. 15. An if no
transgression then no guilt, no punishment. If there had been no Law, man might
have done ^omething worthy of punishment; yet without a Law, he could have
contracted no guilt, so as to be bound to suffer punishment.

And though God knew, that if he did give a Law, it would be disobeyed, yet he
might justly give it: For as he knew man would transgress it, yet he knew
likewise that he might keep it. No Governor will forbear to enact Laws, to
regulate his People, because he knows many will disobey them. That the Law
tran^gressed by man at first, could be no blameable cause of sin, is evident,
because it was just, easy to be observed; man had power given him to keep it,
and the Law it self did express, what, and how great the evil would be,
whereunto man should certainly be liable, if he transgressed: and this was done
to restrain man from sin for his own good. By all this, it is evident that the
first sin was neither from God, nor the Law of God, so as they could be blamed,
but from the Devil, Woman, Man who were justly chargable with it, and
punishable for it. Let no man therefore charge God, who is most holy, nor the
Decree of God, nor the Law of God with sin, as any ways a proper cause thereof:
Let God be true, and every man a Lya^, as it is written, That thou might be
justified in thy saying, and overcome when thou art judged, Romans 3. 4. But let
every one charge his own heart, and with all humility and grief confess his own
sin. It Is true, that the temptation of the Devil tends directly to sin; yet
that could do us no hurt, if we did resolutely reject it, and not consent unto
it.

CHAP. XIII.
Of God's Judicial Proceeding against Man, upon the Commission of the first Sin.
HItherto, not bound to this Rule; and therefore, though in many things he
observes it; yet, in some things, he acts above it, as supreme Lord above his
own Law, and allays the severity of his Justice, with abundance of Free Grace.
The Law promi^ed no mercy, if man disobeyed: yet he promises mercy, even in
the midst of Judgment, and upon fairest terms. This Judgment is described
exactly, in Genesis 3. Wherein we may observe the sin of man, and the judgment of
God. The sin, with the causes thereof, and the first effects thereof before
judgment, the observant Reader will easily understand in the first part of that
Chapter. The Effects, were two: 1. Shame. 2. Fear.


Shame; for they saw their own Nakedness.

Fear; For they heard the Voice of God, and were afraid.

They sought to cover their shame, and to hide themselves from God's Presence;
but both in vain. In the Judgment, or judicial proceedings, ^ive things are
most observable;

1. The Summons. 2. The Charge. 3. The Conviction of the Parties summoned and
convinced. 4. God's Sentence. 5. The Execution of the same: God being Supreme,
and absolute Lord, was no ways bound to observe Formalities; yet he omits
nothing essential to judgment: And this was the first great Court, and Solemn
Assizes, kept on Earth.
1. We have the Summons in these words: Adam, where art thou? The end of
Summons is Appearance; which, in respect of God, was needless, because of his
Omnipresence: And where could man disappear, or hide himself from his All
seeing Eye? Yet because man had a foolish and fond conceit that he mi^ht
conceal himself, God calls him out, and by these words, lets him know that
'twas in vain to hide himself: For let him be in the darkest, and most secret
place in the World, yet there God was present, and he did appear before his
Tribunal. For these words were not of ignorance, as though God knew not where
he was, but a judicial Summons commanding him to appear before him, where he
should have full liberty to plead for himself: Yet these words were not a bare
Summons, but a Charge: For they employed,

1. That Adam did hide himself; And,

2. There must be some cause of it; and there could be no cause but sin. For
why should an innocent person hide himself, or seek to escape the presence of a
just Judge? The Righteous are as bold as a Lion, and dare look the greatest
Judge in the face. By this flying Gods presence he accused himself as guilty,
and sought to decline the Trial. This is a general charge. Adam upon this
appears and exuseth his hiding of himself, but so, that he rather accuses
himself by pretending that the cause of his hiding himself was his Nakedness,
and the Presence of God; whereas it was guilt of Conscience. Therefore God
taking hold of his own words, proceeds to a Particular charge; That surely he
had transgressed the Law, and had eaten of the Tree whereof God had commanded
him that he should not eat: Who should tell him that he was naked, or how
should he know it, except he had offended? This came so home, and the crime was
so evident, and his own conscience so full a Witness, that he could not deny
it. And therefore confesses his offense, yet so that he endeavors to
attenuate it, and excuse himself. Thus the man was convicted; yet so, that he
accuses his Wife. Sin is so odious, filthy, base, that the Sinner himself is
ashamed to own it; but would charge it upon some other, he cares not whom, so
that he might free himself. And if man cannot deny his fact, or prove it not to
be a Sin, yet he will endeavor to make it appear less then it is, that his
shame and punishment may be less. For we are not ashamed or afraid to Sin;
Yet when our Sin is charged upon us, we are both ashamed of it, and afraid of
the punishment deserved. Thus whilst Adam excuses himself to no purpose, he
accuses his dearly beloved Spouse: and she indeed was two ways guilty: Not
only.

1. Because she had eaten the forbidden fruit, but

2. Because she had given it her husband to eat. She therefore is summoned,
accused, and convicted: For she could no ways plead Not guilty. Yet she is
willing to excuse her self; and pleads she was deceived, and the Serpent, that
is, the Devil had deceived her: Yet this could by no ways clear and acquit
her, seeing she knew the Law; and the words were plain, and she had power not
only to resist, but to overcome the Temptation. For the controversy between
the Devil and her (if she had well considered) proved in the issue to be this,
whether she should believe God, saying, If thou eat of that Tree, thou shall
surely dye; or the Devil, saying, Though thou eat thereof thou shall not dye,
in plain contradiction to the Words of God. The old Serpent the Devil and
Satan had no excuse; none to cast the blame upon: His crime was evident and
notorious. And thus the cause was evident, and the parties clearly convicted.

After conviction follows sentence,

1. We must think, and know that the Spirit in this History condescends unto
our capacity, and after the manner of humane judgments, describes the
judgment of God, as in several places of the new Testament our Savior does;
especially in Math. 25.

2. The order* in the Sin, the Trial, the Sentence is observeable. In the sin,
the Devil is first; the Woman the second; the man third and last.

In the Trial Man is first, Woman the second, the Devil the third.

In the sentence, the Devil is first, Woman second, Man last.

3. The parties sentenced are not one Devil, one Serpent, one Woman, one Man;
but the whole body and society of Devils, all Serpents, all Mankind.

4. Yet some kind of Serpents was accused above all the rest; the Prince of
Devils was principally judged, and so Adam and Eve were sentenced, as the
beginning, root, head* of all mankind: And though the seed of the Woman did
comprehend a vast multitude, yet they had one Head, and one principal amongst
them, which must break the Serpents head.

5. The subject of this judgment, being guilty persons does inform us, that
the sentence did not determine any reward to be rendered, but only punishment
to be inflicted by God, and suffered by offenders. It was a sentence of
condemnation not of justification.

6. As there was difference in the parties sinning, so there was in the
punishments: For the punishment of the Serpent was one, of the Woman another,
of the Man another; though there might be some punishment general to them all.

7. The pun^shment of Man was great, of Woman greater, of the Devil the
greatest: For the degrees of punishment were equally proportioned to the
degrees of Sin.

These things premised in general, the field, goes crawling on his belly, and
licks the dust. And there is emnity and Antipathy between Woman and the
Serpent, between all kind of Serpents and the Posterity and seed of the Woman;
and Man does often break his head to take away his Life: and he stings man in
the Heel and foot, and by his poison sometimes endangers, sometimes takes away
his Life. This by constant and universal experience is sound true: and yet the
curse was not at the first Creation: For then God blessed the Creatures, and
every thing was good. Nor was this enmity from the Creation: For man was Lord
over these Creatures, and they subject unto him, so as there was neither harm
nor fear from any of these Creatures. And though this Beast was irrational,
merely an instrument* and abused; yet, to signify his detestation of sin, God
did thus accurse him. Thus the earth is cur^ed for man's sake: and for the sins
of Israel the Land must mourn, the inhabitants with the Beasts of the field,
and the fowls shall languish, and the fishes shall he take away, Hos. 4. 3. So
Christ cursed the Figg^ree because fruitless.

Yet, Lying, and Murder; So God, in this sentence, did add unto their
punishment, and their condition became very bad and miserable. This is
signified more plainly in the latter part of the sentence, verse 15. Wherein
with some learned Commentatours we may observe.

1. A perpetual emnity, and thereupon a perpetual War, and the issue of this
War. The emnity is

1. Between the Serpent, the Devil, and the Woman. 2. Between the Serpents
seed, and the Woman's seed, 3. Between the Prince of Devils, and some special
seed of the Woman, which was Christ. The issue of this emnity, and opposition
was the ruin of the Serpent, and the hurt of the Woman's seed: More plainly,
the ruin of Satan's Kingdom and the suffering of Christ, and the persecutions
of his Church.
The first emnity is between the Devil and the Woman, both present at Gods
tribunal: and this emnity was by a divine decree made irreconcilable: for
though they could agree and converse together in sin to the transgression of
Gods Law; yet now it was Gods will that they should for ever stand at a
distance hereafter. And it is very likely that Eve being a true Penitent did for
ever hate as much as any other did, the Devil, who had deceived her; as she
did abhor the Serpent, and detest him, as most abominable, because he had been
an instrument in that damned and dangerous design against her. And the more
penitent and pious she was, always expecting when God should give her a Child,
who should take eternal vengeance upon him, so the Devil did the more hate
her, and seek her ruin. Yet notwithstanding this decree of eternal emnity,
how many Cursed Witches have familiarity with the Devil?

The second emnity is between the seed of the Serpent, and the seed of the
Woman. And by (his seed) is meant not only all the rest of the Devils, and
Powers of Darkness, but also all Wicked Persons; especially enemies, and
Persecutours of the Power of Godliness in the Saints. These are called A
generation of Vipers, that is, Serpents, the Brood of the Devil, Math. 3. 7.
To be of their Father the Devil, 1 Ioh. 3. 8. So Cain was of that Wicked one,
the Devil, verse 12.

By the seed of the Woman is not understood her mere natural Posterity: for
many of them, as Cain, were of the Devil: But her posterity according to the
Spirit, the Regenerate, Penitent, Pious, and Believers, as she was. Yet, these
are her seed as under Their Head and General Jesus Christ. And here, as the
hatred is bitter, so the opposition is cruel, and bloody; and the contrariety
so great that they seek the mutual destruction one of another. The more of
God, and Heaven is in the seed of the Woman the more they Hate sin, and ^eek to
break the Power of Satan, both in themselves and others. Yet all their
strength is in God, and Jesus Christ. These the Devil and his brood hate with
a dearly hatred; and if they cannot overcome their souls, they Persecute their
Bodies: And hence so many ^earfull dissentions, Wars, and Bloody Persecutions.
But the highest degree of this emnity is between the Prince of Devils, and the
Son of God made Man, and so, the Seed of the Woman, that he was not immediately
the seed of any Man. He suffered more from the Devil, and his Angels and
Agents, then ever any did: and the more holy he was, the more he was hated* And
the more wicked the Devil was, the more Christ did oppose him; and prevayled
against him according to his excellent, divine, transcendent Power, and holy
Policy, more then all men and Angels could do. The issue of the great Battle,
especially upon the Cross was, a fi^all and Fatal Victory. For in it, and by
it he spoiled Principalityes, and Powers, and made a show of them open^y,
triumphing over them Col. 2. 17. For by his Death, and Resurrection he brake in
pieces the Power of Satan, acquired a right to all flesh and received strength
to rescue man out of his hands, and to give eternal li^e to as many as his
Father had given him. By him the Prince of the World was cast out, Joh. 12. 31.
For this end he was partaker of flesh and blood with his Brethren, that he
might destroy him that had the Power of death, that is, the Devil, Heb 2. 14.
And for this end the Son of God was manifested that he might destroy the Works
of the Devil, 1 John 3. 8. And so profound was the Wisdom of God that he turned
the power and policy of Satan to his own ruin. For whilst he did bruise
Christ's heel, and put him to death, he overthrew his own Kingdom, and gave
Christ a glorious Victory. And by him having foiled the Devil; in his Power,
all the Saints overcome the Devil, and obtain a final Victory; yea, are more
then Conquerours. Other Places of Scripture give us so much light as to
understand these Words in this manner; which certainly Adam and Eve understood
better then we can do. Yet this enmity and glorious Conquest was expressed in
few Words, and some what darkely, because the full Knowledge of this great
Victory was reserved till the Son of God was glorified, and the Gospel
revealed. This was that dreadful sentence passed upon the Devil, all his
Angels, and his wicked brood, which began to be executed then* and shall be
Consummate, when the Devil, Death and Hell shall be cast into the Lake of fire,
where they shall be tormented for ever.

The Sentence, Common to Man and Woman, are two:

1. God determines to multiply her sorrow in conception: In sorrow she must
bring forth her Children*

2. Her desire must be to her Husband, and he must rule over her. Both these
are cruel punishments: For many times the birth and life of the child is the
death of the Mother, after that she has suffered many pains in conceiving,
and bearing, and most cruel pangs in her Travail: Sometimes the safety of the
Mother is the death of the Child. The latter, is the more grievous because of
the Proud cruel and domineering Spirits of crooked and unfaithful Husbands:
and by the wickedness of both parties, that society, which should have been
most comfortable, proves most miserable. If woman had never sinned, she must
have brought forth Children, yet without pain; and bin subject to her Husband,
but without any discomfort. Women should remember this sentence; acknowledge
Gods great displeasure against sin, and humble themselves: Yet they must not
despair, but hope for eternall^life by Jesus Christ their Savior; and be
thankful to God, who mitigates the rigor of his justice, and in these two
things many times shows great mercy.

The sentence passed upon Adam is the last; And his Poenalties are many: The
ground was cursed for his sake; in sorrow He must eat of it all the days of
his life; Thorns and Thistles it must bring forth unto him; He must eat of the
Herb of the field; In the sweat of his face he must eat bread, till he return
to the ground; For out of it he was taken, and being Dust, unto Dust he must
return. The sum of all is, Misery and Mortality: He must be in misery, and
suffer many afflictions in this Life, and soul and body must part at death, and
death will turn his body in the end to dust. These penalties are fearfully
inflicted upon many; yet with many God deals mercifully, and removes or
prevents many of them, and in the end by the Resurrection gives a full, and
final deliverance from all.

After Sentence follows Execution, Woman began to be executed in her first
conception, bearing and bringing forth of Children; and man became instantly
miserable, and mortal: as the earth was presently accursed for his sake; and he
found a great alteration, and a (...) change in his Body, his Soul, the Earth,
and others Creatures, which were subject unto him and made for his good.

The execution done upon the Serpent shall continue whilst there shall be any
Serpents upon the earth.

The Punishment of the Devil continued until the Incarnation of Christ, and
upon his Death and resurrection his head was broken; but it shall be Consummate
at the Last Judgment.

The Punishment of the Woman shall not determine till the last child be born:
And

The Punishment of Man and Woman shall not be totally removed, till the
Resurrection and final Glorification of all the Children of God.

And Here, several Particulars are considerable:

1. That this was A General Assizes, wherein passed Judgment upon Beasts,
Millions of Angels, and all mankind.

2. In the Sentence passed upon the Devil, CHRIST was promised; and by that
promise, The Government of mankind was altered; And God did new-model his
Kingdom: For thereupon followed A New Constitution, New Laws, and Judgment did
proceed afterward in a New Manner.

3. By this promise the Covenant of Works was made void, and the Law, as
promising life only upon condition of Perfect, Personal, and Perpetual
obedience, without any Promise of Pardon of any the least sin was repealed; And
the Positive Law of the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil, did cease.

4. Though the Law of works was repealed, yet the Sentence passed upon man for
the sin he Committed against that Law of works (as unrepealed) stands in force,
and shall in part continue unto the Resurrection.

6. Though the Law of Works as a Condition, and only condition, of life be
repealed, yet the pure Morals continue in force to bind man to obedience or
punishment in general, but not to obedience perfect, as the condition of life;
or to punishment, as no ways removeable. To argue, that because the matter of
the moral Laws continues in Precepts and Prohibitions, therefore the Law
continues, is vain. For it may continue, yet in another manner, and to an other
end, and both the manner and the end far different. To say, that man is under
the Law of works as Adam was at the first until he be in Christ, is very false
It Is true, that he is under the execution of that sentence, which passed upon
man for his sin, against that Law both moral and positive given to Adam; and
he cannot pass from death to life, from the State of Damnation to the State of
Salvation, till he be in Christ, by a true and lively faith. And when we are
once in Christ we are not wholly freed from that Sentence, because it continues
partly in force until the Resurrection. But of these, more fully hereafter.

CHAP. XIV.
Of the Penalties Executed on Mankind; more Partiuclary; As also to which the
Sentence made it liable.
FOr the more full understanding of this Judgment,

1. More particularly the punishments which were executed upon mankind, and
whereunto the Sentence made it liable.

2. The extent of sin and death in respect of the subject, and the Derivation
of the same from Adam to his posterity; Where something shall be said of
Original sin.

3. The Attributes of God chiefly manifested in this Judgment.

1. For the punishments; we must know, they were less then the desert of this
sin: For in strict justice man had deserved far more, and more grievous,
punishments then this Sentence did determine: For (as you shall hear hereafter)
God punished man Citra condignum, far less then he deserved. And he in great
mercy ordained means, whereby many of these Judgments might be prevented, and
all in the process of time removed; as he reserved a power to abate them, or
aggravate them at will and pleasure: So that, man has cause to bless God,
that though he might, Yet he will not always chide, neither will he keep his
anger for ever. He has not dealt with us after our sins, nor rewarded us
according to our iniquities, Psalm. 103. 9, 10. Where we may observe the
intermission, interruption, and mitigation of his Justice.

1. The intermission of his chiding. He sometimes chides but not always (as he
might).

2. The abruption of his anger: He chides sometimes and is angry; yet he breaks
off, and continues not his wrath as he might do for ever.

3. The mitigation: He punishes, and sometimes grievously, yet not according
to our sins, and so much as we deserve. And thus his Sentence is to be
understood: For his execution is the best intepretation of his own mind, which
he knew best himself, when he passed this Judgment.

Besides the punishment formerly mentioned, active free power of man, to do
good, and that which was pleasing to God, was not only weakened, but wholly
taken away. For though the essence and faculties of man remained, yet the
Spiritual and divine vigor was lost: A natural, but not a spiritual free will
he has. The Council of Trent tells us, that Liberum Arbitri^us fuit viribus
attenuatum, non penitus sublatum: Free Will by the Fall was weakened, but not
wholly lost. If they mean that it was so weakened, that it lost all spiritual,
and supernatural power clearly to understand and effectually to prosecute
spiritual good; or, if any such strength does remain* yet it was given to man,
and left in his soul, for the merit of Jesus Christ promised, then they speak
the truth; otherwise they cannot be excused. By this incomparable l^sse, there
followed- in man's understanding ignorance and error, and in his w^ll
perverseness, and a disorder in his faculties, and a difference between the
rational, and sensitive appetite: A pronesse, or strong inclination to that God
forbids, and a disaffection to all Heavenly good: The soul has lo^^ all
relish of heavenly things. Besides this, Man became subject and a slave to
Satan, who thereupon could easily b^ind and delude his understanding, and
pervert his will: so that nothing so heinous but he could persuade him unto it,
and work in his heart an hatred of the Power of Godliness.

That there was such a Penalty, which passed upon Adam and Eve, and all their
Posterity may be made evident out of Gods word: For

1. The nakedness, shame, fear, hiding from Gods presence, false pretenses of
fear and slight, and excuses of their sin in our first parents, do imply this.

2. What necessity is there of every son of Adam, even the best, to be born
again, and that of water, and the spirit before he can enter into the kingdom
of God, if man by this fall had not lost the Sanctifying spirit? How comes it
to pass, that except the spirit of Christ be in us, we are carnally minded, at
enmity against God, so that we are neither subject to the Law of God, neither
indeed can be?

3. What necessity is there to turn men from the power of Satan to God, Act.
^6. 18. and to be de^^^ered from the power of darkness, and translated into the
kingdom of Gods Dear Son, Col. 1. 13? To this purpose, I might multdiply other
(...) of Scripture to prove, that this was one great penalty consequent to the
sin of Adam.

Another penalty was, God, testimony of a good con^cience, right to the life,
and all Solace that might arise from the hope and assurance thereof; Instead of
these succeeded horror, grief, anguish, perplexity, an ^ despair; so that he
conceived and found himself cast out of Gods presence, and favor. This seems
to be signified by Gods casting him out of Paradise; denying him access to the
Tree of Life; and that must needs torment his soul grievously, and perpetually,
the passage into that Holy and happy place was guarded by Angels with a fiery
sword. This was the Sentence of Excommunication executed upon him, signifying,
that seeing man had sinned, and polluted himself, there was no possibility of
Life by the Law of works: And except Christ by his blood had quenched the fire
of Gods wrath, and made a new passage to Life, we had perished for evermore:
and to draw near to God, was to approach to a consuming fire to our eternal
destruction. We must needs think that Adam looked back toward the Tree of
Li^e, with weeping eyes, and an heavy heart, especially when he considered the
distance, and the impossibility of access. How grievously did wicked cursed
Cain complain of this that he was cast out of Gods sight? How importunately
does David deprecate this punishment, saying, Lord cast me not out of thy
presence, and take not thine Holy spirit from me. Besides this, he became
timorous and of a dejected spirit, (...) having lost that Majesty, whereby he
awed the inferior creatures; and his dominion over them was much impaired.

The penalties, wild beast, unmercifull, and cruel murderers, treacheries,
assassinations, exquisite tortures, and many other accidents, destructive of
his life, which was every moment, and in every place, in danger to be cut off
from without; Besides, the principles of mortality were always within his
body. And the danger was the greater, because he had lost the Ministry,
Guardiance, and direction of Angels, and was deprived of the special care and
providence of his Lord and maker; the Heavens above him were made like iron or
brass, and either denied their light and influence, or powered down storms,
and terrified him with fiery Meteors, and strange prodigious Comets, or
apparitions. The earth was cursed, bar^en, or fruitful in pro^^cing
unprofitable Weeds, ingendring Toads, Serpents, and Pestilent Vermin, and
other creatures to consume fruits. And the best soil refused to give him
bread, without sweat, labor, care; and both Heaven and Earth did often
threaten him, with hunger, thirst, and so with famine. If the Earth, and Heaven
too did favor him, so that through Gods Blessing, and his industry, they both
promised a plentiful harvest, and return, yet it was subject to many casualties
before it could be reaped and inned; as to blasting, mildew, pe^i^ential air,
inundatious, fire, Locusts, Caterpillars, and several sorts of worms, and
devouring Creatures, which threaten death to man, and beast. If the fruits of
the earth, were laid up in his barnes, and storehouses, yet they were in
danger: If his house was furnished, and his treasuries stored with rich, and
precious goods, yet he was in peril of thieves, Oppressors, plunderers by
Land; and his Merchandise by Sea, of Pirates, and merciles enemies. Neither
could the Liberty of his Person be secure, because of imprisonment, banishment,
captivity: His credit and reputation could not be safe, but he might suffer in
this particular, and be stained by reproaches, slanders, his own imprudent, or
base carriage. His public peace and safety might be disturbed by seditions,
rebellions, civil Wars, and foreign invasions; and his houses, Lands, goods,
possessed by Strangers, or made desolate. And he might suffer from enemies,
desertion of Friends, treachery, ill neighbors, bad servants, his parents,
brethren, sisters, near kindred, nay from his own children issuing out of his
own Bowels. He might be cursed in his Cattle, in his Children, in his Lands, in
all his designs; By his sin^^e provoked God, armed Heaven, Earth, Air, Sea, and
all Creatures against him. His spiritual Condition was much prejudiced by evil
education* bad example* pernicious counsel, ungodly company, and many other
ways. These penalties, and many more are recorded in the Scriptures, and in
the great Volum of divine Providence, and stored up in the treasures of Gods
Almighty and severe Justice. To make a more full enumeration of the miseries,
whereunto Man by his first sin, and Gods just judgments is exposed, and reduce
them into a Method, would take up a great Volum. Of the Penalties to be endured
after this life, I will not now say any thing.

These Penalties. 1. Are spiritual, Privative, which we call punishments of
loss, or Positive, which we call punishments of Sense.

2. There be many degrees of these punishments, and the continuance of them
might be for ever, so far as man is capable for ever to suffer them.

3. Though every son of Adam be subject to these, yet God does not inflict them
all upon any son of Adam.

4. These Punishments may be deserved by other sins; Against the Law of nature,
which the Gentiles violated; Against the Law of Moses, which the Jews
transgressed; Against the Gospel, which Christians violate. And many of Gods
own Children may justly suffer: For all actual sins are not merely from
Original Corruption, though it be a cursed root of all kind of iniquity.

5. These Penalties become unremoveable, either by Negative, or Positive
Impenitency, and Unbelief, or by Apostasy.

6. All these Punishments in Scripture, are signified by one word, [DEATH]: For
the Wages of Sin is DEATH.

CHAP. XV.
Of Original Sin, and the Derivation of it from Adam to his Posterity.
ITs to be known,

1. What the Authors, who write or speak of it, mean by Original Sin? 2.
Whether it be properly a Sin? 3. How it is derived from Adam to his Posterity.
1. Some distinguish of Original Sin, and inform us that its [Originans, aut
Originatum.] By the first, they understand the first sin of Adam; and this
only Pighius defines to be Original Sin.

By the second they understand the want of Original Righteousness, and the
depravation of our Nature following thereupon: And thus it is commonly taken:
So that in it we may consider two things.

1. Not only the want or absence, but the privation of the Righteousness,
which God gave Adam in the day of his Creation: So that it is a want of it in
the subject, where it should be and was at first. Yet this privation may be
understood actively or passively. Actively, and so it is a taking away from one
that had it; or denying it to one who never actually received it. In the first
sense, God took it from Adam: In the latter sense, he denies it to all his
Posterity. In what manner God is in this Act to be considered, or what was the
reason why he did thus, I do not here inquire.

Passively considered it respects the Subject from whom it is taken, or to whom
i^'^ denied. Upon this deprivation, follows a depravation in the Moral, and
Spiritual Qualities, and of the Acts of the Party deprived. And this
Depravation is either Negative, or Positive: Negative, as Ignorance: Positive,
as Error in the Understanding: Negative* as no affection to good; Positive, as
inclination to evil in the Will. This Depravation does not destroy the Essence
of man, nor his qualities, nor his Acts; but the perfection and excellency of
them all: and does necessarily presuppose the Being Qualities, Acts, as the
Subject. All this does imply, that this Right^ousness, being an excellent
Quality, does much ennoble and perfect man; and did depend both in fieri and in
facto (as they speak) upon a superior and intelligent-supernatural-tree Agent,
who could give it, and continue it; as also upon cause take it away. And if
once the Soul lost it upon demerit, or any other ways, it was made imperfect,
defective, and base: and the inclinations and motions were unworthy so noble a
Creature: and so much the more, because a Superior Spirit had power to delude
and deceive the mind, and incline the heart to evil. This is the reason why so
many are said to walk after the Prince of the power of Darkness, that now
works in the Children of Disobedience.

But, the Flesh, Concupiscence, Sin the Body of Sin, etc. properly a Sin? That
it is from sin, called sin, and is a cause of sin, is generally confessed.
But that it is a sin, in proper sen^e, is denied absolutely by Pighius: But he
is singular, and differs from his own Church; which generally acknowledges it
to be a sin, but not in such as are baptized: Because Baptism being a Sacrament
of Remission and Regeneration, takes away the nature of sin from it, so that
the formal part of sin is taken away, but the material remains: For so I
understand them, because they call that which remains Concupiscence, and the
Fuel of Sin. This were something, if Regeneration did always accompany, or
immediately follow upon Baptism, which cannot be proved: or if it did so
accompany, and follow Baptism, as to be perfect, and make the soul perfectly
righteous, and holy, which it does not, as experience in God's own Children
teache^^ us: yet this Doctrine does confess plainly, that it was sin, before
the formal reason and nature of sin was taken away: and by the same reason it
will follow, that so far as it is not taken away, it is properly sin. It is
placed by many of them, especially in the Sensitive Appetite; but certainly
it is found in the Rational Appetite, and the Will; and must needs be morally
evil: and they confess that it must be resisted and subdu^d. Some Remonstrants,
and Corvinus amongst the rest, deny it to be properly sin upon another account;
because; though it be materially contrary unto the Law, yet formally it is not
so: And why? Because the Law forbids future ill acts, not habits. But yet this
is not precisely true; because the Law forbids to all such as are under a Law,
not only the future evil acts, but also dispositions and habits, especially
such as depend any ways on Acts.

But to give a more perfect Resolve of this Question,

1. Distinguish of Sin Habitual, and Actual: And Actual Sin it is not.

2. We may consider it, as it is in us by Conception and Birth, and a Natural
Habit (if I may so speak); or as improved, and increased by many Actual Sins;
and so become an acquired vicious habit; and thus, in this latter sense, Paul
seems to take it, Romans 7. and elsewhere. In this latter sense, few will deny it
to be sin; and by the same reason, it may be sin in the former sense.

3. We may conceive of this Original Corruption, and the want of Original
Righteousness, as taken away, or denied upon a former demerit, and so it is
certainly a punishment; or absolutely in it self, as a quality, disposition, or
habit inherent in us, and so it is not properly a punishment, but a sin: Yet
it is not so a sin in us, as it was in Adam: For Adam once had Original
Righteousness entire, we have not. Adam lost it by the demerit of an actual
sin, but Infants have not actual sin, for which it is denied unto them. It seems
to be rather a punishment, then a sin (though both) in them, who never were
perfectly and personally righteous, especially in such, as never had the use of
reason. It Is certain, that God never allowed in Man, or Angel, any vicious
quality or disposition contrary unto his Law. But the reason, why it is a sin
in Adam's Posterity, is singular; as will appear in the Derivation of sin from
Adam, which is the next thing.

In the third place, Original Sin, is derived from Adam to his Posterity, with
many evils besides. And, first, we must prove that it is derived. Secondly,
show how it is derived from him to us.

1. The [(...)] that it is so, seems to be evident from those words; By one man
sin entered into the world; and, by Sin, Death; and so Death passed over all
men, in that (or as some turn it) in whom, all men have sinned, Romans 5. 12. And
by those, As in Adam all die; so in Christ shall all be made alive, 1 Cor. 15.
22. The meaning is not, as some conceive, that one man* the first man Adam, was
the first that sinned; and so by his Example, sin entered into the World: As
though his Posterity were sinners only by imitation. But the plain and clear
sense is, that by the sin, offense, and disobedience of one man, many, yea all
men were made sinners, and so liable to death, as appears by the words
following. This sin was his first sin, in eating the forbidden fruit: For his
after-sins were personal, and not derived to Posterity in that manner as the
first sin was. So that the person from whom sin was derived, was one man, even
Adam; the means whereby it was derived was sin, one sin, the first sin of that
one man, that first man. The parties to whom it was derived were, All men: The
thing that was derived by this one sin* was Death, the death of all. This sin,
offense, disobedience, is opposed to the obedience of Christ unto Death, the
death of the Cross: and the Death from this Sir is oppo^ed to that Eternal
Life, which Believers obtain by Jesus Christ. So that the sin of Adam is the
sin of all; and the guilt of Adam is the guilt of all.

But the great difficulty is, Adam's sin and guilt is transmitted and derived
to all. The ordinary determination is, that it is derived by Propagation. It Is
true, that without natural propagation it is not derived, because without it we
cannot Be; or if we could have our Being without it, yet we could not be his
children: and except we be his children, we cannot be any subject capable, so
as to derive any thing from him. Yet this natural propagation does only make
us subjects of this derivation of sin, and guilt from him. Therefore, this
participation of sin, guilt, death from him, is an Act of just Judgment. This
therefore presupposes,

1. That Adam was sinful, and guilty.

2. That we are descended from him, as sinful, by Natural Generation.

3. That we are some ways, one person with him, either by Nature, or Law, or
both, and God did so account of us.

4. That in Adam innocent, God judges us innocent; in him guilty, us guilty.
And though we be descended immediately from our next Parents, yet we de^ive the
sin and guilt from Adam immediately, though we have our Being from him mediately
by intermediate Ancestors, and Parents. All men were one man in Adam, and in
none else. We were in him by Nature, and Law: By Nature, for he was the Root,
and all men the Branches; and it was God's Will, that all Mankind should
descend from him: By Law, for as all Nations account the Parents and Children,
as one person in many things, and Children part of their Parents; so that
Children and Parents make but one body: So likewise God did account Adam, and
all Mankind as one. And so far as God judged him one, and made Adam the Head
and Representative of all; so far in Adam all men might be bound to obedience
or penalty; and so far judgments or rewards might be transmitted from him to
all, and no further. And if God had not considered Adam, and all his posterity
as one person, By one man sin could not have entered into the World, and by sin
Death, so as to pass upon all men. That this derivation was an act of judgment,
is evident from the Apostle; because Sin and Death, which is punishment,
presupposed a Law. To impute sin, and punish for sin, and that with Death, are
Acts of Judgment, and that according to a Law, which was in force, when Adam
sinned, and long before Moses. Otherwise, how could sin have reigned even over
Adam, and that from Adam to Moses? and this by a Sentence of Judgment, in force
to this day, according to a Law in force when Adam transgressed it. For upon
that transgression, God condemned Adam* and in him all Mankind. In this
respect, the doubt, how the Soul, being made by God, becomes corrupted, is
vain; and that conceit, that it is polluted by entrance into the body, or from
the body, is false. For,

1. God in the Creation of the Soul of every individual person, is to be
considered as a Creator, and a Judge: As a Creator, he makes a Soul, and
gives it Essence, and all things necessary flowing from the Essence, and
appertaining to it: As a Judge, he denies that person, as one with Adam
sinning, his sanctifying Spirit which Adam received for him, and his; and in
him sinning, was lost to him and his.

2. It is evident, that the Soul is not so much polluted by the body, as the
body by it, and it from it self. For there are many Spiritual sins; as Pride,
Envy, Malice, and such like, which are purely from the Soul, and in the Soul,
as they are in Angels, who have no bodies, but are spirits. And those sins
which have their Rise from the sensitive appetite, could not pollute the Soul,
except it were depraved in it self. And the first sin began in the Soul, as may
easily be understood from Genesis 3. and was there completely molded, before Eve
looked upon the forbidden fruit to covet it, and desire it as a bodily food.
Yet whilst we discourse of the Derivation of Original Sin, as it is a
Deprivation, and a depravation following thereupon, because man falls under the
power of Death; yet we must consider, that Adam's Posterity derive not only
that original corruption from him, but many other evils, together with their
Being. All the evils are reduced to Sin and Death. We participate with him in
some manner in the first sin; and in him sinning, we sin; and in him being
guilty, we are guilty; in him dying, we die. And by Death* all Punishments God
sentenced us to in him, are understood: not only that which we call Original
Sin, but all Actual Sins virtually included in it, and issuing purely from it,
by virtue of the first Desertion. And here we may wonder at the severity of
God's Judgment; yet we must in no wise question the Justice and Equity thereof.

CHAP. XVI.
Of the Attributes of God, manifested in this Judgment of Men and Angels.
THE last thing to be considered in this Judgment and Execution is the
manifestation of the Attributes,

His Holiness was evident in this, that he spared not sin in his most noble
Creatures, punishing the Devils, without mercy, as first in the sin; not
sparing man made in his own Image, though tempted to sin; and in accursing the
Serpent, though an irrational Creature, and but only an Instrument abused. All
this signifies, that he detests and abominates sin; and being holy Himself,
requires holiness in Men and Angels made holy: and if by sin, they pollute
themselves, he casts them out of his presence.

His Power appeared, in that he so presently, and so fully executed his
Sentence, and makes it good to this day, and none can hinder him.

His Knowledge is as exact: for he evidently knew the sin of Men and Angels,
with the measure and circumstances thereof, and proportions his Judgment
accordingly.

But principally his Justice and Mercy shined forth in this judicial
Proceeding.

First, his Justice must be considered: The Justice of God is Legislative, or
judicial: Legislative Justice determines man's duty; and binds him unto the
performance thereof, and also defines the rewards and punishments, which shall
be due upon the Creatures obedience, or disobedience.

His judicial Justice, which is called distributive, is that, whereby he
renders unto the intellectual Creatures, according to their Works. This is
remunerative or vindictive: For taking cognizance of their cause, he rewards
the obedient and punishes the disobedient, The justice manifested in this
judgment, was punitive and vindictive; and it did appear, in that

1. He spared not sinners, much less rewarded them.

2. He punished none but sinners, and such as did concur in this sin.

3. He punished only for sin, and not out of any absolute and arbitrary power.
Therefore, God said to the Serpent, Because thou have done this, therefore,
thus and thus shall thou be punished. The Woman suffered, and is condemned,
because she hearkened, and gave consent to the Serpents temptation. The man is
judged to death, because he had hearkened to the voice of his wi^e.

4. The punishments determined and executed, did not exceed the measure of
their sin.

5. The Devil sinned most, and therefore his punishment is the greatest, and no
ways mitigated or allayed by mercy. The Woman and Man sinned, being tempted,
and their sin was less, and it was allayed by mercy: yet the woman's sin was
greater then Adam's, though less then the Devils: For she was first in the
transgression, and brought man into the snare, being instrumental to the Devil,
and therefore she was adjudged to two punishments, to which man was not liable.

This Justice is not an Attribute, but the exercise and manifestation of an
Attribute, as here it is taken. It Is called Anger, Wrath, Fury, Rage, Jealousy,
Indignation, as the sin is more or less heinous, and he more or less
displeased. It Is called Revenge, in that it renders the evil of punishment for
the evil of sin. It Is Judgment, because he proceeds according to Law, upon the
evident knowledge of the violation of the same. It Is punishment, as God
inflicts it, and the Creatures suffer it.

The principal Attribute which God did exercise,

This mercy did appear in this great Judgment many ways:

1. God sentenced the Devils in the first place, and that without any mercy,
and for this very cause, even because they had attempted the eternal ruin of
man, which upon the success of their damned Design had proved unavoidable, and
the recovery of man impossible, if God should not have done some extraordinary
work to prevent it. Upon this fiery indignation of God against these Liars and
Murderers of Mankind, expressed in this Sentence, it did appear, 1. That the
punishment to be suffered by these cursed Fiends, was grievous, unavoidable,
and unremovable for ever. 2. That God was highly displeased at their malice
showed against, and the mischief done to Mankind, in that he takes so fearful
vengeance upon them. 3. That there was some pity in God toward poor man
trembling at the Bar of God: for though their folly was inexcusable, yet their
condition, considering the temptation, was lamentable.


2. This mercy was manifest in an high and extraordinary degree and measure, in
that; (in this Sentence he) promises, or at least implies, a most certain
promise of Jesus Christ a Savior and Redeemer. It Is true, that this great
promise was folded and wrapped up in a few words, and the same very mysterious,
as we read them in Moses, Genesis 3. 15. But those very words inform us,

1. That the Redeemer should be the Seed of the Woman; that Woman, whom the
Serpent had so deluded, and who now stood guilty before God's Tribunal.

2. That this Seed of the Woman should bruise the Serpents head, and so be the
ruin of his Kingdom, and Dominion over Man.

3. That he should not obtain this Victory without Blood; for his Head must be
bruised and he put to death. And there is not only an Emphasis, but a Mystery
in those words [The Seed of the Woman.] The Emphasis is in this; That God does
not say an Angel or Spirit, or some man more excellent then Adam, whom he
should create instantly; but the Seed, a Child, a Mortal Man, born of that
sinful Woman (though now contemptible and miserable) should encounter the Devil
with that power and policy, as to foil him.

The Mystery seems to be this: That it is not said the Seed of Man, nor the Seed
of Man and Woman; but the Seed of the Woman, signifying (though darkly) that
Christ should be the Seed, and Child immediate, of a Woman, but of no Man. For
as he was Man, he had an immediate Mother, who conceived, bare him, brought him
forth; but no immediate Father. Upon these words, as the condition of Man and
Woman became more comfortable; so the Kingdom and Government of Mankind began
instantly to be altered; and a second Adam was appointed their Head to redeem
them, as the first Adam had undone them.

We must needs think, that our first Parents being sinful, guilty, and
convicted, before the Supreme Judge of Heaven and Earth, stood with sad and
heavy hearts, expecting their doom and condemnation, to Eternal Death, until
they heard these words [The Seed of the Woman should bruise the Serpents Head].
Then their Despair was turned into Hope, and their sinking-dying-hearts began
to revive. For to them these were words far above all expectation of sweetest
comfort: Never better words spoken! never better heard!

3. This mercy was evident, in that God did not send the Spirit of Despair, nor
of Slumber and Security upon them, Cain and Abel, and especially in the Faith
of Abel. That the means of Conversion have been denied several persons, whole
Tribes, many Nations, and the greatest part of the World, howsoever it might be
de^erved by this sin of Adam; yet usually it is the punishment of Apostasy, as
of the generality of mankind before the blood; of the Gentiles before Christ's
incarnation; and of the generality of the Jews, and many of the Gentiles, since
the preaching of the Gospel to all Nations. And the very Gentiles were not
delivered up unto a Reprobate mind, before they abused the Light of Nature, Yet
the very outward means of Conversion, were a gift of Free grace for the merit
of Christ, who was promised of pure and abundant mercy.

The Sentence of Justice past upon them was allayed, Go ye cursed into
everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels. But you shall suffer
Temporal punishments; yet so, that through my Grace, and sanctifying Spirit,
they shall be Corrections and Chassisements for Humiliation, Mortification, and
Reformation; and you shall be banished out of Earthly Paradise, and from this
Tree of Life, that you may more earnestly long after: and seek the Paradise,
and Tree of Life in Heaven: For you shall know, that it is a bitter thing to
forsake your God, and disobey his Command. Yet this was the great punishment,
that the Spirit of Sanctification and Comfort was departed, and no ways to be
recovered, but by Jesus Christ, the great Redeemer, as a gift of Free Grace.

And now consider all Mankind in Adam, as innocent and obedient; they are
innocent and obedient: Consider them, in him, as sinful, guilty, convicted;
they are sinful, miserable, convicted, and in a lost condition: Consider them
in him, as receiving the Promise of Christ; they are in a possibility of
Salvation and Deliverance. And all such as are born in the Bosom of the
Church, and under the means of Conversion, are in a better condition, then such
as are strangers from the Covenants of Promise, as all Children or Apostlates
are. Yet we must understand, and take special notice of it, that after the
Fall, there is not any thing in man tending either to holiness or happiness, or
the abatement of sin or misery, but from the mere mercy of God, which does
shine forth most clearly in two things:

The first is, the giving of Christ, or the Promise to give him; and this was
not upon any merit, no nor of Christ himself. And howsoever all other Spiritual
Mercies may be promised, and given for, and in respect of the satisfaction and
merit of Christ; yet the gift of Christ was from purest love, without any
respect to any merit at all.

The second is in calling, wherein he prevents, both by giving the means of
Conversion, and the grace of his Spirit, to make them effectual: Therefore, the
Scripture so much magnifies God's abundant love, and free grace manifested in
both.

1. For the first it is said God so loved the World, that he gave his only
begotten Son, Joh. 3. 16. And God commends his love toward us, in that
Christ died for us, while we were yet sinners, Romans 5. 8. And in this was
manifested the love of God toward us, because that God sent his only Begotten
Son into the World, that we should live by him. Herein is love, not that we
loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son to be the Propitiation for
our sins, 1 John 4. 9, 10. For some mercies we receive from God, loving us
before we love him; as these two: Some, after we begin to love him.

2. For the second, we read that God who is rich in mercy, for his great love,
wherewith he loved us, even when we were dead in sins, has quickened us
together with Christ (by grace we are saved) and has raised us up together,
and made us sit together with Christ Jesus in Heavenly places, Ephesians. 2. 4, 5, 6.
Yet this latter is merited by Christ.

Besides, the manifestation of these Attributes, it is remarkable that God
exercised his transcendent and absolute power above his Law: For to reverse the
Law of Works, to require and accept satisfaction, and the same made by another,
even Christ, and not the Delinquents; and thereupon to promise Pardon, and
Eternal Life, upon condition of Faith were acts of Him, as above his Law, and
dispensing with it in his judicial proceedings. For if he had according to his
ordinary power made the Law of Works, requiring perfect and perpetual
obedience, as the only condition of life, the rule of judgment; he could have
done none of the forementioned Acts, but must have condemned man unto Death,
and punished him according to the demerit of his sin: which if he had done,
neither Adam, nor any Son of Adam, could have had the least possibility of
Salvation. So that in this Judgment, the Foundation of the second Government of
greatest mercy was laid; and then, even then, God began to constitute another
Form of Government over Man, and to administer the same: And the former
continued but a little while; and the latter has continued long, and shall be,
An everlasting Kingdom.

The Second Scheme.
Acquired by the Word made Flesh, by His Conception, Birth.
Anointed King, Priest, Prophet

in His Humiliation, taking upon Him the form of a servant, being obedient unto
Death, which (presupposing His former Holiness and Obedience) was an act of
Obedience unto the great Command of His Father, accepting Him as the Surety and
Hostage of Mankind, laying on Him the iniquities of us all.
a Sacrifice offered to God, as Supreme Judge, to expiate the sin of Man.
and being accepted, did satisfy Divine Justice offended. merit for Himself
Eternal Glory and Power, sinful Man immediately the Abrogation of the Law of
Works, Covenant of Grace, Power of the Spirit, to enable Him to keep it.
These Effects formally include exclude
no person. mediately upon the Covenant observed Justification, Glorification.






Exercised in the Constitution, which determines the Sovereign God-Redeemer.
Administrator-General, Christ at the right hand of God Enemies Devils, Men,
Rebels, Apostates,
Subjects, men, who being reduced by Vocation, according to Predestination, do
voluntarily submit, and that sincerely to God-Redeemer, their Sovereign.
Administration, considered in general, according to the degrees, alterations
from the time of Adam, till the Commencement of that glorious Reign, wherein
God shall be all in all.

special, in giving Laws, which being Moral, considered as given to Adam
Innocent, continued to Gentiles, Jews, Christians,
with the different Obligations thereof.
determines man's duty to God Creator, Redeemer.
Man,

Positive in Ceremonies, especially Sacrifices Ilastical, Eucharistical.
Sacraments of the Law -- extraordinary, ordinary.
Gospel Baptism, Eucharist
an Examination by whom, to whom, How
these may be admi^^



are a rule of Man's duty in Precepts, Prohibitions.
God's judgment in Promises, Threatenings.


Judgment particular, in Punishments Temporal, Spiritual, in this life, upon
single persons, Societies, Ecclesiastical, Civil.

after Death, before the Resurrection,

Rewards Temporal Spiritual in this life, Conversion Justification begun.
continued in the state thereof.

after Death before the Resurrection.


Universal, determining and rendering the Eternal Punishments Rewards
of Men, Angels.





THE DOCTRINE OF The Kingdom of God. OR, The Government of God-Redeemer.
The Second BOOK.
CHAP. I.
Concerning the Power of God-Redeemer, and by whom it was acquired.
WHen the first Government did determine, Eternal Salvation. For there was a
Foundation of this new Government laid in that Judgment God passed upon the
Devil, and he began instantly to act according to the same. Yet though he
abolished the former Government; yet he continued the memory of it, and
revealed the Doctrine thereof unto the Church, and it remains in the same; and
it serves to let men see their misery, and humble them, that they may seek for
remedy, and vehemently desire it, and follow the Directions God has given: And
by this, he may and ought to know, that in strict Justice he can expect nothing
but Eternal Death, and that all hope of life depends upon the mere mercy of
God, and the merit of a Second Adam.

This Second Government did not abolish the power acquired by Creation: Adam
fallen. The Laws thereof do not bind man as the former did to perfect and
perpetual obedience, as the condition of Life, but to Faith in the Redeemer.
Neither in this New-Model does God alone, without a President-general, as in
the former^ govern Mankind, but does administer all things by his Son made Lord
and King, at his Right Hand, after the Incarnation.

This Government is that Act of Divine Providence,

This is evident, out of the sacred Writings both of the Old and New Testament:
For all the Holy Patriarchs from Adam, were saved by their Faith in God
Redeemer, and the Seed of the Woman: And after the exhibition of the Redeemer,
and his manifestation, he himself faith, That God so loved the World, that he
gave his only begotten Son that whosoever believes in him, should not perish,
but have Eternal Life: And He that believes on him is not condemned; And, he
that believes not is condemned already, because he has not believed in the
only Begotten Son of God* Joh. 3. 16, 18. John the Baptist testifies, that
the Father loves the Son, and has given all things into his hand: He that
believes on the Son has everlasting life; and he that believes not the Son
shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides on him, Joh. 3. 36. And all
power in Heaven and Earth was given to Christ, Math. 28. 18. And from this
Power, the Apostles received Commission and Command to go to all the World, and
to preach the Gospel to every Creature; And, He that believes, and is
baptized, shall be saved; and he that believes not shall be damned, Mark 16.
15, 16. In all which words, we have a New Power, a New Government, New Laws,
both as a Rule of Man's Duty, and God's Judgment, differing much from the
former. This might be called the Government of Mercy, as the former the
Government of Justice.

Whereas many tell us, that the former Government continues; that the Laws are
still the same; that God, as Rectour, by Substitution, transferred the
punishment, merited by transgressions, of the Law, upon Christ; and for, and in
consideration of satisfaction made by him, remits sin; and this is nothing but
a relaxation, or interpretation of the former Law, they are much mistaken, and
reach not the truth in this particular. And this shall be made evident, when we
come to speak of the Administration of this Kingdom from the times of Adam*
till the preaching and baptizing of John the Baptist, and the manifestation of
Christ's entering upon his Public Office.

As in the former Government;

1. Who is the Governor invested with Power. 2. How this Power was 1.
Acquired. 2. Exercised.

The Governor is God, Creator, and Preserver of Mankind, the same who was
Lord and King by Creation: Yet here he must be considered under another notion,
as God-Redeemer. For, as the Work of Creation and Redemption differ; so the
Power acquired by Redemption, differs from that acquired by Creation. This
Power is Supreme, Universal, Eternal, Monarchical, as the former.

In the Acquisition, we must consider, by 1. Whom. 2. What it was acquired.
It was acquired, 1. By the Word, made Flesh. 2. By the Humiliation of this Word
made Flesh.


The Person by whom God acquired this new Power, was the Word made Flesh: for
as by the Word he made the World, and in particular Man, and so acquired a
Properiety in Man, and a Dominion over Man, as a rational free Creature: So by
this Word incarnate, and made Flesh in a wonderful manner, he acquired a new
propriety in Man fallen, and a dominion over him, as capable of Spiritual and
Eternal Felicity, to be recovered by a new way. The work whereby this Power was
acquired, was, the Humiliation of this Son of God. So that now Man is God's,
and subject unto God, not only as Creator, and Preserver in general, but as
Redeemer and Sanctifier: For this new Dominion considers Man in his Spiritual
Capacity.

For the better understanding of this acquisition of New-Power, 1. Who the
Redeemer is. 2. What the Work of Humiliation is.


The Redeemer is Jesus Christ our Lord, first promised, then exhibited. Jesus
Christ our Lord, who is blessed for ever, In himself is the Word made Flesh,
Ioh. ^. 14. As our Redeemer, he was anointed with the Holy Ghost, and power to
be a Prophet, Priest, and King Universal, Act. 10. 38. In Him, as the Word made
Flesh, we may observe, 1. His Person. 2. His Natures.


For his Person, in a large sense, as here I take Person; He is the Word which
was in the beginning, and was with God, and was God, and by whom all things
were made, Joh. 1. 1, 2. The only begotten Son of God, Joh. 3. 16. The Image
of the Invisible God, the firstborn of every Creature, by whom all things were
not only created, but do subsist, Col. 1. 15, 16, 17. The brightness of his
Father's glory, and the express Image of his Person, Heb. 1. 3. He was begotten
of the Father from Everlasting, and is the full expression and representation
of Himself unto Himself.

By these places it evidently appears, that the Word did exist before the World
was; and so exist, that He was with God, and God. To be with God, implies some
distinction; to be God, an identity of substance: and this is that which we
call Circumincession, the nearest Union that can be with any distinction in the
World.

In the Natures, 1. The number. 2. The union. 3. The distinction of them.


The Natures are two: 1. Divine. 2. Humane.


The Divine, is He was the Word: The Humane, as He was Flesh. For if He was
that Word, which was in the beginning with God, and was God, so that all things
were created and upholden by Him, He must needs be God, as the Father is God:
yet not the Father; yet one God with the Father. If He be Flesh, He must needs
be Man. As God, and the Word, He is Eternal; as Flesh, and Man, He is not
Eternal. That Jesus Christ was Man, and that such a man there was, both Jews,
and Mahumetans confess: Yet Orthodox Christians only acknowledge him to be
God, and that according to the Scriptures; which, in these great Mysteries, are
the only infallible Rule. And, in them, we do not read, that ever the Word
assumed the Nature of any irrational Creature, nor of any of the Intellectual,
but the Nature of Man: For he took not on him the Angels, or the Nature of
Angels; but he took on him the Seed of Abraham, Heb. 2. 16: For the Children
being partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself likewise took part of the
same, that, through Death, he might destroy him that had the power of Death;
that is, the Devil. For, 1. He redeemed not Angels. 2. He redeemed Men. 3. He
redeemed them Only. 4. He redeemed them by Death. 5. Because the Word, as the
Word, could not dye; therefore the Word was made Flesh, that he might dye. This
seemed good unto the Divine Wisdom; and this was determined in the secret
Counsel of the Eternal Deity.


The Union of these two Natures is personal. Assumption was begun in
Conception, consummate in Birth. As His Birth was both mean on Earth, and
glorious from Heaven; so his Conception was wonderful: For He was so conceived,
that He had a Mother, and the same a Virgin in her Conception; yet he had no
immediate Father who begot him; and because his Mother was descended from David
and Abraham, therefore in respect of his Humane Nature, he was the Son of
David, the Son of Abraham, according to Divine Prediction, and Promise, and the
Seed of the Woman in a special manner.

Concerning this Conception, we are informed, That the Virgin Mary, after she
was espoused and before she and Joseph came together, was found with child of
the Holy Ghost: and to satisfy him, an Angel was sent from Heaven, to signify
unto him, that that which was conceived in her, was of the Holy Ghost; and that
according to a Prophecy, Behold a Virgin shall conceive, Math. 1. 18, 20, 22.
And we read in another Evangelist, that an Angel answered to this Blessed
Virgin, demanding, how she should conceive such a Son, seeing she was a Virgin,
and knew no man, That the Holy Ghost should come upon her, and the power of the
Highest should over-shadow her: therefore, that Holy Thing which should be born
other, should be called the Son of God, Luke 1. 34, 35. So that this Conception
was singular, extraordinary, and supernatural, and no ways to be paralle^d.

And there was a twofold end, why it pleased God to have him thus conceived,
1. That he should be holy. 2. That he should be called the Son of God.


And certainly these two things followed upon it.

1. He was holy, and so free from Original Corruption; either as considered in
it self; or, as a punishment for the first sin: For this Original Sin was
prevented 1. By the Sanctification of the Spirit. 2. By this extraordinary
Propagation.


For two things concur to this Native Corruption:

1. That the man be in Adam as sinning, and so sentenced for sin. 2. And also
descend from him by natural propagation: But neither of these did agree to
him: For though he was the Son of Adam, and the seed of the Woman, yet he was
not in Adam sinning, nor the Son of Adam in that manner as all other men were.
2. He was called the Son of God, not only because he was conceived in a
divine manner by the Holy Ghost, but also as the Word was the Son of God, and
had that relation to his Father, so this Nature assumed being personally one
with this Word must have the same relation to the father too. This incarnation
of the Word, and Son of God is a great mystery. That Jesus Christ is the Word,
and not only flesh; and not only the Word, but the Word made flesh; is plain
and express Scripture: But the manner of this union is unsearchable. And we
must simply believe what is plain, that it is so, not curiously enquire how it
is, for that is above our capacity. lib. 4. c. 41.
Aquinas, contra Gentes, endeavors to exemplify this by the union of the Soul,
and body: As the body is the instrument of the Soul; and supposes an
universal reason or intellect which assumes and unites it self to the
Conceptui humano.
nature of man, so as to use it as a Proper instrument, as the hand is to the
body, and by the same works divine works proper to God, and that, not
sometimes transiently, but after the manner of a constant, and permanent Act.
This is the Sum of his exemplification, which, as he confesses, is very
imperfect, and far too short. This assumption was an act (ad extra); and
therefore both Father, Word, and Spirit must concur in it; yet so that the Word
did in a special manner assume, and was the proper term of this Act. And that
word in which was life, which life was the light of men in the Creation, did
assume, possess, dwell in, and act by the Soul, and body of man; so as to be a
Fountain of Life and Spiritual light to man for ever.

This Word,

1. The communication of Idioms in predication: So that because the Word, which
was God, was flesh; and word, and flesh are one; therefore what is true of the
word may be affirmed of that flesh; and that which was properly true of that
flesh, might be truly affirmed of that Word, which was God. So that it may be
truly said, That the flesh, and man did that which God did; and God might be
said to suffer that which the flesh did suffer, and that by a Metonymy, and
such as no Rhetoric ever taught us.

2. A near relation between the Word and that flesh, and such as is not to be
found in all the world.

3. The excellency and dignity of that Nature, and flesh, not only above all
men, but all Angels.

4. The concurrence of the Word and flesh in the acts of Redemption, and the
same singular, and extraordinary. But whether the gifts of the Spirits
confirmation in holiness, universal power, glory and happiness which Christ
attained, did necessarily and instantly follow upon this Union, may justly be
doubted.

That the redeemer should be the Word, and so God and Flesh too; One, and the
chief Reason, was the Wisdom and Will of God. And other reasons not clearly
contained in Scripture are better forborne then mentioned.

After the number and union follows the distinction of the two Natures,
God-Man. Yet still he was so God that he was Man, and so man that he was the
Word, and God; and so shall continue, blessed for evermore.

Jesus Christ our Lord is the word made flesh;

An office is a derivative power, and therefore cannot be supreme, but
subordinate: and as an officer by commission with a Mandate receives his power,
so he is liable to account. In this respect, and for this cause it is, that
though Jesus Christ of Nazareth be the Word, and so God, yet as God he cannot
be an officer: as flesh, and man, he may be, and was such. This the Scripture
teaches plainly when it says, that he was sent, received commandment from
his Father, was sealed, anointed with the Holy Ghost, and with power, did not
glorify himself, that his Father gave him power over all flesh, and that all
power in Heaven, and earth was given him: all these things are true of him only
as man. His office was the greatest and highest that ever was: Because he was
supreme and universal governor above the Angels, and all other creatures next
unto God. Therefore his place upon his investitute, and solemn inauguration was
at the right hand of the eternal Throne of God: And in this particular Joseph
advanced by Pharaoh was a lively type of him. In him as an officer, we may
consider.

1. His Ability, 2. His power and Authority.
His Ability is expressed, in that metaphor of being anointed with the Holy
Ghost: for he was endued with all the gifts of the Holy Ghost, and in the
highest degree that any creature was capable of: therefore it is said God
gives not the Spirit in measure unto him, Joh. 3. 34. but in fulness. So
that of his fulness we all have received grace for grace, Joh. 1. 16. And the
Spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him, the spirit of Wisdom and
understanding, the spirit of counsel and might, the spirit of knowledge and
the fear of the Lord, Isay. 11. And at his Baptism the Heavens were opened, and
the Holy Ghost was seen in the likeness of a Dove to descend and rest upon
him. These gifts and endowments he received with a power to communicate in a
certain measure unto others,

The Spirit in this fulness was given him not only to sanctify him, but to
enable him for the undertaking, managing and accomplishing the great work of
Redemption, which was committed unto him. Besides these Abilityes he received
power, and authority accordingly, and so had plain right to do such things, as
neither men nor Angels had right to do.

He had power to command all the Angels of Heaven, the Devils, and all
Creatures, and they must obey him, because they were subject unto him. And
because he must discharge this Office; for that end, was required an high
degree of wisdom, and the knowledge of the deep and secret Counsels of God,
especially concerning the Eternal Salvation of sinful man, whose Nature he had
taken upon him. Therefore, he must be a Prophet, able, fully, infallibly, and
with Power, and Majesty, to declare the Mind and Will of God. In which
capacity, and faculty, he was more excellent then all the Prophets, then Moses,
then the Angels, who have the Spirit of Prophecy, as being in the Bosom of
the Father, and more intimate then the Angels were. And he could reach men not
only outwardly, but inwardly, and speak, by the Spirit, immediately unto the
Souls of men; and that not only ordinarily, by imprinting the Doctrines of the
Scripture outwardly upon the Tables of the Heart; but also extraordinarily by
Inspiration, and immediate Revelation of the Mysteries of Gods Kingdom. Thus he
taught Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists: And he is the Head and Lord of all
Prophets; and all Angels, Prophets, Apostles, Pastors, Teachers, are his
Servants, and subject unto him as a Prophet: and his Doctrine must be heard,
believed, obeyed; and he that will not submit unto it, must be cut off, and
everlastingly accursed.

Because Man is guilty, Nazareth, is made so by God, and now confirmed by Oath,
to minister in the Heavenly Tabernacle, there to appear before God for us.
Therefore, he is more excellent, and above all other Priests, even Aaron; nay,
above Melchizedeck, one of the greatest Priests on Earth; and also, above the
Highest Priests of Angels, if there be any Priesthood amongst them. Besides,
because he must have Subjects of all Nations, in times successively, unto the
end of the World; and He, and His, shall have many Enemies, both Men and
Devils, and of great power and policy: therefore, he must be a King, invested
with Universal, and Eternal Power, to make Laws and Officers, to judge, and to
execute Judgment, in rendering eternal rewards and punishments, according to the
Works of such as shall be judged, that so he may subdue all Enemies, even Death
it self, protect his people, and give Eternal Peace and Felicity, to such as
shall unfeignedly submit unto his Power, and continue loyal and obedient
Subjects to the end. As God has decreed before the World, upon the foresight
of man's sin, that the World should be made flesh: so he likewise decreed, that
he should be invested with this threefold power, and to confer it upon him, as
Flesh united to the Word. Upon the Fall of Adam, this Office was promised: in
his Conception and Birth, he was designed unto it: in his Baptism, he was
declared to be the Son of God: Upon his manifestation, after his Baptism, he
began to act in this Threefold Office: Upon his Resurrection, he was
constituted a complete Priest, Prophet King, and all power in Heaven and Earth
given Him: Upon his Ascension, he was solemnly invested, and confirmed in the
place, and began at the right hand of God to exercise his Power more gloriously.

CHAP. II.
Concerning the Humiliation of Jesus Christ, whereby this New Power was
acquired: And a brief Historical Narration of His Sufferings.
THis New Power, as you heard before, was acquired by the Word made flesh;

It was acquired by the Humiliation of the Son of God.

This Humiliation of Jesus Christ is that whereby He, in the form of a Servant,
was obedient unto Death, the Death of the Cross.

In this Humiliation we have two degrees.

1. He took upon him the form of a Servant. 2. In that form he suffered the
Death of the Cross.
1. He was a Servant: For being in the form of God, he thought it not Robbery
or Sacrilege to be equal with God: yet he made himself of no reputation, and
took upon him the form of a Servant, and was made in the likeness of men, Phil.
2. 6, 7. This state and condition of a Servant taken upon Him, was the first
part of his Humiliation. But here it is to be noted,

1. That He was not a Slave taken in War nor sold, nor born of Servile Parents
or Parent.

2. As He was the Word, and equal with God, He could not be a Servant, but as
He was flesh, and made Man, For as Man, He was a reasonable Creature, and so
subject to God, and bound to Obedience.

3. Yet to be Man was not all: For He was a Servant, in respect of the mean
condition of His Humane Nature: For He was born of a Mother, though of Royal
Extraction from the house of King David, at a great distance, yet poor and
mean, as appears in that she was espoused and married to Joseph, a Carpenter,
and so a Mechanic, and of the lowest Rank of Subjects, and also by his poor
Birth in a Stable.

4. He, as Man, for the time, laid aside, or did not assume the Robes of Glory,
the State and Dignity which did agree unto Him, as He was the Son of God;
neither did He take upon Him any Civil Command, or Jurisdiction, much less that
Universal and Supreme Power, wherewith He was invested afterward.

5. He was born, not only a Man, but a Jew, under the Bondage and Servitude of
the Law, as was manifest by His Circumcision, and Presentation in the Temple.

6. He subjected himself unto the Ecclesiastical Power of His own Nation, and
the Civil Power of the Romans, so far as to be tried and condemned by both,
though He was innocent; and was willing to be obedient, not only in doing the
good commanded, but to suffer the evil, even Death, the death of Servants, nay
of Slaves, nay of Dogs, which He no way deserved. So that He wholly denied
Himself, renounced his own Will, even in things lawful, and was a Servant to
his Father in one of the hardest, and lowest services that ever was, the
service of Sin excepted. This was a way, which the unsearchable depth of
Eternal Wisdom contrived, to acquire a new transcendent Power.

It Is true, that alter He appeared in public, He took upon him some power,
and acted accordingly. He began to preach the Gospel with power and majesty,
not only in private, but public: He gathered Disciples, and made Apostles,
and other Officers, instituted Sacraments, and gave Laws and Commissions, and
signified that He was the Son of God, and should one day come in the Clouds of
Heaven; yet still He was a Servant.

The second degree of his Humiliation was, Jews, and the Civil Laws of the
Romans, so far as they were just. He many ways manifested himself to be the
Word made flesh, and the only Begotten Son of God, and that not only by his
eminent Virtues but by his Heavenly Doctrine, and glorious Works. So that never
any gave better Example, taught better Doctrine or did greater Works so
beneficial to Mankind, and to destructive to Sathan's power. Yet he manifested
himself in this manner, only amongst his own people, seeking earnestly not
only their Temporal Peace, but their Eternal Salvation. And all this may be
called his Active Obedience; which, though so excellent and perfect yet could
not free him from obedience in sufferings, which were many; and ended in the
death of the Cross. The History hereof I will

1. Deliver briefly out of the Evangelists; And, 2. Discourse of the same more
at large, out of these and other places of Scripture.
Though he suffered by the Determinate Counsel, and sore-knowledge of God, and
God had showed before by the mouth of all his Prophets, that he should suffer;
yet the Counsel of God, and Predictions of the Prophets, were fulfilled in the
manner following:

1. By his Sufferings before Judgment. 2. By his Sufferings in Judgment.
1. Before Judgment, He by his Example, Doctrine, Works, gathered many
Disciples, and the people followed him in great multitudes. This was a
provocation to the ambitious Rulers of the Jews, many of whom were Pharisees, a
Sect, in those times, in great account and admiration with the people, for
eminent Piety and Learning, wherein they seemed to excel. And this did grieve
them much, that He did neither comply with them, nor their Designs, nor receive
any Commission from them but did reprove their Hypocrisy, and took off their
Vizard of Sanctity, and open before the people their Ambition, Covetousness,
Cruelty, Oppression, and other enormous Sins; confuted their false Doctrine,
and denounced most fearful Woes against them. His eminency and respect with the
People, with the multitude of Disciples in all places, especially at Jerusalem
were matter of Envy; and the rest, intended for Reformation, ended in their
malice, and his suffering. Out of this envy and malice, they traduce him
amongst the People, Censure and condemn him amongst themselves, and design his
death most unjustly, though under pretense of Justice, and the Public good.
Sometimes they are ready to stone him: Otherwhiles they tempt him by Questions
cunningly devised, to entangle him in his Answers: so that they might have some
ground to accuse him before the Governor. Sometimes they lie in wait for him,
and otherwhiles seek to take him by violence: yet none of these take effect,
till his hour was come. And he suffered all these things with patience, and a
constant mind. Those were but the beginning of sorrows: The night wherein he
ate his last Supper with his Disciples, instituted the Sacrament of the
Eucharist, for the perpetual remembrance of this Death, and came to Gethseman,
then they began to be more bitter: For after he had washed his Disciples seet,
foretold that one of them should betray him, Peter deny him, and all forsake
him, made his farewell Sermon so full of Heavenly Comfort, and concluded it
with a most excellent Prayer; he entered the Garden, and the fatal place. There
his Soul began to be troubled, and was heavy unto death; and so that bitter
agony, above all other most grievous, began: wherein, He thus had the greatest
power and patience to suffer more then Man or Angel was able to endure, seemed
to stoop, and He fell grovelling and pro^rate upon the ground, as though He had
been a Worm, and no Man, and prays earnestly, with strong cries and tears, unto
his Heavenly Father, three times, that this Cup of his Passion might pass from
Him: yet He limited his vehement desire, and resigned himself wholly to his
Hevenly Father's Will, and was resolved to drink the very dregs of it, if his
Fathers Will was so. So unwilling was He to disobey His Heavenly Father's
Commandment, and so willing to save sinful Man, though it cost him dear. And
such impression, this Conflict of His Soul made upon his Body, that He did
sweat, and His sweat was as it were great drops of blood falling upon the
ground. In this saddest condition, none of his Disciples, no not the three
nearest unto Him, though earnestly desired, could watch and pray with Him one
hour. Even Peter, who so resolutely promised to dye with Him, failed to be any
comfort to his Master, in this exigency. So that He had not any comfort from
any Creature, or from any Man, or from any of His Disciples, or Apostles, or
nearest and most intimate Friends, till an Angel from Heaven was sent by His
Father, to comfort, strengthen, and encourage Him. What was the particular
distinct case of this trouble, is doubted by many, and many have fancied many
things: yet this is certain, that He had a lively apprehension and sense of
this Bitter Cup, which He did so much deprecate, and did clearly foresee,

1. That God would smite him, would him, and put him to death, by laying upon
him the iniquities of us all.

2. That all kind of miseries would rush upon him, as it were in one violent
stream, to over-whelm him.

3. That all sorts of people would conspire against Him, and that with greatest
and most cruel malice to torment and confound ^im.

4. That the Prince of Darkness, with all his Damned Power, would be let loose,
and permitted with greatest violence to assault Him: for it was the hour of the
power of Darkness.

That in all this, his Father, for a time, would withdraw his sweetest
comforts, and suffer his Enemies to prevail, and put him to a shameful death.
And that which He most feared was, left by impatience, or distrust, or some
other way, He should offend His Heavenly Father, and so have made void the
great Design of Redemption, and given the Devil the Victory. For Satan's chief
intention was, not to torment his body, and put him to a Temporal Death, but to
tempt him to sin, and herein he was disappointed: For Christ, in the days of
his flesh, when He had offered up Prayers and Supplications, with strong crying
and tears unto Him, who is able to save Him, was heard; that is, delivered from
what He feared, though not from the Death of the Cross.

These were His Sufferings before judgment. 1. The Preparatives, or
Forerunners. 2. The Trial. 3. The Execution.


The Preparatives for Trial were, the betraying of Him: His Attachment, the
bringing of Him bound to the Place of Trial. For He was most unworthily
betrayed by one of His own Disciples, yea one of His Apostles, who being
covetous became treacherous, and receiving the Devil into his Heart, when no
admonition would divert Him from His cursed Enterprise, contracted with the
Highpriests, and Rulers, for 30 pieces of silver, to betray His Master, who
was better then the whole world: and according to the Damned Contract, unto his
own Eternal Woe, he directs a Company armed to the place where Christ was; and,
lest He should escape, or not be taken, he betrays Him by a Kiss, a sign of
love in it self; but, in this business, an effect, and act of horrid treachery.
After He was betrayed, and so discovered, they apprehend, and attach him in a
disgraceful way. For though He never hid, or concealed Himself, but taught
openly, and often; and, but the day before, in the greatest and chiefest City,
and in the Temple, the most public place, and so was ready at any time to
appear before the Rulers to clear his own innocence; yet, as though he had been
a Malefactor, a Thief, a Murderer, conscious of his Crime, who hid himself,
declined Judgment, and sought to escape, so they deal with him. Thus he was
presumed to be guilty of some capital crime, and therefore not fairly summoned,
and dealt withal as a free subject. This Christ told them of, and charged them
with it. After He is apprehended, they bind him as a prisoner to secure him,
and lead him to the place of Trial. A very great Trial it was, wherein God did
condemn and punish: Mankind in his own Son; and though He proceeded justly, yet
the judgment of man, in this particular, was abominably unjust. His Trial is
twofold, before 1. The Ecclesiastical, 2. The Civil Judge.


The Ecclesiastical Court had Cognizance of false Doctrine, Blasphemy, and such
like Crimes, and accordingly proceed in the examination of the party, and the
Witnesses, and with that care and diligence, as though they feared lest they
should not find sufficient Evidence against Him, and such as might satisfy the
Procurator Pontius Pilate. When they failed of all sufficient proofs, the
High Priest took a new and uncouth way to convince him from his own words, and
so adjures him to tell them plainly, or expressly, Whether He were the Son of
God. To this, He answers directly, that He was the Son of God, and the day
would come, when they should see him sitting on the right hand of power, and
coming in the Clouds of Heaven. This answer they expected, and from his own
words condemn the Judge of Heaven and Earth to be guilty of Blasphemy. After
his most unjust condemnation, He, as one out of all Protection, and unworthy of
any benefit of Law, is exposed to the abuses of the vilest Wretches, who did
hood wink him, mock him, spit upon him, blaspheme him, who was now already
betrayed by Judas, presently denied by Peter, and forsaken of all his
Disciples. These miseries, this ingratitude, these indignities, the glorious
Son of God, and Lord of Angels, did endure.

This Trial in the Ecclesiastical Court, Highpriests still were afraid of the
People, lest they should rise against them, if they should proceed to public
and open execution; or it might be, because the Romans denied them
Jurisdiction in Capital Causes. This seems to be implied in their words to the
Procurator, It Is not lawful for us to put any man to death, Joh. 18. 31. He is
brought before Pilate, and sent by Pilate to Herod. Herod finds in him no cause
of death; neither does Pilate: and therefore, out of Justice, and Natural
Conscience, and other Reasons, justifies him as unworthy of death several
times, and several times seeks to release him. And as he was unwilling to
condemn him, because there was no cause, and for that He knew the Rulers out of
Envy had delivered Him into His hands; so He was afraid to do it, is admonished
by His Wife, and that in some sort from Heaven to have nothing to do with that
righteous man; but especially when He heard He was the Son of God. Yet they
accuse Him vehemently of heinous crimes, as Sedition, and High Treason against
Caesar, and importune him to do justice; and seeing him unwilling to pass
judgment against Him, and willing, and very earnest to release Him, they
persuade the people to desire Barabbas, a cruel Murtheret, to be delivered to
them, according to the Custom; and to cry, without ceasing, Crucify, crucify
Jesus; and that which was of greatest force, they tell Pilate plainly, that if
He released Him, He was not Caesar's friend; and, in these words, imply, that
they would accuse Him, if he let Him go. So in the end, the cries of the
tumultuous Rabble, the fear of a Tumult, and much more of his Masters
displeasure, prevail with him to condemn him to death, against all Justice, all
Admonitions, and his own Conscience, though he had former^y scourged him. So
vile a thing it is in any (Judge especially) to fear Man, more than God, and
Temporal more than Eternal punishments. Thus Barabbas is released, the guilt of
Christ's blood charged upon the Jews; who take it upon them, and their
children, to their condemnation, and confusion; And Christ is delivered to the
Soldiers.

1. To be abused. 2. To be executed.
As He was accused, and so condemned for this cause alleged, that He said He
was the King of the Jews; so they accordingly abuse Him. They divest Him of His
outward garments, crown Him with thorns, array Him with a purple garment, as
signs of Royal Dignity, put a Reed, for a Scepter, into his hands, bow before
him, and salute him, as King of the Jews; and withal, smite Him on the Head,
to make the Thorny-Crown pierce into His Temples. And after they had made
themselves sport, with His miseries, and satiated themselves, they take off
those Ornaments of derision, and lead him to the place of Execution: which
followed immediately upon this unjust Judgment, and so many indignities offered
him. He is led out of the City, as a profane, unhallowed person, unworthy to
abide in that holy place and he must carry his cross; which yet Simon of Cyrene
was afterward compelled to do. Being brought to the place of execution, he is
divested of his garments, which are divided amongst the Soldiers, who cast
lots upon his seamless coat; which done, He is nailed to the Cross, and suffers
cruel torment. Instead of ease and comfort, they give him gall to eat, and
vinegar to drink, they mock him, give him vile and cutting words. In midst of
this condition, He is deserted for a time, the sweetest comforts of Heaven
restrained from Him, the Devils of Hell permitted to exercise their malice,
cruelty, and power upon Him. And that we might understand his sufferings to be
far greater then we can imagine, He cries out My God my God, why have thou
forsaken me? and complains of such miseries as never any suffered. Job's
afflictions were many and grievous, and came nearest unto these of Christ, yet
were far short. He suffered thus upon the Cross, from the 6th, unto the 9th
hour of the day, and then died, and commended his Soul into the hands of his
Heavenly Father. Thus the Consecration of the great High Priest was finished,
the things foretold concerning his Suffering fulfilled, and his bitter
suffering had an end.

That day, his body being dead, pierced by a Soldier, though no bone of this
true Paschal Lamb was broken, sent forth water and blood: and being taken down
from the Cross, yielded by consent of the Governor, into the hands of Joseph
of Arimathea, was by him, and Nicodemus decently and honorably interred in a
new Sepulcher, where never any man was buried, continued separate from His
Soul, as His Soul from it, unto the third day, and saw no corruption.

And this was the deep Humiliation of the Son of God, whereby this universal
and eternal Power was acquired.

CHAP. III.
A more large Discourse of Christ's Obedience unto the Death of the Cross.
I Will not here take up time in showing both how many, 1. Consider this
Humiliation of Christ, as it was an Obedience unto Death, and a Sacrifice of
Him, as a Priest. 2. I will declare the Effects thereof. 3. I will endeavor to
show how far the benefit of this Humiliation was communicable, or derivable
unto sinful Man; And 4. The Attributes God manifested in this Humiliation.


Many with great Eloquence and Art have methodically set forth the Passions of
our Savior; and their intention was, to affect the Hearts of their Auditors,
and stir up to sorrow and other passions: Yet these four things are matter of
greatest moment give a clearer light to understand the great mystery of
Redemption, and are effectual to melt our hearts with godly inccour for our
sins, to make us sensible of God's wonderful love, to revive our hearts with
heavenly comfort, and to mortify our corruptions.

1. Therefore, this Humiliation was an Act of Obedience unto God his Heavenly
Father, who out of his unspeakable love gave him this command to be servant for
a while and suffer death for sinful man's salvation. This was an Act of
transcendent power, to give such a Law; and Christ willingly out of pity unto
his Brethren, submitted to this power, and was willing to be bound by this Law,
and become a servant and was obedient unto this Death. Therefore it is written,
Lo I come to do thy will; that is, this great Command of suffering death, not
for himself, but for others, being guilty, and bound in their own persons to
suffer: which was an act of greatest love that possibly can be expressed. In
that it was an act of obedience it signifies his willingness and does teach us
that he suffered freely: For all obedience is free and willing or else no
obedience. That it was willing and free is many ways evident: For no man (says
he) takes my life from me, but I laid it down of my self Joh. 10. 18. No man
took it from him because no one could do it, if he had not bin willing to have
parted with it. His Prayer, wherein he so earnestly three several times
deprecated the Cup of his Passion, makes it clear by that clause, wherein he
corrected his natural desire, Thy will, not mine be done. It was often
attempted, both by fraud and force, to take away his life, but it could not be
done before that hour-wherein he was willing to lay it down himself. He offered
himself unto the Band of Soldiers, which came to apprehend him, and said unto
them, Whom seek ye? They said, Jesus of Nazareth; He answers, I am he: and
resently, at that word, they went backward and fell down to the ground.
Besides, he could have called for 12 Legions of Angels, to defend, or rescue
him, and yet he would not do it. To be a servant, and suffer the death of the
Cross, was an act of greatest humility: For, the Son of God, the Word made
flesh, Humane Nature united so nearly to the Deity, to deny himself so far, as
to be below the Angels, below so many men, to be a Servant in the meanest rank
of men, subject to the Law, to Civil, and Ecclesiastical Power; and, though
Lord of Angels, yet to abase himself so low, as to suffer such reproach, and
all kind of indignities, from the basest sort of Abjects, and Refuse of the
people, and as it were to be trampled upon, as though he were a Worm, and the
ba^e^^ and most guilty Wretch in the World, though he was most innocent, was
humility indeed, and a stupendous humiliation.

This Act of Obedience, was performed with greatest patience and charity that
ever any was: For he opened not his mouth, was dumb as the sheep before the
Shearer: When he was reviled, he reviled not again. They curse him, blaspheme
him, deride him, and many ways abuse him, yet he is quiet, and his Soul so
calm, as though he suffered nothing, though he suffered more than ever any did.
And this was his Charity, that he humbled himself, and suffered all this for
unworthy, ungodly sinners, and enemies, even for the Eternal Salvation of those
who did afflict and crucify him, praying to his Father to forgive them, for
they knew not what they did.

In that,

1. By this we may understand, that his sufferings were very great, not only
in respect of the multitude of them, the quality of the persons from whom, the
parts wherein he suffered, and the nature of his sufferings: But from this,
that he died the death of the Cross. And this Death was, 1. Violent, not
Natural. 2. Cruel, and full of Pain. 3. Ignominious and most Reproachful. 4.
Most accursed. 5. Joined with far greater Torments, and trouble of the Soul,
then we can conceive.


2. Seeing Death is the wages of Sin, it must be for Sin; and seeing he had no
sin of his own, it must be for the sins of others. And because where there is
no Law, there is no sin, therefore must there be some Law transgressed, whereby
He became liable to this punishment of death. The Law, of it self, made none
liable to death, but the parties violating it, which Christ never did;
therefore, there must be a Lawgiver, and a Judge above the Law, who had power
to transfer the punishment, from the guilty, upon One innocent, who was willing
to take it upon him. The Lawgiver was God, and He was the Judge, and gave a
Command to Jesus Christ, to suffer this death due to sinful man, and he
willingly submitted, and became Surety or Hostage for man. And by virtue of
this Command, and Christ's Voluntary Submission, the Law transgressed had power
over him, and he became liable to this death: And so he who knew no sin, became
sin for us, that we might be the righteousness of God in Him, 2 Cor. 5. ult. So
that in this suffering of death, though the Devil, and the Jews, with Pontius
Pilate, were active in crucifying Christ, We must consider, God, as Supreme
Judge, did pass the Sentence, and execute the same. Christ is the Head of, and
Hostage for Mankind, and a general person suffering for many, that the benefit
might redound to many. In this respect, that Christ suffered for the sin of
others, we may conclude, that his suffering was a punishment in proper sense;
and, that God, in threatening death to Adam, and Mankind, sinning, reserved a
power and liberty to himself to punish the party sinning, or some other for
him. Yet because the thing, in the obligation, was the punishment of the guilty
offending, and not the Innocent; it must needs be an Act of Grace in God, by
his Command, to substitute another, and also to accept his Suffering, as an
Expiation of their sins. It was Justice in Him, that He would punish Sin; but
free Mercy to punish it in Christ, and be satisfied with that death of another
person. But of these particulars more hereafter, when I shall declare how, and
how far the benefit of this Redemption, may be derived to others.

This Death was Death, and Death of the Cross, to signify the justice and
severity of God, and the desert of sin, which is shame, pain, a Curse. For this
death was shameful* painful, accursed. Therefore, it is said, that Christ
endured the Cross, and despised the shame, Heb. 12. 2. and that he became a
Curse for us, God. 3. 13. Therefore, the bitter passion of our Savior, may
persuade us all for ever to ^ear, and hate that sin, which so much offended the
just God, that He punished it so severely in our Savior. For he never suffered
death, neither did he lay upon him the iniquities of us all, to this end, that
we might have liberty to sin, but that we should repent with godly sorrow, and
ever mortify corruption, and the very root of sin in us. The death of Christ
should be the death of sin in us; and the remembrance of his sufferings should
break our hearts, humble us, and separate us from sin. -- That Christ should
die, and we should live, and his death should be our life, was often signified
by the ancient Sacrifices, wherein the blood and death of the thing sacrificed,
was a kind of expiation of the sin of man. Man sins, and Beasts suffer, to
signify, that there must be a far better Sacrifice to purge away the sin of
Man, and purify his Conscience. Therefore Order requires, that we consider the
death of the Cross, so willingly suffered as a Sacrifice: And, if it was a
Sacrifice, as no doubt it was, we must observe 1. The Priest. 2. The thing
offered. 3. The Party in whom it was offered. 4. The Parties to be sanctified
by this Offering.


The Priest is CHRIST.

The Sacrifice, HIMSELF.

The Party to whom it was offered, GOD.

The Parties to be sanctified, SINFVL MEN, for whom He suffered.

That Christ was a Priest, the Apostle proves, Heb. 5. 6. For there he first
describes a Priest to be a Mediator between God and Man, in matters of
Religion: and in his Offerings and Prayers, represents the People: In blessing
of the People, He represents God: though of this He says nothing in that
Chapter; yet in the 7th, in Melchizedeck blessing and tithing Abraham, he
implies, that in both these Acts, a Priest represents God. And because a
Priesthood is an Office, and a Priest and Officer in Religion, and things
pertaining to God, he informs us, that, very one cannot be a Priest, but one
taken from amongst men, and ordained for men. And as an Officer is made by the
Will and Commission of the Supreme Power, and must not presume upon, and usurp
the Office; therefore Christ did not glorify himself, but was chosen, called
ordained a Priest, and that immediately by God. And his Commission he finds in
Psalm. 2. 7. and 110. 4. And his Priesthood was powerful, most excellent,
personal, immutable, made so by Oath, and Eternal, and he himself holy without
sin. He must minister in the Heavenly Tabernacle, and his Ministry must be
Spiritual, and himself the Mediator of the New Testament, to procure and
dispose of the Spiritual and Eternal Blessings promised in the same. Amongst
many other Services to be performed by a Priest, one, and a principal, was
Sacrifice; and in the Levitical Service, that of Expiation, yearly offered on
the 10th day of the 7th Month was most eminent: and this the Apostle singles
out as the most excellent Sacrifice to typifie the death of Christ, as far more
excellent then that Sacrifice of the Levitical High Priest, Chap. 9. Therefore,
the death of Christ was a Sacrifice Ilastical, and Propitiatory. His
willing-suffering of death was the Offering: the Thing offered, was Himself:
For he offered himself without spot. The Party to whom he offered himself was
God, considered

1. As Lawgiver offended.

2. As Judge, who had power to refuse or accept the Offering; and upon the same
accepted, to pardon sin, and give Eternal Life. The Parties to be sanctified by
this Offering, were sinful, and guilty Persons, acknowledging Christ alone to
be the Priest, and this Death the full and only expiation of sin, and resting
in the same alone. So that this Sacrifice so was offered unto God, and this
Offering was an Act of Christ, as a Priest; and, in particular, it was an Act
of Obedience to that great and transcendent Command of His Heavenly Father,
that He should suffer death for the sin of Man; and the intention of it was to
take away, and expiate the sin of Man: and, in this respect, it is said, that by
His own blood He entered in once into the Holy Place, and obtained Eternal
Redemption, or Remission.

Christ entered two several times into Heaven.

1. Immediately upon His Death, when His Soul separated from His Body, was
received into Paradise.

2. When He was risen, He ascended both Soul and Body, as immortal into the
Heaven of Heavens, where He does, and shall continue until the time of the
Restitution of all things. The first entrance seems to be that which obtained
Eternal Redemption. For as the High Priest, presently upon the slaying of the
Sacrifice, takes the blood, and enters into the Holy Place, and appears before
the M^rcy-Seat; and when that was done, the expiation of the sins of the People
was finished: So Christ being slain, and dying upon the Cross, His Soul enters
the Holy Place of Heaven as separated from the Body, and so presented himself
before the Throne of the Eternal Judge, as having suffered death, as God
commanded, humbly demands that which God had promised, and so speeds. For He
obtained Eternal Redemption. And lest this Death of Christ should seem to be an
ordinary thing, The Sun was darkened, the Earth did tremble, the Rocks were
torn asunder, the Veil of the Temple was rent from the top to the bottom; and
all this to signify, that the Great High Priest was entered by His Death and
blood into the Holy Place of Heaven, and had obtained Eternal Remission; the
great Encounter between the Son of God, and the Prince of Darkness was past,
and Christ obtained the Victory, and the sin of Man was now punished in the
Surety and Hostage of Mankind; and the greatest Execution in the World was
ended, and by the same an entrance was made into the place of Glory.

After that it has been made evident, Suffering of Christ was an Act of
Obedi^nce unto the Death of the Cross, and a Sacri^ice; ^he next thing, in the
second place, to be inquired, is, what the effects of this Sacrifice were. And
they are of two sorts: 1. Immediate. 2. Mediate.


Immediate are reduced to two: The First is called satisfaction. The Second,
Merit.

And both these, in respect of man, are called Propitiation: yet the immediate
effect, in respect of Christ, is Merit, and only Merit. In respect of man,
it is written That God set forth Christ the Propitiation for our sins, by Faith,
through His Blood, Romans 3. 25. And He is the Propitiation for our sins, and the
sins of the whole World, 1 John 2. 2. And that God did manifest His love, in
sending His Son to be the Propitiation for our sins, 1 John 4. 10. To be a
Propitiation, is to make God offended, propitious unto guilty Man. This
Propitiation, therefore, in respect of sin, which is also called Redemption,
may be truly said to be Satisfaction, made to the Supreme Judge offended, so as
to free the party guilty from the obligation unto punishment. Neither need we
scruple the word, Satisfaction. as not found in Scripture: for it is expressly
used by our Translators, Numb. 35. 31. Moreover, ye shall take no satisfaction
for the life of a Murderer, that is guilty of death etc. The word in the
Original, is, (...) turned by the Septuag^^, (...): Whence (...), used in the
New Testament, and translated Redemption, Ransom, etc. And it signifies a gift
or price, or something offered to him that has power of life and death, and
accepted as a sufficient satisfaction: it frees the party liable to death,
because an Enemy, or guilty of some capital Crime, from Death, and that
Obligation unto Death. The word, Lutron, comes from (...), because it does
(...), free from death. That which made sinful man liable to death, was the
Will of the Lawgiver, expressed in the Law, and binding man to Obedience, or
Death. Man disobeying justly deserves Death, and God the Supreme Judge might
justly condemn him, and nothing could free man from the Obligation, but Pardon,
Pardon might be granted two ways; either, ex nuda voluntate, absolutely and
freely out of meet mercy without any consideration of, or respect unto, His Law
and Justice; or, a Satisfactione, upon consideration of something done,
suffered, offered for satisfaction, unto Divine Justice violated. And this
satisfaction might be made, either by the Party offending, or some other, taken
as a Surety or Hostage, whose life is engaged for the life of another. In this
particular case pardon is granted, not without consideration: For that could
not stand with the honor of the Law and Divine Justice, but upon satisfaction
to be made. This satisfaction could not be made by the Parties offending, who
were guilty and unworthy: Therefore it was made by another, Christ Jesus, the
Word, made flesh, who became an Hostage for sinful Man, and engaged His life.
And as He had engaged His Life, so He gave Himself a Ransom for ALL, 1 Timothy 2.
6. And here, many things are observable:

1. That Christ being the Word, made Flesh, and Innocent, was fit, and only He
was fit, to be a Hostage: 1. As Flesh. 2. As Flesh united to the Word. 3. As
Innocent. 4. As freely, upon God's Command and Commission, offering Himself.


2. That God, in strict Justice, might have refused the Hostage, and the
Ransom and Satisfaction offered and made, because neither the one, nor the
other, were in the Obligation of the Law.

3. Yet He, in free mercy, accepted both, in behalf of, and for sinful Man.

4. The proper effect, in respect of God, which followed upon the Ransom, or
Lutron given and accepted, was, that God was propitious, and willing to pardon
and save.

5. Yet Divine Wisdom, in respect unto His Justice and Holiness, determined
the terms, upon which Pardon should be actually given; and expressed the
terms, in the Promise, which was grounded upon the Death of Christ accepted.

6. For God to be propitious, was to be willing to turn away His Wrath, and
forbear to punish, and also to be favorable unto Man. In respect of the
former, Christ's Death is called Satisfaction; of the latter, Merit: yet both
are really the same, and was a changing of Justice into Mercy, which took away,
or rather immediately made the Punishment of Pain and Loss removable: And
Christ's Death accepted, may be said only to merit: Yet because this Merit was
upon a Wrong done, and presupposed it is called Satisfaction.

Seeing the immediate Effect of this Sacrifice is Merit, Merit, in respect of
sinful Man, is a Propitiation active, or a Propitiating God offended; and, in
respect of Christ, merit of Reward: Therefore, let us consider, 1. What Christ
merited for Man. 2. What He merited for Himself.


Christ merited for Man.

1. The Abrogation of the Law of Works, and requiring perfect and perpetual
Obedience, as the only condition of Life.

2. The Promises of the NewCovenant, making Faith the only condition of Life.

3. Upon these that God should be placable, Sin pardonable, and Eternal Li^e
possible.

4. The power of the sanctifying Spirit, to enable man to keep the Conditions
annexed to the Promises, without which, all the rest had been vain. The mediate
Effects are such as Christ merited, to follow upon the performance of the
Condition, which are Conversion and Faith: And these, principally, are
Justification, Reconciliation, Adoption, Eternal Glory upon the Resurrection.
The Apostle, Heb. 9. beginning at the 11th verse. reckons up five Effects of the
Sacrifice and Death of Christ.

1. By it He obtained Eternal Redemption. The word is, (...), which signifies
Expiation, and Remission: For God, upon this Sacrifice, offered, presented, and
accepted, was willing to grant Eternal Pardon, without expectation of any other
Sacrifice to be offered, or other satisfaction to be made. The

2d. Is the purging of the Conscience from Dead Works, to serve the Living God,
ver. 14. The Conscience is the Immortal Soul: Dead Works are sins, compared to
dead Bodies, or unclean things, which did legally pollute, so that the persons
could not be admitted, with the rest of God's People, to worship God in the
Tabernacle, or Temple, till they were purified. To purge, is to justify, and
sanctify, and free from sin, that so we may be fit to serve our God; and
when our Purification and Consecration is finished, that we may serve the
Living God in the Temple of Heaven. The

3d Effect, is the Confirmation of the New Covenant, or Testament, as
Mediator, and Priest thereof. For as the Promises of Remission, and the
Eternal Inheritance formerly made to the Called, for, and in the consideration
of the Death and Sacrifice of Christ, had been void, and of none effect, if
Christ had never dyed: So upon this Death and Sacrifice, they were firmly
established, and of full force, to convey the Inheritance upon the Called; so
that if they obey the Heavenly Call, they may certainly expect, as they shall
certainly receive Remission, and the Eternal Inheritance, ver. 15, 16, 17. The

Fourth Effect is, His entrance into Heaven, to appear in the Presence of God,
for Us, ver. 24. For upon our Repentance, Faith, Prayers, upon Earth, He, as
our Advocate, and Intercessour, pleads before the Throne of God with His own
Blood, to obtain Remission and Acceptance for Us. This Intercession made by
Him, as an ever-living Priest, is made effectual for us, by virtue of this
Sacrifice, and the efficacy and success depends upon this Unspotted Blood.
Therefore is it written for our comfort, That if any man sin, we have an
Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous, who is the Propitiation
for our sins, 1 John 2. 1, 2. And His Plea is this; That though His Client has
sinned and deserved death, yet he ought not to suffer and dye, because He
Himself has suffered, God accepts His Death; the sinner confesses,
repents, and believes, and God his Father, and supreme Judge, at whose Bar
He pleads, has promised Pardon and Salvation upon those terms. The

Fifth and last Effect, is the Actual Collation, and enjoyment of Eternal Glory
For unto them, who look for Him, He will appear the second time without sin,
(that is, suffering for sin) unto Salvation. For the Actual Enjoyment of
Salvation, and Eternal Glory, is granted, as merited by this Death, ver. 28.
All these are summed up, in that one of the Eternal Consecration of the
Sanctified, Chap. 10. 14.

Seeing Christ merited many and glorious things for sinful man, Phil. 2. 9. And
God advanced Him far above all Principality, and Power, and Might, and
Dominion, and every Name that is named, not only in this World, but in that
which is to come: and has put all things under his feet, and gave Him to be
Head over all things to the Church, Ephesians. 1. 21, 22. By which, we may
understand, that He merited to Himself a Supreme and Universal Power in Heaven
and Earth: and not only power over all flesh, but over all Creatures, and even
over all Angels. And He was invested with this power immediately upon the
Resurrection: for then He was made universal Prophet Priest, and King; and upon
His Ascension, followed His Solemn Inauguration, and Coronation, as we may so
speak, when He was set at the right hand of God; and then His Eternal and
unchangeable Priesthood was confirmed unto Him by an Oath.

2. He merited Immortality, the Place and Throne of Glory, fullness of joy in
His Fathers presence and pleasures at His right hand for evermore. He attained
Immortality upon His Resurrection; the Place and Throne of Glory, fullness of
joy and Eternal Pleasures upon His A^cension.

3. He merited a Judgment to be passed upon the Devil, to lose his power over
Mankind, and the same to be transferred upon Himself; and a strength to rescue
him out of Sathan's possession a^ will and pleasure.

4. He merited a power, to send down the Holy Ghost to reveal the Gospel, and
in a special manner to head His Church, protect it, guide it, give it
everlasting peace; and, in respect of His highest Dignity, that not only Men,
but Angels shall worship and honor Him: and all such as refuse so to do, must
be dashed in pieces with His Iron-Scepter, and cast into Hell.

Christ's Sufferings being 1. An Obedience unto the Death of the Cross, 2.
Having many and glorious Effects, one and the same principal being the
Acquisition of a new Power over Mankind. The 3. Thing, in order, is, the manner
and measure of the communication of the benefit thereof unto others.


That the benefit of this Death and Sacrifice, is communicable to sinful Man,
is express Scripture: For as by the offense of One, Judgment came upon all men,
unto condemnation; even so by the Righteousness of One, the free gift came unto
all men, unto justification of life: And again, As by one man's disobedience,
many were made sinners; so by the obedience of One, shall many be made
righteous, Romans 5. 18, 19. And since by man, came death; by Man came also the
Resurrection of the Dead: for as in Adam all dye, so in Christ shall all be
made alive, 1 Cor. 15. 21, 22. From which places, it is clear, that as from
Adam, Sin and Death were derived upon all men; so Righteousness and Life are
derived upon Mankind by Christ.

But the Question will be, 1. How? 2. How far this Benefit is derived?


1. If we enquire of the manner, how Righteousness and Life is derived from
Christ being One, unto so many, we shall find that this cannot be, except
Christ be a general Head of Mankind, and one person with them, as Adam was. And
this He could not be, as He was the Word properly; but as the Word, made Flesh:
for if He will sanctify them, he must take Flesh and Blood with the
Sanctified, and so be Man. Yet He may be Man, and not a general Person, so as
to be one with them: and we do not read of any, but only two, who were general
Heads, and, in some respect, virtually all Mankind, the first and second Adam.
Such Christ, was not but by the Will of God, and His own voluntary Consent. The
Will of God appoints Him to be the Head of Mankind, and their Surety and
Hostage, and so accounted Him; and He did willingly submit, and took upon Him
the Person of others. And the principal cause of this Representation, whereby
He is one Person with us, is the Will of God, who, as Lord, made Him such; and,
as Lawgiver, and Judge, did so account Him. But

2. How far is He One Person with us? The Answer is.

1. In general; so far as it pleased God to make Him so, and no farther. 2. In
particular; He, and We, are One so far, 1. As to make Him liable to the Penalty
of the Law, which He suffered not for Himself, but for us. 2. So far as to free
us from that Obligation, and derive the benefit of His Death to Us. I may
instance in a Debtour, and his Surety, who are one person; and the Law so
accounts them, so far as 1. The Surety becomes liable to the Debt; And 2. If he
pay it, the Principal is freed from the Obligation. Yet the Surety is not the
Principal; nor if he pay the Debt with his own money, does the Principal pay it
with his.


So, though Christ be so far one with us, as to be liable to the Penalty of the
Law, and to suffer it, and upon this Suffering we are freed; yet Christ is not
the sinner nor the sinner Christ. Christ is the Word, made Flesh, innocent, and
without sin, an universal Priest* and King; but we are none of these. Though we
be accounted as one person in Law with him by a Trope; yet, in proper sense, it
cannot be said, that in Christ satisfying, we satisfied for our own sins: For
then we should have been the Word, made Flesh, able to plead innocence, with
perfect and perpetual obedience, have dyed upon the Cross, when He was
crucified; and by our own blood, entering into the Holy Place, to have obtained
Eternal Redemption.

But all these things are false, impossible, blasphemous, if affirmed by any.
It Is true, that we were so one with Him, that He satisfied for us, and the
benefits of this Satisfaction redounds to us, and is communicable to all, upon
certain terms, though not actually communicated to all.

From this Unity, and Identity, of Person in Law, if I may so speak, it follows
clearly, that Christ's Sufferings were not only Afflictions, but Punishments,
in proper sense. For it is not material, whether He suffer for His own sins,
which He could not, because He was innocent, or for the sins of others: For if
He suffered for sins, then His Sufferings were Punishments. For Poena is
Vind^cta noxae, sive propriae, sive alienae. That one may suffer for the sins
of others, and that justly, except we will accuse God of injustice, the
Scriptures make evident, by Doctrine, Threatenings, Examples. Eating the
Forbidden Fruit, was not the Personal Sin of any of Adam's Posterity, and yet
they all are punished for it: For by one Man sin entered into the World, and by
sin Death, and Death passed over all men, etc. Josuah, and the Princes of the
Congregation of Israel, swear unto the Gibeonites, not to put them to death:
Saul 450 years, and more, afterward slays them, and so violates that Oath. For
this sin of that King, Israel ^^^ers three years Famine: and this sin is not
expiated, nor the Judgment turned away, (...) 7. of Readiness Son, long after,
were given to the Gibeonites, and hanged up unto the Lord. Saul sins, Israel
suffers Famine, and 7 of Readiness Sons are slain; and this by the direction of
God, declaring the Perjury of Saul, to be the cause of Isreal's ^^sfering.

Achan commits Sacrilege: not only He, but his Sons and Daughters are stoned
to death for it. But I shall have occasion, hereafter, to say something more of
this Particular.

The Socinians, in opposing this truth, deny plain Scriptures, and charge God
with injustice, by consequence: and whilst they deny Christ's Sufferings to be
Punishments, lest they should make God unjust, they charge Him with injustice.
For if it be unjust to punish Christ, being innocent, for the sins of others,
for whom He voluntarily suffered, according to the Appointment and Command of
His Heavenly Father; much more unjust it must needs be, to afflict him, and
that so grievously, without any cause at all, or demerit of others. And whereas
they say, That though some may suffer for the sins of others, when they are
sinful themselves, and not otherwise, they do but trifle. For if one may justly
be punished for the sin of another, whereof he is not guilty, then an innocent
person may justly suffer for another, who is guilty. This was the case of
Israel, when David sinned. He, out of Pride, numbers the People: God is
offended herewith, and punishes for this sin, and that with death, 70000 of
his Subjects. The King sins, the People suffer, and they suffer death for the
Kings sin, whereof they were not guilty; as appears by those words of David's
Repentance. But these sheep, what have they done? 2 Samuel 24. 17. That is, I,
not they have sinned: They are innocent in this particular. By all this we may
understand how, and how far Christ's Sacrifice is communicable to us. How we
come to be actual Partakers of these Benefits, shall be showed hereafter.

Before I proceed, Extent of Christ's Death: Whether He died for all men, and
so Redemption be universal, as some use to speak; or no.

1. That Christ dyed for all, in some sense, must needs be granted; because the
Scripture expressly affirms it. For by the Righteousness of One, the free gift
came upon All Men, to justification of life, Romans 5. 18. And if One died for
all, then were all dead.

2. That only Believers actually enjoy the Benefit of this Death unto
Salvation, is as clear also.

3. Neither God's love, in giving Christ; nor Christ's love dying for Man, do
exclude any, as love.

4. The benefit of Salvation is communicable to all, upon certain terms
expressed in the Covenant, which yet limits the actual benefit of Remission,
and Eternal Li^e, by prescribing a qualification in the Parties, to be saved by
Christ's death.

5. The Qualification is such, that it excludes no man, as a man, or a sinful
man, but as impenitent, and not believing at least. So that it may truly be
said, that by Christ's Sacrifice, all men are save-able some way, though all
shall not be saved: And if any become not save-able, it is upon some demerit,
and special cause antecedent. The immediate Effects, called Satisfaction, and
Merit, both signified by the word Propitiation, make God propitious; and, in
that respect, man in a capacity of Salvation, or save-able, and do not
precisely exclude, or include any: But Justification, Reconciliation, Adoption,
Glorification, are so simi^ed by God's Promise, that they formally, and
immediately belong to none but Believers.

This Question is needless, if men would content themselves with the plain and
simple truth of the Scriptures, and rather, use all means to believe then
dispute. For if I once sinc^rely believe, I may be sure I have a right unto
those Benefits; If I believe not, I can have no comfort in this blessed, and
most meritorious Sacrifice.

There is another question, and the same unprofitably handled [Whether the
Propitiation which includes both satisfaction and merit be to be ascribed to
the active or passive obedience of Christ?] (as their distinction, and
expression proposes it).

For solution whereof its to be observed.

1. That both his active, personal, perfect, and perpetual obedience, which by
reason of his humane nature assumed, and subjection unto God was due; and also
that obedience unto the great and transcendent command of suffering the death
of the Cross, both concur as causes of Remission and justification.

2. The Scriptures usually ascribe it to the Blood, Death, and Sacrifice of
Christ, and never to the personal active obedience of Christ to the Moral law.

3. That yet this active obedience is necessary, because without it he could
not have offered that great sacrifice of himself without spot unto God: and if
it had not been without spot, it could not have been Propitiatory, and
effectual for expiation:

4. That if Christ as our surety had performed for us perfect and perpetual
obedience, so that we might have been judged to have perfectly and fully kept
the law by him, then no sin could have been chargeable upon us, and the death
of Christ had been needless, and superfluous.

5. Christ's propitiation frees the Believer, not only from the obligation unto
punishment of sense, but of loss; and procured for him not only deliverance
from evil deserved, but the enjoyment of all good necessary to our full
happiness. Therefore there is no ground of Scripture for that opinion. That
the death of Christ and his sufferings free us from punishment, and by his
active obedience, imputed to us, we are made righteous, and the heirs of life.

6. If Christ was bound to perform perfect and perpetual obedience for us, and
he also performed it for us; then we are freed not only from sin, but
obedience too: and this obedience as distinct and separate from obedience unto
death may be pleaded for justification of life, and will be suffi^ient to carry
the cause. For the tenor of the law was this: Do this and Live: And if man do
this by himself or surety, so as that the lawgiver and supreme Judge accept
it, the Law can require no more: It could not bind to perfect obedience, and to
punishment too. There never was any such law made by God or just men. Before I
conclude this particular concerning the extent of Christ's merit, and
propitiation, I thought good to inform the Reader, that as the Propitiation of
Christ makes no man absolutely, but upon certain terms pardonable, and savable;
so it was never made, either to prevent all sin, or all punishments. For it
presupposes man, both sinful and miserable. And we know that the guilt, and
punishment of Adams sin lies heavy upon all his posterity to this day. And not
only that but the guilt of actual, and personal sins lies wholly upon us,
whilst impenitent and unbelieving, and so out of Christ; and the regenerate
themselves are not fully freed from all punishments till the final
resurrection and judgment. So that his propitiation does not altogether
prevent, but remove sin, and punishment by degees. Many sins may be said to be
remissible by virtue of this sacrifice which never shall be remitted: In this
sense it may be understood, that some deny that Lord that bought them, 2 Pet.
^. 1. For Christ by his death acquired a right unto, and so a power over all
flesh; but so that he must give eternal life, only to such as his Father gave
him. For one immediate effect of Christ's death was to make God placable, and
sin pardoned: yet he never merited that any sin should be actually pardoned but
upon such terms, as his heavenly Father should prescribe. It may also in a
sense be said that Christ dyed only for the elect; That is, that only they
shall obtayn actual pardon. Yet they who thus affirm must give us out of the
Scriptures the true notion of Election, and of the Elect, and not seek to
obtrude upon us their own false Conceits. For the Elect, as the elect in
decree, are no subject capable of actual Remission, as such; for they are no
subject at all, because they have no actual existence; though they may be and
are an object or Logical subject of Gods decree. And after that they have
actual being* yet they are not immediately capable of actual pardon, before
they are called and actually believe. And whereas some affirm that Christ dyed
only for the Elect, in their sense it cannot be proved: Because they
presupposing an order in the decrees of God* take it for granted that the
decrees of Election and Reprobation are antecedent to the dec^ee of Redemption:
and ^o by these very decrees formally exclude the greatest part of mankind, and
include the rest: which cannot stand with the plain texts of Scripture, which
signify that we are predessinated to be conformed to the image of Christ: That
we are elected in Christ, and predestined to the Adoption of Children by
Jesus Christ unto himself.

The 4th, and last thing in this discourse of Christ's death, Corinthians, but
Christ Jesus and him crucified. And though this Doctrine of the Cross seemed
foolishness to men devoyd of the Spirit; yet, when he preached it, he spoke
Wisdom to them who were perfect, the Wisdom of God in a mystery, ev^n the
hid^en Wisdom, which God ordained, before the world was to our glory, 1 Cor.
2. 2. 6, 7. And, by the preaching of the Gospel, was made known to
Principalityes and powers in heavenly places, the manifold Wisdom of God,
Ephesians. 3. 10. And the Doctrine of the sufferings of Christ, and the glory that
should follow thereupon, was such and so excellent for Wisdom that the very
Angels desired to pry, or look in it, 1 Peter 1. 12. That Wisdom must needs be
wonderful which contrived such glorious things. For the seed of ^rayl Woman
deceived by the Devil, and now guilty before the tribunal of God must bruise,
and break the head and power of the Devil, and shake his Kingdom over mankind
in pieces. The Word and eternal Son of God must be made flesh, as though
mortality and eternity had been united together, Weakness must vanquish
strength; Mortality must be away to immortality; Death to eternal life; the
most cruel pains to full, and everlasting plea^ures; the mo^ bitter sorrows
to the sweetest joys; the lowest humility to the highest honor, and the
greatest shame to the most excellent glory. And which is strange, that the
Devil himself must use his utmost strength and policy to overthrow himself; And
his deepest Counsels must be the cause of his own ruin. These are the
wonderful ways of Gods unsearchable Wisdom, discovered in the humiliation of
the Son of God.

The Holiness, Romans 3. 25. And this propitiation must be made by the Word made
flesh.

Therefore he sends his son, his dearly beloved, his only begotten son, whom
he esteemed above all men and Angels: He smites him, wounds him, and lays on
him the iniquityes of us all. He must not only suffer, but suffer death, the
death of the Cross: and he must for a time be a servant, and lay aside (...)
his shining Robes of Glory, be content to want the joys and pleasures of
Heaven, and be deprived of God's sweetest comforts, be exposed to the malice of
the Devil, and his malicious enemies, ly under the pressure of most bitter
pains, sorrows, and anguish, and suffer, and that from basest wretches, the
bas^^ indignityes, that ever any suffered. And thus, though he were a son, must
he learn obedience by suffering: and, before all these things were endured, his
Soul separated from his Body, and his Body laid in the Grave, he must not rise
again to Glory. And he makes an unchangeable decree, that whosoever will not be
willing to deny himself, take up his Cross, be obedient, not only in doing
good, but also in suffering evil, even death, the most cruel, and tormenting
death, and that with patience for his sake, shall derive no benefit from his
Savior, who did not only expiate sin, and seal the Truth with his blood, but
also give us an example of most eminent humility, patience, meeknes, charity,
obedience, and all other heavenly virtues, that we might follow him if we will
be saved. And sinful man must know his sin, confess it, be sensible of it, hate
it, resolv against it, return unto his God, rely upon his Savior, who must
plead his cause with his own blood: and the sinner must be washed in that
blood, and sanctified by his Spirit, before he can be admitted to the Throne of
Grace, and have access unto, and acceptance with his God. And he must be
cleansed fully, and from all sin, before he can enter into Glory: and no man
must expect eternal life upon other Terms.

The Mercy,

He reveals him in the Gospel, offers him unto us, calls us, gives his
Spirit, and with patience and long-suffering waits for our Repentance,
abrogates the law of works, and promises eternal life, anew upon fairest
terms; constitutes him an High Priest in Heaven, and ever hears his
Intercession, which he ever lives to make for us. Nay upon this suffering of
Christ foreseen, and fore-accepted, he gives his Spirit who justifies, and
saves all Believers of the World, who lived before his Incarnation, and the
finishing the work of Redemption. When we cry to him, with penitent and
believing hearts, and come unto our Savior; our sins, though many and
gr^evous, are pardoned, and Christ has a charge given him to receive us, have
a care of us, protect us, guide us, raise us up at the last day, and give us
everlasting life: Angels must be ministering Spirits to guard us, and all
things must work together for our good. And this is strange: The Son of God
must be punished, that we might be spared; must be condemned, that we may be
justified; die, that we may live; be humbled very low, that we may be exalted
very high; endure most bitter pains, that we may enjoy eternal pleasures; and
be miserable, that we may be for ever happy* But what Tongue of Men or Angels
is able to express the exceeding greatness of his Love to us, which was the
greatest that ever God did manifest? Who is able to number, and reckon up the
particular mercyes, and benefits, which Christ did merit, and we receive by
him? This Mercy in Christ is to be remembered, not only on earth, but, to be
matter of eternal praise, and thanksgiving, in Heaven.

The subject of this discourse is the Acquisition of a new Power: Cor. 6. 19,
20. And Christ has given himself a Ransom for us, 1 Timothy. cap. 2 ver. 6.
And we are redeemed by his precious Blood, as of a Lamb without blemish, and
immaculate. 1 Pet. 1. 19. And as God acquired a new right unto us by
Redemption, so likewise by Regeneration, which is a new creation; so that our
spiritual being is wholly his; and he has acquired a new power to dispose of
us, and give us laws, and bind us to obedience and his service, upon another
account. For we are delivered out of the hands of our enemies to serve him,
without fear, in holiness, and righteousness, before him, all the days of
our life. This power being acquired, we must consider to whom it was acquired,
and to whom it was communicated. God acquired this power unto himself, and he
communicates it to Christ as man, so far as he is capable. That God did
acquire it, it is evident; for he sent Christ; he gave him; he transferred the
punishment of our sins upon him; he accepted his death, and sacrifice, as a
full propitiation; He regenerates, and renews us by his spirit, and gives us
our new being. And if althese be his works, then the Power, as also the Glory,
is his; and he has a new prop^iety inus. For the Word made flesh was his son:
The work of Redemption and Humiliation of this son was his work: Therefore we
are said to be purchased by his Blood, his own Blood, Act. 20. 28. We are said
to be his workmanship created anew in Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 2. 10. All that we
are in respect of our spiritual estate, we are wholly, wholly his: and al
things that we have, as New-creatures, are from him, who quickened us, raised us
up, set us in heavenly places in Christ Jesus.

Though it be said that Christ is our Lord, Romans 14. 8, 9. Yet God did all this
likewise, and put him to death, and raised him up again, and made him Lord and
King. This power therefore is Christ's, but so as that it is derived and
communicated unto him from his heavenly Father. For he gave him power, as he
himself confesses, over all flesh; he exalted him, and gave him a name above
all names: he by his mighty power raised him from the dead, and set him at his
own right hand in heavenly places, far above all principality, and power, and
might, and Dominion. And though he had all power in heaven* and earth; yet he
acknowledges it as given him. The son has an universal jurisdiction; yet all
judgment was committed unto him, Joh. 5. 22. so that he has it by commission.
From all this it is evident, that God acquired this power, and Christ acquired
it. God has it; Christ has it. God has it originally, and primitively;
Christ has it derivatively, as man, and by commission. God is the principal
cause of the work of Redemption, Christ, as man united to the Word, is the
ministerial agent. And as God by Christ did redeem and save man, so he gave
this power to Christ, and set him, not in the Throne, but, at the right hand of
the Throne of Glory, and by him, and his Spirit, does exercise this power, and
will exercise it to the worlds end: which Exercise shall be the subject of the
discourse following.

CHAP. IV.
Concerning the Exercise of the Power of God-Redeemer, and the Constitution of
His Kingdom.
AS God acquired this Power unto Himself; Deity, and was Lord of Angels, and
all Creatures. Whether before the Incarnation, Michael the Archangel, or any
other, did represent him, as having the primacy of dignity and power, is not so
evident: but that he had both Men and Angels, who both were types of him, and
did represent him^ is clear enough. In this respect, he is said many times to
have appeared to the Fathers, and that the Israelites tempted him in the
Wilderness, 1 Cor. 10. 9. Some think, that the Angel which appeared to Abraham,
Isaac. Jacob, who brought the Israelites out of Egypt, and conducted them in
the Wilderness, was at least a Type of Christ, whom they tempted not only as
the Word, but as represented and typified by some Angel.

This Power is exercised, Monarchical, yet rather Regal, then Despotical,
though his Power be absolute, and arbitrary, and as such he might exercise it.
The Subjects are, all Creatures in a large sense; but strictly, sinful Man, in
respect of his Spiritual Estate. And all men that have not subjected themselves
to him, as Redeemer, by Christ, are strangers at least, if not enemies. Those
are Subjects, and to be admitted as such, who renouncing the Devil, the World,
and the Flesh, submit themselves to him, as Lord; not only Creator, but
Redeemer; and, after that Christ was manifest in the flesh, such as should
acknowledge him to be the Son of God, and the Prince of Salvation: For being
consecrated, He became the Author or Prince of Salvation, to all that obey him.
The perpetual Enemy, with whom there must be Eternal feud, is the Devil, with
His Agents. Yet this Constitution will be better understood by the
Administration.

Yet, God as Redeemer. For we must not confound passive subjection, with this
voluntary submission. All Creatures, at all times, were subject, that is, under
the power of God, as Creator and Preserver; and, amongst the rest, the Devils
themselves, though Revolter, and Rebels, are not exempt from His Dominion: So
that its one thing to be actively, another to be passively subject unto God.
God-Redeemer has power, and is Lord of all; yet He acquired a special Right
unto, and Propriety in Man, and a peculiar power over him, in respect of His
Spiritual Estate: and therefore a special subjection is due from him unto His
Savior. And the Angels, and all things, were subjected unto Christ, upon His
Exaltation; yet this was not by reason of Redemption, as though He had bought
and redeemed them, but upon another account: For their Service and Mini^^ery
was very useful, in the administration of His Kingdom. Though in the
Constitution of this Kingdom, the proper Subjects are men; and God, as
Redeemer, by Christ, has a special right unto all and every of them: yet there
is not any one of them admitted as a Subject of this Kingdom, so as to receive
Protection of the Sovereign, the Privilege of God's people, and have an actual
right unto the Eternal Glory of the same, before his voluntary submission be
made. And if any submit, though not fully; and, after that, fall away, and
prove Apostates, they yet remain under His Dominion. The reason why this
submission is due unto Him as Redeemer by Christ, is, because man wholly
depends upon Him, for Spiritual Being and Happiness, ever since he lost
Righteousness and Life, by the Fall of Adam; and God required it, since He
promised, that the Seed of the Woman should bruise the Serpents Head: And
seeing God is not Redeemer, but by Christ, either promised, or exhibited,
therefore whosoever submits to God as Redeemer, must submit unto Christ; and
whosoever submits to Christ, submits to God, who sent Christ. This submission
pre-supposeth, and necessarily requires, a firm and Practical Belief of the
Redemption by Christ, and by none else: Which Belief was first implicit, and
after the Revelation of the Gospel more explicit, according as the Revelation
of this Mystery was less, or more clear and full. And for the more orderly
proceeding in this point. I will declare 1. The Nature of it. 2. The manner and
means how we are reduced: Where I shall take occasion to speak briefly of
Calling and Predestination. 3. What our condition is upon this Duty performed?


This Submission,

1. That by Subjection, we bind our selves to be His perpetual Servants and
Vassals.

2. By it we renounce all other Powers, Lords, Masters, Redeemers; and
especially the Devil, the World, and the Flesh, so as to account them our
E^emies.

3. That we resign our own Understanding, Will, and Power, to His Wisdom, Will,
and Power, in all matters of Eternal Salvation.

4. That seeing the Party submitting, is a guilty person, this cannot be
performed without an acknowledgment of his own sin, guilt, baseness, misery,
with godly sorrow, a detestation of sin, and a returning to obedience again.

5. That in this resignation, we renounce all confidence in our selves, and all
other things, so as wholly to rely upon his mercy, and Christ's merit; as
without which, we must perish everlastingly.

6. That upon a clear and distinct knowledge, and firm belief of the
excellency, sufficiency, and perfection of power, and readiness in Him to save
sinful Wretches, liable to Eternal Death, the Soul does rest in Him alone as a
complete Redeemer, and does love, esteem, and admire Him so, that it accounts
all things most vile and base, in comparison of Him; and is willing for His
sake, to lose the best and rarest contents the World can give, and suffer the
greatest evils, and miseries, the Devil or Man can inflict upon Him.

7. That it is the Root and Ground of all Obedience and Service. All these
things are plain, from the Doctrine and Example of Christ and His Apostles. For
Christ denied Himself, and took up His Cross, and informs us, that we must do
so too: That we must forsake Father and Mother for His sake; and whosoever
hates not Father and Mother, and dearest Relations of this Woold, for His
sake, is not worthy of Him: He is that Pearl, for which we must give all, or
else never purchase Him. And the Apostles forsook all, and followed Him, Math.
19. 27. Paul counted all things loss and dung, in comparison of Him. We have
the like Examples in Abraham, Moses, the Prophets, and all the Saints of old.
Whom have I in Heaven but thee? And there is none on Earth that I desire
besides thee. Psalm. 73. 25. was the confession of them all. In Christ Jesus we
have Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, Redemption; and all things, to make
sinful man fully, and for ever blessed.

This Submission, Thou shall have no Redeemer besides Me: And it is solemnly
testified in Baptism, Wherein we renounce the Devil, the World, and the Flesh,
and engage our selves to God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

This is our Allegiance and Fealty, whereby we give our selves wholly to our
God, who has redeemed and bought us, that He might give Himself to us, for to
make us Eternally Blessed. Though this Duty was always the first, and principal
which God required, yet it was more distinctly and clearly revealed and urged,
after the Exhibition and Glorification of Christ.

The first Lesson that Christ taught His Disciples and Apostles, was, That He
was the Son of the Living God; and their first and chief Duty was, To deny
themselves, take up their Cross, and depend upon Him for everlasting life. And
that His own people might believe this Truth, and perform this Duty, John the
Baptist was sent before Him; He was manifested to the World by His Doctrine and
Miracles. But after He was once set down at the Right Hand of God, and the
Gospel was preached, the first thing taught, was, that He was the Universal
Officer, by whom God would administer His Spiritual Kingdom, and dispose of
Eternal Life.

And the first Duty pressed upon Jew and Gentile, was to receive Him as their
only Priest, Prophet, King, and depend upon God, by Him, to be for ever saved.

This might be made evident from many places: For Peter, in his first Sermon
preached, after he had received the Holy Ghost, would have the house of Israel
to know, that God had made that same Jesus, whom they had crucified, both Lord
and Christ, Act. 2. 36. He was the Prince of Life, and that Prophet, whom God
had promised to send, and threatened with destruction every one that should not
hearken unto Him, Act. 3. 15, 22, 23. He is the Head of the Corner, neither is
there Salvation in any other: For there is no other Name under Heaven given
amongst men, whereby we must be saved, Act. 4. 11, 12. Him God exalted with His
right hand, to be a Prince and a Savior, for to give repentance to Israel, and
forgiveness of sin, Act. 5. 31. The Eunuch must believe and profess, that Jesus
is the Son of God, before He could be baptized, Act. 8. 37.

This was the principal point, which Paul, converted, did assert and prove,
That Christ is the Son of God, Act. 9. 20.

This was the principal truth proposed to the Gentiles, That Jesus was He, whom
God ordained to be Judge of the Quick and Dead; and that, through His Name, all
such as believe in Him, shall receive remission of their sins, Act. 10. 42, 43.

This is the principal scope of the Apostle Paul, in several passages of his
Epistles, and especially in the first and second Chapters of that to the
Colossians, to manifest the excellency and sufficiency of Christ. And in that
to the Hebrews, it is made manifest, that He was a Prophet, far above all other
Prophets, above Angels* and Moses; and a Priest above all Priests; and
especially in this, that by one Offering He had consecrated the Sanctified for
ever.

By this we may understand, God-Redeemer, is: yet because the performance of
this Duty, is above the power of sinful Man, as born of sinful Adam; therefore,
in the second place, we must consider, by what means Man is reduced, and
brought back unto his God again.

The Scriptures inform us, that we must be called, and born* quickened, and
raised up by some Divine Power given out of free mercy for Christ's sake:
Therefore this Subjection may be said to be a Work of Vocation or Calling. This
Vocation is sometimes taken for a Work of God's Power, whereby He reduces Man:
Sometimes for a gracious admission, and acceptance of the sinner submitting
himself for a Subject, to enjoy the Rights and Privileges of His Kingdom:
Sometimes for both. In this place, I take it for an Act of Divine Power, as it
is a cause of subjection which must ^o before admission. To understand this, we
must consider the Subject of it, and that is Man, as sub aliena potestate,
under the power of Sin and Satan, and so out of God's King^om, and as an Alien
to this Heavenly Commonwealth: and such is every one by Nature, as he is out
of Jesus Christ. Yet there are degrees of this distance: some are further off:
some nearer to this Kingdom. This is evident, from the condition of Jews and
Gentiles, in former times, and always, especially since the times of the
Gospel: Because all men are either in the visible Church, or out of it. And men
may be out of the Church two ways:

1. As never admitted into the same: Or, 2. Such as being in the Church prove
Apostates.
The Gentiles once were not Gentiles: For their first Apostate Fathers were in
the Church: and the Jews, in former times, were God's people; but for their
unbelief are cast out, and continue LO-AMMI. none of God's people: and this
shall be their condition, till such time as the fullness of the Gentiles be come
in. And we must distinguish of such as are in the visible Church; for some are
sincerely subjected unto God-Redeemer, according to their Allegiance: Some are
Subjects only by Name and Profession; and by their ignorance unbelief,
disobedience, are little better then Heathens and Aliens: Some are subject in
some measure, but come short of that degree, which is required to admission.
All these, excepting one sort, are out of this Kingdom, as it consists of
real Saints, and living members of Christ. Apostates shall never be called,
much less admitted if they be personally, and wilfully such. For if we sin
wilfully, after we have received the knowledge of the truth, there remains no
more Sacrifice for sins, Heb. 10. 26. and if no more Sacrifice, then calling is
in vain, and to no purpose. Yet the posterity of Apostates may be, and have
been called. And if once God vouchsafe the means of conversion to Idolators,
who have forsaken, not only God as their Redeemer, but as Creator and
Preserver, he requires of them to renounce the Devil, and turn from their Idols
to the living God first, and then unto him as Redeemer by Jesus Christ. They
which have forsaken Jesus Christ, or deny him as their Savior, and yet
acknowledge, and worship God alone as the Creator of Heaven, and Earth, the
Preserver and Governor of the World, as Turks, all Mahumetans, and the
unbelieving Jews do at this day, are bound to acknowledge Christ as their
Savior and Redeemer, and sure his incarnation, and glorification, as already
come into the World. The case of the Jew in the times of Christ, and the
Apostles was singular. For the sincere Proselyte and Jew had only this to do
to believe in Christ already come, as before they believed in him to come: and
so they became complete members of the Church Christian, and perfectly subjects
of the Kingdom of Christ glorified. The Ignorant, and Profane, as also the
Hypocrites must forsake their wicked ways, and sincerely submit themselves. Yet
none of these things can be done without a power from Heaven, and a Vocation;
which is a gracious work of God Redeemer, wherein he by his Word and Spirit
reduces man to subjection, so that he is fitted to be a subject of his Blessed
Kingdom. For by Calling we are delivered from the power of darkness, and
translated into the Kingdom of His Dear Son, Col. 1. 13. Therefore said to be
called out of darkness into his marveylous light, 1 Pet. 2. 9. And upon this
they who were not a people, are made the people of God, verse 10. For God will
put his laws into their mind, and write them in their hearts: and thereupon He
will be their God, and they shall be to him a People, Heb. 8. 10. In all these
Passages, and many more, it is evident,

1. That by nature, and as born of sinful Adam, we are in darkness, out of
Gods Kingdom, none of Gods People.

2. That we pass out of darkness into light, and into Christ's Kingdom.

3. This is not a work of our own merit or power: For it is God that delivers
us, translates us, writes his laws in our hearts; and this of his free mercy,
and by his great and wonderful power.

4. By this we become Gods people, and subjects of Christ's Kingdom. And all
this is said to be by calling: For he called us out of darkness into his
marvaylous light. All these particulars are expressed or employed in those words
of the Apostle, who signifies that God would send him to the Gentiles to open
their eves, and to turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of
Satan unto God, that they may receive remission of sins, and as inheritance
among them, which are sanctified by says in Christ, Act. 26. 17, 18.

This Vocation,

1. By the Word.

2. By the Spirit. By the Word: For of his own will he begat us with the word
of truth, Jam. 1. 18. By the Spirit: For, except a man be born again of water,
and the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God, Joh. 3. 5. In the
Word God commands, and promises. The command binds man to submit: The promise
is a motive to enforce the performance of the precept. This we man understand
and observe in the Call of Abraham: For,

1. He is commanded to get him out of his Country, and from his kindred, and
from his Fathers house unto a land that God would show him; and to persuade him
God promises to make him a great nation, and to bless him, etc. But the
principal promise was, that in him all the familyes of the earth should be
blessed, Genesis 12. 1. 2, 3. This precept implies that man is under the domi^ion
of sin, and Satan, and therefore commands him to forsake his sin, and Satan,
and turn from Satan unto God. In this God makes use of the Doctrine of the fall
of Adam, and the Moral Law as given unto him, and binding him to perfect, and
perpetual obedience, and upon disobedience threatening Death. And by the precept
is discovered man's sin, and by threatening his misery to humble him, break his
heart, make him weary of sin, and desirous of deliverance, and willing upon any
terms to accept a Savior. Yet this gives him no Comfort, nor any Power to do
that which is his duty; though God make use of it to prepare man's heart. The
first duties commanded, are

1. A sight of sin, as sin, in our selves, whereby we are miserable. The

2. Is says, whereby we believe that God being satisfied, and attoned by the
blood of Christ, will be merciful, and pardon sin. This faith presupposes
knowledge of the promise, and a serious consideration.

1. That it is God, who promises. 2. That the thing promised is everlasting
life, and all things necessarily conducing thereunto. 3. The terms upon which
it is to be obtained and enjoyed:
And the principal is, sincerely to submit under the Power, and wholly rely
upon the mercy of God, Redeemer by Christ, for remission of sin, and eternal
Salvation, which Christ has merited, and God will give. This Remission, and
eternal life are promised for Christ's sake, and the Promise it self is made
for and in the consideration of his death, and these things as promised are a
mighty motive, and powerfully work upon the heart of man, to incline it to
submission: and if ever they prevayle, this submission will follow. The promise
binds God, gives hope, moves man's heart, and presents unto the soul the
unspeakable benefit to follow upon the Performance of the duty; and that
certainly without any doubt. This submission presupposes certain duties
antecedent, and includes virtually all Particular duties following.

This word as written in a book, Therefore said he, No man can come unto me
except the Father draw him, Joh. 6. 44. To draw us, is a work of power, not a
mere outward Word or Writing. In the new Covenant God does promise to put his
laws in our minds, and write them in our hearts. And this is said to be done
by putting his Spirit within us, and so causing us to walk in his Statutes, and
keep his judgments to do them, Ezekiel. 36. 27. And before this can be effected,
he must take away our stony hearts, and give us hearts of flesh. One effect of
this Spirit is generally granted to be illumination, another to be
sanctification of the heart* This illumination may not be only a restoring of
a spiritual sight, and vi^ve power, but also a more clear representation of
the things spoken in the Word, and the same more immediate, and in an higher
light. This cannot be done except it free the soul from false notions and
errors in matters of Religion. This sanctification of the heart does certainly
subdue, if not wholly take away predominant lusts, and elevate and perfect the
rational appetite, by giving and imparting a divine sense, and Vigor, whereby
it more effectually does relish heavenly things, but reject and abhor evil,
and sin. I will not here dispute whether this Spirit be a distinct thing, or
power different from the Word of God, as spoken immediately by himself to the
soul of man, or it be the very same. No doubt, the Word of God, as the word of
God, is power. For as it is said of Thunder naturally, so its true of this Word
spiritually: The voice of the Lord is powerful, the Voice of the Lord is full
of Majesty, and it breaks the Cedars, and shakes the Wilderness: So this
word, as his, is powerful, and full of Majesty, able to break the most stony,
and senseless stubborn heart, and shake it in pieces: If it come close unto the
soul, it cleares the understanding, dispels the mists, and foggs of error,
pierces the inward parts, and makes most lively, and lasting impressions upon
the same. As I will not di^pute this point of difference between the word and
this power, so I will not perplex the Reader, nor amaze him with the
controversy concerning the manner of conversion, the resistibility or
irresistibility of grace, and the necessitation of the Will of man. The manner
of conversion is to us unsearchable; both because we are ignorant of the nature
of the immortal Soul, and because much more are we ignorant of the manner of
Gods working upon that immortal Spirit. As for the resistibility or
irresistibility of grace, we know that the power of God is Almighty, and cannot
be resisted by any created strength, if he please to exercise it to the full,
or in some high measure: But if God give power to the creature, or work by that
created power given, it may be resisted by a contrary created power: And so
grace or the power of conversion, as a created thing in man, may be so given as
to be resisted by the Will of man. And both the understanding of man, will and
does, either deny or doubt of divine truths represented to the soul, and the
Will will wrangle, oppose, and reject, or not sincerely affect, and submit unto
the divine commands, and promises. And hence, the many conflicts not only in
conversion, but after we are converted. As for necessitation of the will in
this work of divine calling, its certain, and granted of all, that the
illumination of the understanding may be necessary so far as the soul in
respect of the same is only passive, though in the apprehension, and judgment
concerning the truths represented by the Word it be active. Besides God may
give an active power to the Will, and it may be passive in receiving of it; and
also necessitated to an act of complacency in general, so that it necessarily
may approve by a general approbation of the justice and equity of the command,
and the excellency of the good promised. For even a wicked Medaea may truly
say, Video Meliora Proboque. And a simple apprehension of a thing, as good,
much more an act of judgment, may produce an act of approbation, complacency,
and volition in general: and the good represented may be not only approved as
good in respect of the contrary evil, but as better in respect of that good
which is apprehended as less. For it is not possible to apprehend good, as
good, and not approve it because, as Bradwardine says well, in that respect it
is not Objectum nolubile. Yet notwithstanding this necessary and natural act
of complacency, that act of the Will, which Buridan calls Acceptatio ad
Prosecutionem may be, and is Free. I pass by the Philosophical Speculations
^oncerning the nature of the Will, which few know; concerning the natural, and
necessary act^ thereof, and also concerning those that are free; and what the
natural liberty of the Will is, and in what acts, and in respect of what acts,
it is free. Concerning the positive acts Velle, and Nolle, and the negative Non
Velle, Non nolle; and concerning the liberty of contradiction, and
specification; It Is far more profitable for all such, as are so blessed as to
live in the Church, and enjoy the means of conversion diligently to use the
means, and exercise that power which God has given them, and also earnestly
and constantly pray for the regenerating Spirit, which God has promised to
them that seek him in an orderly way. For upon this done, Regeneration will
follow; and by the Divine, and Spiritual power given them together with Gods
special assistance, and concurrence, after all necessary preparations, they
shall freely determine, and the Will shall wholly, and most willingly submit to
God Redeemer, which is the ultimate product of Divine Vocation: The parts
whereof are the outward Word, and the inward power of the Spirit which go
together, according to the promise of the Gospel, and make up the essence of
it. Though its true that for the circumstances, and accidentalls, the calling
of particular men, and several persons may vary much: Some are called sooner,
some later; some in an ordinary, some in an extraordinary way; some with
lesser, some with greater power; Some with many afflictions, and long trials,
some otherwise; some speedily submit, some stand out long. In all this the
divine wisdom orders, and disposes all things so, as shall be most
congruous, and fitting to this work, and the persons called. Yet this congruity
which many talk of, is nothing without the Word, and Spirit: Both which are
always in the Church; so that though many are called, and few cho^en, yet
those that are converted cannot ascribe any thing to themselves, but all to
God: and such as are not converted, and yet enjoy the means, shall be deep^y
guilty, not for the omission of that which they could not do, but for the
neglect and abuse of that power God had given them. And we must not thinks but
God calls, and that seriously, all those to whom the Gospel is preached, and is
ready to communicate his grace, and by his Spirit works some preparatory
effects which are the same with those he works in them which are converted:
others call them Common graces. And we cannot find in Scripture that God denies
his Spirit to such as hear his word, till they give God cause either by their
neglect, or perverseness, or Apostasy from that degree of grace they have
received to withdraw the same. By all this we understand that Christ finds
his subjects, to whom God has given him a right, to be enemies, and he
enlarges as he begins his Kingdom by a kind of spiritual conquest,
dashing in pieces all such as will not submit, and are bound to submit, with
his Iron Rod and irresistible strength, reducing the rest unto subjection,
after some time of standing out. Therefore God said unto him; Rule thou in the
midst of thine enemies. Psalm. 110. 2. and Ask of me, and I will give thee the
heathen for thine inheritance, and the utmost parts of the earth for thy
possession. Thou shall break them with a rod of Iron, and dash them in pieces,
like a Potters Vessel, Psalm. 2. 8. 9. This work of calling is done by
publishing the Laws of this Kingdom, wherein he manifests his title; declares
his just and gracious commands, threatens eternal Punishment, and promises
eternal protection and rewards. And this publication of his Laws is
accompanied with a wonderful power of his Spirit, whereby together with the
word of the Kingdom, he pierces the minds of men, and breaks their stony
hearts in sunder, as an hammer does a Rock: In this respect the Lord says, Is
not my word like as a fire, and like an Hammer that breaks the Rock asunder,
Jer. 23. 29.

Because by this Vocation, 1. I will enquire into the signification of the
words. 2. The Nature of the thing signified.


And, 1. I will not take Predestination to be the Genus of Election, and
Reprobation, as many do; for so it is not used in Scripture. It Is true, that
(...) signifies to determine, and (...), a determination of the Will: and in
this general signification, Predestination may signify a Pre-determination, or
Decree, to Elect or Reprobate: But thus we do not find it used in the Book of
God.

2. Predestination, in Scripture, does signify a Decree and Determination of
God's Will, concerning the Eternal Estate of sinful Man, wherein He decrees to
bring him, in a certain Order, by certain means, unto Eternal Glory. And this
Decree was made, though not executed, before the Foundation of the World.

3. This Predestination is in Christ, to Eternal Life, not to Eternal Death, as
used in the New Testament.

4. Predestination, and Election, are sometimes, if not, for the most part,
taken for the same.

5. When they are differenced, Election is a Decree to Call; Predestination, a
Decree to adopt, justify, glorify.

6. Election is sometimes the same that Calling is; sometimes a Decree of
Calling.

7. Sometimes Election, the purpose according to Election, and Foreknowledge,
and Foreknowledge alone, are taken and used for the same. We read that all
things work together for good to them that love God, the called according to
purpose: For whom he did fore know; he also did Predestinate to be conformed to
the Image of his Son, that He might be the first Begotten amongst many
Brethren. Moreover, whom He did Predestinate, them He called; whom He called,
them He justified; and whom He justified, them He glorified, Romans 8* 28, 29,
30. Where we may observe,

1. That there is a Calling, according to a purpose and decree, and that is
such, as upon it follows Conversion, Admission, Justification.

2. That, in this place, Foreknowledge is distinct from Predestination, and
signifies not only an Act of the Understanding, whereby God does foreknow
particular persons before they did* exist; for, in that respect, it is called
Foreknowledge: Nor also what they would act or do under the means of
Conversion, but an Act of the Will, whereby He did approve, love, elect them
freely; not for any merit of their own, but out of His mere good will. To KNOW,
in this place, is to elect, or choose, and seems to be taken from that place of
Amos 3. 2. Thee have I KNOWN of all the Families of the Earth. To know,
according to the Chaldee-Paraphrast, and Vatablus following him, is, to Choose:
You have I chosen. And so likewise yra, and Mercerus understand it. Yea, the
Apostle himself informs us, that the people fore-known, Romans 11. 2. are a
Remnant, according to the Election of Grace, ver. 5. And the Election, that is,
the persons elected, ver. 7. So that, to foreknow, is to decree to Call, and
is the same with the decree of Election strictly taken.

3. Predestination, Election, or Foreknowledge, and is a decree to justify,
adopt, and glorify the Elect or Called. For in these words of the Apostle, To
be conformed to the Image of his Son, is to be glorified. For Image, in several
places of the Old Testament, is taken for Glory. So, O Lord, when thou awakest,
thou will despise their Image; that is, their Glory, Psalm. 73. 20. When I
awake, I shall be satisfied with thy likeness; that is, thy Glory, Psalm. 17.
15. The similitude of the Lord shall He; that is, Moses; behold! that is, his
glory, Numb. 12. 8. In both places, the Septuagint turn the word, which
signifies, likeness, or image, glory. And in the New Testament, Man is the
Image, and glory of God; 1 Cor. 11. 7. And though not here, yet in another
place, God is said to predestinate us to Adoption, Ephesians. 1. 15. Where,
Adoption may be glory: for so sometimes it is taken. And it is employed, That we
are Predestinate unto an Inheritance ver. 11.

4. Election signifies both, when it is written, That God has chosen you, that
is, the Thessalonians, to Salvation, through Sanctification of the Spirit, and
belief of the truth, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 13.

5. The Subject of Election, is Man; but not as Man merely, nor as man made,
nor to be made nor as fallen in massa corrupta, though man may be considered
under all these notions; but the immediate subject of Election and
Predestination is every person, considered in that condition as God shall find
him, when he calls him. For the execution of Election begins in that Calling,
upon which follows the first sincere Conversion. And because in many, this
Calling goes long before final Faith, as final: Therefore man, as finally
believing, is not the immediate Object of Election, though final Believers be
the immediate Subject of Glorification. The first Compilers of the Articles of
Subscription for the Church of England, in King Edward the 6th His Reign, do
understand Predestination, and Election, for two distinct and different Acts of
God, as appears by the 17th Article: For they make the Elect to be the Object
of Predestination, and imply, that Election is Antecedent to Predestination.
But whether they meant by Election a Decree to Call, is difficult to determine.
Neither need we trouble our selves in the search thereof, because our Rules is
the Scripture, and their words are capable of a good sense.

Thus much may be sufficient for the explication of the words: Election taken
in the larger sense, both for the Decree of Calling* and Predestination too,
may be defined from 2 Thessalonians. 2. 13. to be, A Decree of God, whereby He
determined to choose certain persons unto Salvation, through Sanctification of
the Spirit, and Belief of the Truth. Or thus more at large: It is a Decree of
God, whereby He decreed, according to His good pleasure, before the Foundation
of the world, to call certain particular persons; and, by Christ, to justify
and glorify them.

First, the general Nature of Election is a Decree. A Decree is an Act of the
Will, that act which we call a determination or resolution to do something; and
this is an act of God's Will: and according to our manner of understanding, and
the expression of the Scriptures, it does pre-suppose his counsel and practical
knowledge directing the Will. For we are said to be predestinate according to
the good pleasure of Him, who works all things according to the counsel of
his will, Ephesians. 1. 11. Where observe,

1. That the word, (...) which is turned Purpose, signifies, sometimes, good
pleasure, and so its to be understood there.

2. That Counsel is antecedent to the Will, and directs the determination
thereof. As the general Act is a Decree: So,

Secondly the Decree was passed by God before the Foundation of the world, and
the existence of things; and in this respect is not only Destination, but
Predestination. Yet this Decree is not properly Eternal, as the existence of
the Deity, and the immanent Acts of God upon Himself are.

3. This Decree was not only a free act, but an act of free and abundant grace
and mercy in Christ, therefore said to be according to the good pleasure of His
Will, to the praise of the glory of His Grace, wherein He has made us accepted
in His Beloved, Ephesians. 1. 5, 6.

4. The Object or Subject of this Decree, is sinful man; yet considered, as
redeemed by Christ: For otherwise He could not be eligible, or predestinable to
Salvation, and Eternal Glory; seeing that by the first Law of Works
transgressed, he was a Vessel of Wrath, and, as such, in no possibility of
Salvation: For once guilty, he was no way save-able, but by Christ's
Redemption, and the New Covenant. Therefore we are said to be chosen in Christ;
to be predestinate unto the Adoption of Children by Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 1. 4,
5. And from hence it follows, that there was no merit in man foreseen, nor
any cause out of God, that might move God, or determine His Will. The merit of
Christ fore-known, could not necessitate His Will; yea, neither final Faith
foreseen, nor the foresight it self of Faith could any ways pre-determine
God's Will. But this Will did freely determine it self both in general to choose
any, and much more to choose these or those particular persons. The
foreknowledge of Christ, Faith, good-works, final perseverance as possible,
could not make the Salvation of sinful man to be future: for the futurition of
it depended merely upon his good pleasure, yet directed by his Wisdom. And the
Object of this Decree was not man in general, but certain single persons, and
the same not only guilty by the first Sin of Adam, but by many other actual
sins; even all their actual transgressions, which they had committed before
God's effectual Call, and their Conversion. Yet this is to be understood of
such as are Adulti, and at age before their Conversion. This is evident, both
out of the Epistle to the Romans; but especially in that to the Ephesians,
Chap. 1. 4, 5, 11. and that to the Thessalonians, 2 Chap. 2. 13. For we find
the subject to be persons, and such as were guilty not only of the first sin,
but many proper actual sins before their Conversion: and their Election
pre-supposeth Christ, the Redemption, the Covenant. The Remonstrants inform us,
that the Decrees of Predestination are these:

1. A Decree, to give Christ, to redeem sinful man.

2. A Decree to save all those, who shall sincerely and finally believe in Him.

3. A Decree to give grace sufficient, and necessary, and effectual to work
repentance and faith in Christ.

4. Upon his foreknowledge of the event of these means administered, to choose
single persons, foreseen finally to believe. Yet if we will understand,
consider, and speak accurately. The

1. Is the Decree of Redemption; The 2. Of the Covenant; The 3. Of giving the
means of Conversion* But none of these are the Decree of Election. Nor is the
4th, as delivered by them. Others imagine Election to be a Decree to save
certain single persons, without respect to sin, Christ, the Covenant-grace for
keeping the Covenant. And these, for the most part, make this Decree antecedent
to the Decree of Redemption and the Covenant. All these forsake the simplicity
of the Scriptures, which teach us, that this Decree essentially includes single
persons, the means, the end, and pre-supposeth the Providence, and Government
of Man, first innocent in Adam, then fallen, afterward continuing in sin, till
God call him, according to purpose. And also the Dec^ee of sending Christ, of
the Redemption by Christ, and of the New Covenant.
5. This Decree has something of absolute and arbitrary power, according to
that Similitude, Has not the Potter power* etc. Romans 9. 21. For as He could
have called and converted all; so He could have decreed to have saved all: yet
He has done neither. He has passed by many. And this Prete^ition, which is
rather Non-Decretum, than Decretum is made by some to be Reprobation. Yet
Reprobation, according to Scripture, is a Positive Decree; according to which,
God not only in His absolute power passes by certain single persons, but also
decrees to order them, according to His Laws and Judgment, unto Eternal Misery.
That there is such a Preterition, is certain; but that this Preterition is the
whose Decree of Reprobation, upon which follows necessarily, and unavoidably,
Eternal Death, who can evidently prove out of God's Word.

7. As this Decree of Election does con-note an absolute and arbitrary power of
God's Will; so no reason thereof can be given, but from his good pleasure: and
we must say with the Scripture, he will have mercy upon whom He will have
mercy; and whom He will, He hardens. Yet in God's Eternal Wisdom, there may
be many Reasons of both, and the same weighty and preponderant perhaps, though
they are concealed, and not made known to us. For there is no act of
Ordination, of intellectual and immortal Creatures unto their final estate of
felicity and misery, that is an act of mere absolute Power, as abstracted from
all Mercy, Wisdom, sustice. In the execution of the Decree, there is given a
plain reason of the Rejection of the Jew, and that is Unbelief, Romans 9. 31, 32.
and Chap. 11. 20. Yet no reason or cause in the Gentiles; why God called them,
but His absolute power, free will, mere grace: yet of their first Rejection,
the moral cause in themselves, was their Idolatry and Apostasy: Yet

1. Why did not God prevent the Apostasy of the Gentiles, but reject the
generality of them for two thousand years, and choose the Jew, and the Posterity
of Abraham by Jacob, and continue them His people for so many hundred years;
And 2. Why He should reject the Jew, and take away from the generality of them
both the Word of the Gospel, and the Spirit, for these sixteen hundred years
and upward, and choose the Gentiles; And 3. Why in the end, He should choose
both, in one main Body; no Wit of man can give a reason. Therefore the Apostle
cries out, O the depth of the riches both of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God!
How unsearchable are his Judgments, and his ways past finding out! Romans 11. 33.
Which place implies, 1. That there were weighty Reason, why God did thus: for
they were Acts of His profoundest Wisdom. 2. That these Reasons to Man, and
perhaps to Angels are unsearchable.

7. These Decrees are no ways contrary unto, but exactly agreeing with the
Redemption by Christ, the tenor of the New Covenant, the Execution, and the
final Judgment, if we truly understand them, as they are revealed in Scripture.
And He mu^^ needs be a false Prophet, who shall tech them otherwise: and he
that shall so teach them, as to derogate the least from Free Grace in Christ,
is inexcusable.

There be two Propositions unworthy to be made Principles in this Doctrine.

The first is, Quod Primum in intention, id ultimum in executione. That which
is first in intention* is last in execution.

The second is, Ordinate volens prius vult finem, deinde media ad finem: He
that acts rationally, and orderly, first wills the end; then the means to the
end: and yet these are made Principles in Divinity, and must be the measure and
rule, according to which, we must understand the Word of God, speaking of these
high and mysterious Decrees: Yet

1. These do not agree unto God; but applied unto him, derogate from His
glorious Perfections.

2. They are neither truly understood, nor rightly applied to the Decrees of
God.

3. The first, taken out of the Blasphemous Commentator, whom some think to be
Aver^oes, or some other, is falsely understood, and otherwise interpreted, than
the Author first meant it, as Occam tells us. For thus some expound it: That
which is the chiefest thing in intention, is, that to which all things in the
Execution are ultimately referred. And what is this to their purpose, who use,
or rather abuse it?

4. The second is by the Schoolmen, and such as follow them, applied to the
Decree of Election in this manner: That seeing God is the most orderly Agent,
He must needs first intend glory unto sinful man as the end. Secondly, grace as
the means for glory. Yet as that excellent School-man says well, That glory is
not the end of God predestinating, but of man predestined: and it was
indifferent to him, whether to will Glory the end, or Grace the means, first in
order: and as He gives Grace first, and then Glory, so no doubt He decreed to
do so. To say and affirm, that first God absolutely chose such persons, then
decreed to give them glory; thirdly, that they might attain glory, He intends
and decrees to give them Christ, and grace; are groundless speculations, and
the imaginations of men's hearts, who conceive of God, as they do of themselves.
But here we may truly say, How far are God's thoughts above the thoughts of
silly, sinful, ignorant men? That there are Decrees of Election, and
Reprobation, Free Will natural, and Grace, is evident out of Scripture; and
most men, even such as differ amongst themselves, do grant: but how to
reconcile these, has been the business of the subtillest Wits, and is not yet
so clearly done, as to satisfy others. The manner of Conversion, the manner
how God fore-knows and decrees all things, especially the contingent, and free
acts of Angels and Men, cannot be evident^y known by us, neither is it needful.
Scientia media, decreta ex hypothesi, vocatio congrua, are much controverted:
yet, Sub judice lis est, to this day. We have no perfect notions of God's
Knowledge and Decrees, nor of His manner of Working in the Souls of men:
Therefore, it were wisdom to be silent. If we desire to know our own Election,
we must not curiously pry into God's secret Counsels, nor search the Records of
Eternity; for that we cannot do: But let us diligently examine our selves, and
if our hearts have been sincerely obedient to the Heavenly Call, wholly
subjected to Christ, and feel the power and comforts of God's sanctifying and
adopting Spirit, having dominion over Sin, then we may conclude, that our names
are registered in Heaven, and enrolled in the Book of Life, and we are Subjects
of this glorious Kingdom.

Thus you have heard,

After this brief Discourse of Predestination, Eternal Salvation, and the IDEA,
and Model of God's special Government, according to which He calls Converts,
admits sinful man, as a subject of His Kingdom, and directs him unto the full
enjoyment of Eternal Peace, and also of Calling, whereby this Decree begins to
be put in execution, and sinful Man is reduced; it remains, that we enquire
what the condition of man, upon his sincere submission, proves to be. For this
end, we must observe,

1. That God, according to His absolute power, calls whom He will: For He is
bound to none; and therefore, without any injustice, He may pass by, not only
particular persons; but whole Nations, yea, the greatest part of Mankind,
especially upon their demerit.

2. That to whomsoever He vouchsafes the means of Conversion, them He may be
truly said to Call.

3. That the issue and event of this Call is twofold; for some stand our, some
come in. Those who stand out, either by their secular employments, Earthly
care, and love of the World are kept back: or being spiteful and malicious,
oppose, persecute, and murder God's Messengers. As these voluntarily refuse to
submit; so they are for ever shut out of this Kingdom: and all of them,
especially the malicious, wilful Wretches, are counted Rebels, and so adjudged
Enemies, and so to be dealt withal: For here is no different, and third sort
of people, which may be reckoned Neuters: For all are either Subjects, or
Enemies. Of such as come in, some submit in Hypocrisy, some imperfectly, some
with all their hearts sincerely: and the Hypocrites are either gross, or not so
palpable. All this we may learn from that Parable of our Savior, Math. 22. 1,
2, 3. etc. Of those who submit, is made the visible Church on Earth, which
universally considered, since the first publication of the Gospel to all
Nations, are,

1. Christians.

2. Reduced into several Societies and Flocks, for Doctrine and Worship, over
which are set Ministers; and their Privileges, are Word and Sacraments. And
the Universal Church, in all the several parts of the World, wheresoever they
are dispersed, make one Political, and Organical Body, and are all subject to
Christ their Head; and to their Ministers, as His Officers. And in this
respect, the Government of the Church is Monarchical: And as the Word and
Sacraments are Privileges of the Universal Church; so Ministers rightly and
du^y called are Officers of the same. And we are first Subjects unto Christ,
and Members of the great Body, before we be Members of this, or that particular
Church. But of this I have spoken in another Treatise.

3. They are associated for Discipline, the end whereof is to preserve the
Doctrine and Wo^ship pure, and the body free from scandalous and infecting
Members. The Power of the Church thus associated is fourfold.

1. To declare and constitute Canons.

2. To make Officers.

3. To exercise Jurisdiction.

4. To dispose of the Churches stock, made up of the Charity and Benevolence of
the People. This power is in the whole Church and Body associated. It Is
exercised by Officers chosen and constituted, according to the Rules of Christ
for that purpose. The acts of Jurisdiction are to admonish, suspend*
excommunicate, or absolve, according as they shall see just cause. The whole
Church particular, may trust one man, or more, with a general inspection,
without giving any jurisdiction. Many particular Congregations, instituted for
Worship, may associate into one Body for Discipline: and then the power is not
derived from the particular Congregations to the whole; but from the whole
Association to the Parts. These Associations may be of too narrow, or too vast
an extent, of too small a number, or too great a multitude. And the Parts and
Members are most fitly united, and conveniently disposed by vicinity of
Habitation. These particulars, I have at large made evident, according to my
Talent, out of the Scripture, in a former distinct Discourse. All these
Associations, the great and glorious Lord Redeemer makes use of, in
administration of His Kingdom. But one only part of these make up the Body of
His Spiritual Kingdom, which shall inherit the Eternal Glory of the same; and
they are such as submit at the first sincerely, and with their whole heart. Yet
there be degrees of this Subjection; and the best may and must improve their
submission, until their corruptions be fully subdued, and they perfectly
sanctified. For before, they are not capable of full communion with their God,
and the perfect enjoyment of Eternal Peace. Besides, there be several degrees
of Preparation, before we attain to sincere submission and admission into this
blessed Commonwealth of Israel. The condition of such as sincerely acknowledge
their Sovereign and Lord Redeemer, is comfortable here in this life, and
glorious hereafter. For the present, as they are admitted Subjects unto God
their Father; so they who were far off, are made nigh, and by Christ have
access, by one Spirit, to the Father: are no more strangers and Foreigners,
but Fellow-Citizens with the Saints, and Household of God, Ephesians. 2. 13, 18, 19.
And by reason of this union with God the Father, and Jesus Christ, and the
Saints, they are become the Temples of the Holy Ghost; and being washed in
their Saviors blood, are the adopted Sons of God, the Heirs of Glory come
under the Divine Protection, and have a general right to all those Mercies and
Blessings which Christ has purchased, and God has promised, as shall more
particularly be showed hereafter. For as this Subjection is virtually all
obedience, so it receives a right to all Blessings limited to the performance
of several Duties. And before I conclude this great Duty you must observe this
one thing, that this Subjection is that whereby we submit our selves to Christ,
and so to God, not only as King, as some conceive, but to Him, as our only
Priest, for expiation and intercession; and also to Him as our only Prophet,
to teach us not only outwardly by the Word written, but inwardly by the Spirit.

From this Subjection, God-Redeemer by Jesus Christ. The Church-mystical is the
community of such as subject themselves sincerely unto GOD-REDEEMER. So that
this Subjection is the very essence of the Church. To believe, and subject to
Christ to come, and to Christ already come is accidental: So to be National, or
Universal, is, To be under a Form of Discipline, or to be without any settled
outward Government, is not essential: nor to be militant or triumphant, (though
it as such and such, differs much) is of the Essence. To be Pilgrims and
Strangers on this Earth, seeking an abiding City in Heaven, and to be militant
fighting against the Devil, the World, and the Flesh, is the condition of this
Society in this life. To obtain a final and full Victory over Sin, and be
secure of Eternal Bliss, is in some measure an estate of triumph. But to rise
again, be immortal, and fully glorified in one full body, after that all
Enemies are totally and eternally subdued, is the most perfect triumph. And
this is the Order that God has decreed and established, that first we must be
militant, obey and suffer in an estate of Humiliation, till we prove finally
victorious; and after that, we must except a reward, and a Crown of Glory,
which in due time we shall certainly receive. So Christ, our Head, was first
humbled, afterward exalted, and passed by the Cross to the Crown; so must, we
His members, do. In this life we must be consecrated, and in the life to come,
we shall be complete Kings and Priests, and reign with our Savior, and serve
in the glorious Temple of Heaven. These two conditions differ much, and very
much; yet the difference is not essential, but accidental. Thus far the
constitution of this Kingdom, in the Sovereignty of God-Redeemer, and
subjection of sinful Man redeemed and called.

CHAP. V.
Concerning the exercise of the Power of God, Redeemer, in the Administration
of the Kingdom of Grace in general.
THis administration is the exercise of the power of God acquired by the
humiliation of the Word,

This administration is to be considered.

1. In general, and in respect of the general affections accidental to it.
2. In the parts thereof, which are 1. Legislation, and 2. Jurisdiction.

This administration for the substance was the same always, and it began
betimes, even in the days of Adam, after that promise of the seed of the
Woman, which should break the Serpents head. Yet there was a great difference,
in the same, in many things after that Christ was exhibited and glorified, from
that which was before. Yet in all times, God as Redeemer was the supreme Lord
and King; man sinful, the subject; Faith, and subjection to Christ, the Law;
and the judgment was according to that Law. And though the humiliation of the
Son of God to be made man was yet to come, and Christ only present, and
represented in the promise, yet as this humiliation was accepted from the
beginning for the benefit of man, so that power which was always virtually in
God, was exercised by the word not incarnate, and by the Spirit, as though it
had been acquired already. That this administration began so early, might be
made evident from several texts of Scripture rightly understood. Neither was
the promise of Christ made first to Abraham: for this promise was passed in the
sentence of the Devil. The Sacrifices and offerings of Cain and Abel taught
them, and used before by their Father, and instituted by God, did witness the
same. That they were instituted by God the acceptance of Abel's Sacrifice does
prove: For no service is accepted of God which is not instituted by God. The
Faith of Enoch whereby he pleased God was Faith in Christ: otherwise he could
not have sought God, so as to have found him, nor expected, or received so
glorious a reward, but by the merit of his Savior believed upon. Without this
faith Noah could not have been the heir of the righteousness which is by
faith, and partaker of that eternal deliverance, which was typifyed by his
deliverance from the flood. This administration after the time of Abraham was
more clear. Yet God had his Kingdom, and his Church long before: yet he did
administer the same without any Vicegerent or President general, except some
emine^t, and principal Angel was his universal deputy, as was hinted formerly.
Yet in the Church on earth God by his Word eternal, and the Spirit in the
Patriarchs, and extraordinary Prophets, did supply Christ's prophetical office,
and by them at certain times made known the laws and judgments of his
Kingdom: but ordinarily he used for this purpose ordinary teachers. Yet besides
these he gave the Spirit of Prophecy to the Angels, and by them he instructed
Patriarchs, and other Prophets. His Sacerdotall office was executed by the
Patriarchs, the first born of the familyes, and at length by the Leviticall
Priests, and they were typical mediators between God and man. The most eminent
Priest and lively Type of Christ both as King, and especially as Priest was
Melchizedeck, who lived at Salem, in the day^s of Abraham. He was a righteous
King, who by the just administration of his Kingdom, procured the peace and
prosperity of his subjects, when the neighbour-Countryes were invalded, and
spoiled by War. In this respect he did represent this King of perfect
righteousness, and eternal peace. And as a Priest* he had no predecessor from
whom, nor successor to whom he might derive his Sacerdotal power; For he was
not a Priest by birth, nor did he transmit his Priesthood by death unto
another, as the Leviticall Priests did. And in this respect he might be truly
said to be without Father, and Mother, and descent, so as to receive his
Priesthood that way, and without end of days, and so was the fittest of all
others to represent that Priest Jesus Christ, who had no Predecessor, from
whom he might derive his right, nor successor, because he live in Hea^ven, a
Priest for ever, who alone has right to receive tithes, and homage (...) his
people, and bless them with spiritual, and eternal blessings. And the Throne
and Scepter of David, and his successors in his Kingdom did shadow him, whose
Throne is for ever, and ever, and his Scepter a right Scepter. Faith and
obedience to pure morals to be performed to God Redeemer, by the power of the
renewing Spirit, were always required by the Laws of this Kingdom: for the
Laws of Faith, and obedience to pure Morals were always the same. Yet to
these Laws of Faith, and obedience in pure morals were added from the
beginning diverse positive and ceremonial precepts, especially that of
sacrifice. And when the promise of the Messiah to descend of (...) was renewed
of Abraham, circumcision was instituted as a Seal of the righteousness of
faith, and a solemn right of engagement unto their Savior, and of his
admi^sion of them into the Church, upon their submission. And this was by his
command to be administered to Infants born in the Church. When Israel came out
of Egypt, the Passover was ordained in remembrance of that great deliverance,
and did continue till that great Pa^chal Lamb was slain, by whose blood we are
redeemed from the wrath of God, Hell and everlasting death. But after that the
posterity of Abraham, Isacc, Jacob, being multiplied into a nation, were
reduced by God into a Commonwealth, both civil, and Ecclesiastical, and
presented before God, appearing in a glorio^s and retrible manner upon Mount
Sinai, they entered into a solemn Covenant with their God. He promises to be
their God, to protect, and bless them, and they engage themselves solemnly to
be his loyal subjects. Upon this Foundation of a Kingdom once laid, God
proceeds as their Lord, and Soverenig to give them moral judicial ceremonial
Laws. In the moral he reduces all moral duties to certain heads, in a
brief, exact, and excellent method: in the Ceremonials he reduces all former
rites, and ceremonials Instituted by himself into order, and adds many more, as
he saw convenient for that people in that time. In the judicials he dilivered
them a perfect body of the civil Law. These judicials were for direction in
judgment, and the adminstration of their civil state. The moralls and
ceremonials were for the Church, and looked far higher. The moralls tended to
give them a more perfect knowledge of moral duties, to be a rule of moral
obedience, to let them see their inability to keep it, their impossibility to
be justified by it, to make them sensible of their sin, and seek a Savior, who
should deliver them from the curse, and paenaltyes threatened by the Law, and
deserved by their disobedience. The ceremonial was more mystical: (...)
therein God did prescribe a Tabernacle* a Priest, and a solemn (...) of
service. The Tabernacle was a type of the Heavenly Temple the High Priest of
the great eternal Universal High Priest, and the Services, especially that
(...) Sacrifice and most of all that yearly Sacrifice of expiation to be
offered only by the High Priest the 10th. day of the 7th. month, with the
blood whereof he ente (...) into the most holy place, was a type of that
sacrifice of Christ, by which he obtained eternal Redemption. Besides that
these did signify heavenly things: they were given to this people to keep, and
preserve them pure from Heathenis^ Idolatry, and superstition; to continue them
separate, especially in Religion and Divine Worship, from all other nations of
the world. They were for the multitude, and charge of them, a burden, and
heavy yoke to keep them unde^^ and cause them to long for their Messiah, who
should free them from those dark and mysterious shadows, give them a clearer
and more glorious light, and a perfect liberty and ease from this servitude.
This time was the time of the infancy, and minority of the Church: for as the
Heyr so long as he is a Child differs nothing from a Servant, though he be
Lord of all, but is under Tutours and governors, until the time appointed of
the Father: So they, when they were Children, that is, under age, were in
bondage under the elements of the world. But when the fulness of that time,
that was appointed by God their Father was come, God sent his Son made of a
Woman, made under the law to redeem them that were under the law, etc.
Wherefore after that, they were no more Servants, but sons, Gal. 4. 1, 2, 3, 4.
7. The time of the Gospel, therefore, is a time of emancipation, and liberty,
not only from the Ceremonials, but from the curse, and servitude of the law of
works, which that law of Moses did threaten* and could no ways free them from
it. For in that law there was no promise of the Spirit to enable them, for to
obey the moral law; nor of pardon, though they did transgress it. Neither was
there any Sacrifice, Priest or Service that could expiate sin, and purge the
conscience from dead Works: For though their expiations, lustrations, and
purifying ceremonies might free them from legal pollutions, yet from sin they
could not.

This covenant was not the same with that of the seed of the Woman, Abraham;
That in his seed all the nations of the earth should be blessed; much less was
it the same with the promises of the Gospel made in Christ exhibited. And by
the way we may take notice that the Apostle, Gal. 3. puts a difference between
the Promise, the Law, and Faith. The promise looks at Christ to come, and was
made more particularly to Abraham. The Faith is the same with the Gospel, and
looks at Christ already come. This law comes in between, along time after the
promise, and a longer time before the Gospel. And one end why it entered in
between both, was, that sin might abound, Romans 5. 20. and it was added because
of transgression, till the seed, that is Christ, should come: and before Faith
that is Christ and the Gospel came, they were kept under the Law, shut up unto
the Faith, which should afterward be revealed. So that the Law was their
Schoolmaster, or Tutour unto Christ, Gal. 3. 19. 23. 24. By all this we may
easily understand that this Law, and Covenant made only with the Jew, of whom
Christ was to come, considered as God intended it, was neither against the
Promise, nor the Gospel, but subordinate to both. And though it was not the
same with the Law of works given to Adam innocent, yet it had much affinity
with it. For it is said, Do this and live; and, Cursed is every one, that
continues not in all things, written and contained in it: yet it promised no
power to observe it, nor pardon if not observed, as was said before. And the
Jew was much mistaken, when he conceived that it made void the Promise. For
the Covenant which was confirmed before of God in Christ, the Law which was
430. years after, could not disannull, that it should make the promise of none
effect. Gal. 3. 17. If it had been given for to give life, it certainly had
made void the promise: But that was not God's intention in giving the Law. And
the regenerate Saints of God, who lived under the Law were sanctified
justified, and saved, not by virtue of the Law, but of the promise confirmed of
God in Christ. The law was proper to the Jew, and Proselytes incorporated into
that state and Church, and bound them, and no others unto the Ceremonialls to
be performed by them in the land of Canaan. And though the moral law does
always bind all men to obedience upon certain terms, yet it was given in Mount
Sinai, to them alone, and in special relation unto them, as appears by that
preface to the decalogue, I am the Lord thy God, which brought thee out of
Egypt, out of the house of Bondage. The law is called the law of works, and
the first Covenant in respect unto the Gospel, preached first unto the Jew, and
to be renned unto them in the latter days.

From all this, Adam, after that God had said, The seed of the Woman shall
bruise the Serpent's head, the fundamental laws of God-Redeemer were the
same. After that John Baptist appeared in the Wilderness, God began to
administer this Kingdom in a different manner. For all the Prophets, and the
law prophesied unto John, Math. 11. 14. He was the Horizon, as some express it
between the Old and New Testament. Moses and the Prophets foretold Christ more
darkly, and at a great distance: But He 1. Signifies that he was near at hand,
and that a far more glorious administration of this Spiritual Kingdom would
shortly follow. 2. God by him institutes a new rite of admission, that was
Baptism. 3. He Baptizeth Christ the Messiah. 4. By his Baptism, and Doctrine, he
made way for him* 5. Upon the Baptism of our Savior, he discovers him to the
people, and persuades his disciples to believe in him, and gives an excellent
testimony of him. Yet these things neither took away the law, nor brought in
the Gospel, but were a preparative for the same.


After that Christ was initiated by Baptism, Canaan, and amongst his own
People. For he was sent first to gather the lost sheep of Israel. Thus he
continued to administer the Kingdom in his own person till his death. After and
immediately upon his Resurrection, he receives universal power, manifests
himself to his Apostles, and many of his Disciples, gives commission to his
Apostles to go and preach to all Nations, after that he had given them
instructions, and commanded them to stay at Jerusalem* till he should send down
the Holy Ghost, and begins to exercise his universal power. And, so that
administration which shall continue to the end of the World without alteration,
did commence.

But before I speak of this more particularly, etc. Philip. 2. 8, 9, 10. This
exaltation was properly in respect of his humane nature: For as he that exalted
him was God, so the nature exalted was Man. The Power of the Godhead was
infinite and eternal, and could neither be increased, nor communicated. The
Resurrection of Christ is made by many to be the first degree of his
exaltation. Yet this considered in it self did give him no power, but it freed
him from mortality and all kind of sufferings, and by it he was made immortal.
Yet instantly upon his resurrection he was made an everlasting Priest and King,
and ready and fit as a Priest to Minister, and as a King to reign in Heaven.
This Resurrection for the manner was glorious and wonderful, and for the
manifestation of it full and (...). That (...) the manner it was wonderful and
glorious, God made it appear, because at the time there was an Earthquake, the
stone that shut the entrance of his grave was tumbled away; an Angel descends
with a glorious light, the guard that kept the Sepulcher was terrified and
fled, the bodies of the dead aro^e out of their graves, and diverse of the
Saints, raised up together with Christ, did appear in the Holy City. Thus did
God manifest the working of his mighty power, which he wrought in Christ when
he raised him from the dead, Ephesians. 1. 19, 20. This manner of Resurrection
became him who was the first fruits of them that slept, 1 Cor. 15. 20. and the
head of all those which rise again to glory: and his rising is a pattern of the
universal Resurrection. God is said in many places to have raised him from the
dead, yet so, that his own immortal soul might have some hand in that work.
For he had power to lay down his life, and power to take it up again, Joh. 10.
18. He did not rise to die again as Lazarus did, but to be immortal. For being
raised from the dead, he dies no more; death has no more dominion over him,
Romans 6. 9. The time of his Resurrection was no sooner, that he might appear to
be dead and no later, lest his Disciples Faith, already shaken, should have
^ayled. This day was a day of greater bliss and glory, then any since the
Creation: It was the beginning of the new World, and the foundation of the
Christian Sabbath celebrated in all times since, by the universal Church in
memory of this blessed and glorious work. This was his justification, the
confirmation of his satisfaction and merit, and Gods acception of that great
sacrifice; and an absolute Conquest of death, which is the last enemy to be
subdued in the bodies of the Saints, who are his Church. By this also sin, and
Satan received a fatal wound; and Regeneration, and the hope of eternal glory
depend upon the same. They depend upon it not only in respect of divine
institution, but because as he had merited, so he received a power to
regenerate all such as should believe in him, and to raise them up to eternal
Life. For, to whomsoever he gives his Regenerating Spirit in this Life, that
very Spirit once dwelling in us, is an evidence and assurance that we shall
rise again to glory. For if the Spirit of him that raised up Christ from the
dead dwell in us; He that raised up Christ from the dead, shall also quicken
our mortal bodies by his Spirit that dwells in us, Romans 8. 11.

The manifestation was full and clear, Mary Magdalene. 2. To two Disciples
going to Emaus. 3. To Cephas. 4. To the twelve. 5. To 500 Brethren together. 6.
to James. 7. To all the Apostles, and that, several times. Thomas must not
only see him but with his hands, and fingers feel the print of the nails, and
the scars of his wounds. They eat, and drink with him, receive instructions,
and commissions from him, and see him taken up into Heaven. Steeven, Paul, and
John the Divine, see him after he was ascended into Heaven. The Soldiers, who
were set to guard the Sepulcher are forced to be witnesses as of death, so of
his resurrection. The coming down of the Holy Ghost upon the Apostles, the
miracles done, the gifts of the Spirit received in his name, and the Faith of
the world in him do testify the same. So that there can be no reason in the
world to doubt of this Resurrection. The persons to whom he most of all
appeared were the Apostles, to whom he showed himself alive after his passion
by many infallible proofs, being seen of them 40. days, and speaking of the
things pertaining to the Kingdom of God, Act. 1. 3. And the reason hereof was
this, that they might be witnesses to him both in Jerusalem, and in all Judea,
and in Samaria, and unto the uttermost parts of the earth, verse. 8. And its
remarkable that he several times appeared on the first day of the week as
though he intended not only by his Resurrection, but his several apparations
to consecrate and honor that day.

After that Christ was risen, Olivet, his Disciples, gives them commission to
go to all Nations, promises the Spirit, blesses them, and, in their sight,
from that place ascends into Heaven in a cloud. For the Angels which appeared
unto them in the likeness of two men in white apparel, told them that he was
taken up into Heaven, Act. 1. 10, 11. This Ascension added nothing to his
power, though it might be a part of his Glory and Honor. The place from whence
he ascended was the Mount of Olivet, at the foot whereof he suffered so much in
his bitter Agony, where he was betrayed, apprehended, and deserted. The place
to which he did ascend was Heaven, the highest, and most glorious place in the
world. For he ascended far above all Heavens to fulfill all things, Ephesians. 4. 19.
The manner of this Ascension was glorious, and by way of Triumph: For,
accompanied with Angels, he led captivity captive, and gave gifts to men,
Psalm. 68. 18. And, no doubt, he made open show of the Principalityes and
Powers of Hell, which he had conquered. It was the greatest, and most stately,
Triumph that ever was in the World. Great was the joy of Angels, and the
Honor of that day wherein the Son of God, mounted in his triumphant charior, a
bright and glorious cloud, ascended into that glorious place, where, in his
Fathers presence, he, after his biter sufferings, has fulness of joy, and
pleasures for ever more! Where he has taken possession of those blessed
mansions of eternal rest, not only for himself but in our behalf. And, Oh
that our minds were lifted up above the world, and our affections so placed
that we might seek those things above, where he sits at his Fathers right
hand; that we might have a certain hope, that one day he would descend, from
that holy place, and take us with him, that we might be where he is, and so
behold his Glory, and be eternally freed from all sin and sorrow. And surely,
if we believe him, it was expedient he should depart, and leave this Earth, not
only for his own Glory but for our comfort, that he might send down his Spirit
to sanctify, comfort, and guide us into all truth, Daniel saw in his
Night-Vision, and behold, one like the Son of man came in the clouds of Heaven,
and approached to the ancient of days, and the Angels brought him near before
him. This Vision was fulfilled in this Ascension, Dan. 7. 13. The Heaven of
Heavens was the fittest place, not only for his enjoyment of eternal
pleasures; but it was a stately Palace from whence he might exercise his
universal Power, and administer his eternal Kingdom, and be ettended, and
guarded, by the heavenly powers. For the Chariots of God are twenty thousands,
even many thousands, and he is in the midst of them, as in Sinai, even in the
holy place, Psalm. 68. 17. There he, as a Priest, for ever lives to make
intercession for us, and continues our Advocate to plead our cause, and make it
good before his Fathers Tribunal.

After that Christ ascended into Heaven, Sit thou at my right hand, till I make
thine Enemies thy Footstool. To sit at God's right Hand is to reign as King:
So the Apostle expounds it 1 Cor. 15. 25. Therefore by those words we
understand, that the highest degree of Honor and Power, next unto God, was
solemnly conferred upon him, and he was instantly to begin to exercise the
same. The Angels and all things, were subjected unto, and put under, his
power: and he became Administrator-Generall of this spiritual and everlasting
Kingdom. This Power was given him before; For he said that All Power in Heaven
and Earth was given him whilst he was on Earth. Yet now in Heaven he receivs
full Possession, and was solemnly crowned, and enthroned, before all the
Angels and the Host of Heaven, by virtue of these Words: Sit thou at my right
Hand. He was made Lawgiver and Judge, and could bind men to obedience or
punishment, and judge them accordingly, and determine of their final and
eternal estates, so as to give them eternal rewards, or afflict them with
eternal punishments. This was part of Daniel's Vision: For when one, like the
Son of Man, was brought near before the ancient of days, there was given Him
Dominion and Glory, and a Kingdom, that all People, Nations, and Languages,
should serve Him: His Dominion is an everlasting Dominion, which shall not pass
away; and His Kingdom that which shall not be destroyed.

The success and issue of His Administration, was a final Victory over all
Enemies, and a total subduing of all opposite and contrary Powers: and also the
Eternal Peace and Felicity of His loyal and obedient Subjects. As upon His
Entrance into the glorious place of Heaven, His everlasting Kingdom was
established in His hands; so His Priesthood was made an everlasting
Priesthood, and confirmed upon Him by a Solemn Oath. For God swear unto Him,
and would not alter, That He should be a Priest for ever after the Order of
Melchizedeck: So that now He is made Universal, Supreme, Eternal King and
Priest; and as He is next unto God, by Personal Union, so He is by Power. Ten
days were spent in this Solemnity and the Preparation for the Administration
of this Kingdom: and upon the 10th day after His Ascension the Holy Ghost was
sent down from Heaven upon the Apostles, and the Son of God made Man, having by
Death acquired this Power, and now received it, began by the Holy Ghost to
exercise the same.

After that Christ was exalted, Administration differed much. For Christ, as
King, sends down the Holy Ghost upon the Apostles, and so makes New Officers,
new Laws, and executes judgment accordingly. As Prophet, reveals clearly and
fully the great Mystery of the Gospel. As Priest, begins His intercession in
Heaven. He begins this Administration in Jerusalem, and the first tender of
Eternal Life by Him, as Savior, is made to the Jew. For the Rod of His Power
must go out of SION. So it was prophesied of old. He abolisheth the
Temple-Worship: and for the sin of that People, destroys the Temple and the
City, and both lie desolate to this day. And He not only took away the Customs
and Rites of Moses, but all mystical and typical Ceremonies and Sacrifices,
used from the times of Adam; and also the Sacraments of Circumcision, and the
Passover. The Levitical Priests and Ministers, and all such as served in the
Temple, or in the Tabernacle, He removed. In stead of the Sacraments of
Circumcision and the Passover, He instituted the Sacrament of Baptism, and the
Supper of the Lord: Of Baptism, as a Solemn Rite of Regeneration, and admission
into His Kingdom; the Lords Supper, as a Rite of Commemoration, of the great
Sacrifice of His Death, and of the continuance of their subjection unto Him*
and communion amongst themselves. His Territory is enlarged: For He takes in
the Gentiles, and all Nations, unto the ends of the Earth. The Synagogue
Wo^ship, in Word and Prayer, and other Moral-Services remained: yet this was to
be performed unto God, in the name of Christ glorified. And now they were
neither bound to worship in the Land of Canaan, nor in Jerusalem, nor in the
Temple, according to the words of our Savior, to the Woman of Samaria: Believe
me, the hour comes, when ye shall neither in this Mountain nor in Jerusalem,
worship the Father, Joh. 4. 41. Therefore, we may worship and pray every where,
lifting up holy hands without wrath and doubting, 1 Timothy 2. 8. The Officers, in
stead of the former Priests and Prophets, ordinary, and extraordinary, are
Apostles, Prophets, and Evangelists, Pastors and Teachers. The extraordinary,
besides Prophets and Evangelists, were the Apostles, who being Universal
Officers, invested with transcendent power, laid the Foundation of the
Church-Christian, not only amongst the Jews, but the Gentiles, and finished
the Canon of the New Testament, which is the perpetual ^^le of
Doctrine-Worship, and Discipline, unto the Worlds end. To this purpose they
were endued with extraordinary gifts of Knowledge, Wisdom, Languages, power of
doing Miracles, and, by imposition of hands, of giving the Holy Ghost. The
ordinary Officers, are Pastors and Teachers. These succeed the Apostles in
their ordinary power, both of Teaching, Praying, Administration of the
Sacraments, and the exercise of Discipline, so far as Christ has left power in
the Church. For their Associates, or Assistants, and their Order, and imparity
in the use of the Keys, this is no place to speak of particularly. So that
now, by Christ glorified, all Laws are made and published; all judgment
exercised, all Officers ordained. By Him, as a Priest, all Petitions,
Thanksgivings, Praises, Doxologies, Services, are presented to the Father, and
to be performed in His Name. Nay, Glory and Worship are given by the Universal
Church to God and the Lamb, Rev. 5. 13. and 7. 10. By Him all Pardons and
Spiritual Blessings are dispensed and disposed of: and all the Promises are
performed by Him, and in His Name, and for His merit. No man can come unto the
Father, but by Him, nor any service be accepted, but for His sake. By Him, we
have access into His Fathers presence, and by Him we come with boldness and
confidence unto the Throne of Grace. And this Administration shall not be
altered* but shall continue, till Death shall be destroyed; and then Christ
shall deliver up this Commission, and God shall be All in All.

CHAP. VI.
Concerning the Parts of the Administration and the Laws.
THE Administration in particular follows, and it refers either to Enemies,
Church, which is the number, and Society of God's loyal and sincere Subjects,
has always had Her Enemies. How else could she be militant? And if not first
militant, how could she prove in the end victorious and triumphant. The
principal Enemy is the Devil, the old Serpent, ever since God put emnity
between him and the Seed of the Woman. His design is their Temporal, and
Eternal Ruin: and his opposition is very terrible, and so violently managed
with such power and policy, that nothing but destruction could be expected, but
that God is our defense, and by Jesus Christ, our General, will not only
defend us, but dash in pieces all his power. His Instruments and Agents are
wicked men without, or Hypocrites within the Church: The one, are like
Foreign; the other, like Domestic and Intestine Foes. The one, by Persecution
without; and the other, by Heresies, Schisms, and Scandals within, assault us.
Both these have a great advantage, because of our corruptions in our Bowels.

The greatest hurt God suffers them to do us, is, to chastise us, and exercise
our Spiritual Graces, and Heavenly Virtues. And Death it self, whether Natural,
because of the first sin, or violent from them, can but destroy our bodies for
a time, which God will raise again; but they cannot take away our Eternal
Estate, nor deprive us of Eternal Glory. Nay, such is the Wisdom of God, that
He can order all their opposition, so as it shall further, and not hinder our
Salvation: and such will be His care of us, out of His dear and tender love
unto us, that it shall actually tend unto, and end in our everlasting peace.
And in the end, all Enemies shall be subdued; Death, the last Enemy, shall be
destroyed. The Devil, and all his Angels, with all his Agents, shall be cast
into the Lake of Fire and Brimstone, there to be tormented for evermore. This
shall be done, in Justice and in Judgment. And after this follows our Eternal
Peace and Triumph, and we shall be Kings and Priests, and reign with God for
ever. This emnity, and the opposition of these Enemies, their cruelty, the
sufferings of God's People, God frustrating of their Designs, and confounding
of their Counsels, His Defense, His many and strange Deliverances, the Valor
of God's Saints, and their glorious Victories mentioned in the Scripture, would
require a whole Volume, and be an excellent Subject of some Sacred Pen.

As this Administration refers to the Church, the Subjects of God-Redeemer, by
Christ; the Parts thereof are, LAWS, And JVDGMENT.

For as there be two Branches of this Supreme Power; Legislation; and the other
of Jurisdiction: so the Parts of this Administration, which is the Exercise of
this twofold Power, are Laws, or rather, giving of Laws, or judging according
to these Laws. For these Laws, are the Rules of this Administration of the
Subjects Duty, and of God's Judgment; as the Judgment puts the Laws in
execution, according to the obedience, or disobedience of the Subjects.

Concerning these Laws, we may observe

1. That they bind the Conscience, and the Immortal Souls, to obedience; and
make men, upon their disobedience liable not only to Temporal, but Spiritual
and Eternal Punishments. And in Judgment, God takes cognizance of all causes,
even the most secret and spiritual, and rewards and punishes, accordingly.

2. The Church was never without these Laws, since God made the first Promise
of Christ.

3. They were made known, and promulgate before the Exhibition of Christ, by
Angels and Men; and by men either immediately inspired, as by extraordinary
Prophets, or by ordinary Prophets, Priests, and other Teachers. The Decalogue,
which we call the Moral Law, was once delivered by God, in wonderful manner,
upon Mount Sinai. And after Christ was exhibited, they were promulgated by
Christ, His Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists; and, after that, by ordinary
Pastors and Teachers. The Gospel began to be made known by our Lord Jesus
Christ, Heb. 2. 3.

4. They are delivered to us, and reserved in the Church by Word and Writing.

5. They are not bare Precepts, Prohibitions, Threatenings, and Promises, but
have annexed many Admonitions, Reproofs, Exhortations, Dehortations, absolute
Denunciations of Judgments, and Examples. The Examples are delivered in the
Historical Part; and they set before us the Obedience and Virtues of some, and
their Rewards, with the Disobedience, Apostasy, Rebellions of others, and their
Punishments. And all these are further illustrated by Parables, and
Similitudes; and the same Commands and Prohibitions repeated often in several
parts of the Scriptures. The final and universal Judgment, with many other
particulars of this Administration, we may read in the Prophetical Part.

6. All these are Laws of God-Redeemer, who does not expect from sinful man,
perfect and perpetual Obedience, nor promise Eternal Life upon that condition,
but upon the Faith of Christ's Satisfaction and Merit.

7. They presuppose man sinful, and destitute of all power to observe them.
Therefore, they require obedience, by way of Return, to be performed by the
power of the Spirit, merited by Christ, and restored in great mercy unto us.
And which is strange, Obedience, as Obedience, and performed by us, gives us no
Title unto everlasting life: For it is derived by the Promise of God, from the
merit of Jesus Christ; from, and for which, we receive our Faith and Obedience.

8. Some of these Laws were Temporary, and to stand in force only for a time:
Some perpetual, and after they were once given to continue unto the Worlds end.

These Laws must be considered,

1. As a Rule of Man's Duty.

2. Of God's Judgment: In respect of the Commands, they bind man to duty, and
are the Rule thereof: In respect of the Promises and Threatenings, they are the
Rule of God's Judgment. As they are the Rule of Man's Duty, they are either
Moral or Positive. The Moral require, or presuppose Subjection unto God, not
only as Creator, but Redeemer, in the first place. The Moral Law, as such, is
of perpetual obligation, and was given to Adam innocent, and continues in force
for ever yet, as it is purely Moral. Yet the obligation thereof, which followed
the Promise of the Redeemer, differed much from the former, as it bound Adam
innocent, as shall appear hereafter at large.

This Law is called Moral, not merely, because it is Regula morum, a Rule of
Humane Actions, for so other Laws may be; but to distinguish it from Laws
Positive, as Judicial, and Ceremonial be; and because the Acts commanded by it
are intrinsecally just. For we must not so much attend to the proper
signification, as the use of words. And it is so called, not by the Prophets, or
Apostles, but by Latin Christian Writers, especially of later times. The
reason why it is of perpetual obligation, is, because God having made man
righteous, and holy, never gave him liberty to be unrighteous, and unholy: and
He always bound him to love his God, himself, his neighbor. The Duties thereof
arise from the Natural Relation of Man unto God, and unto his Neighbor;
therefore called the Law of Nature. The very frame and constitution of his
reasonable and immortal Soul, and of his Body, did dictate the Equity and
Justice of this Law. Some therefore say, that this Law did result from the
Image of God, wherein Man was created. Yet there are degrees of Morality: For
some acts are more immediately Moral: Others derive their Morality from some
other, and are such at second hand. In the Decalogue, all the Commandments
derive their Morality from the first: And all the Precepts of the second Table,
receive their Morality from the last, as that receives Morality from the first
of the first Table. Some are Moral in this life, which shall cease to be so in
the life to come. And we must diligently consider what Duties are purely Moral,
and of perpetual continuance. Consider the matter of this Law, as consisting in
so many Rules or Propositions of Divine Wisdom and Justice, as abstracted from
the Nature of a Law, and the commands of God's Legislative Will, and the same
known unto man; if he act according to these Rules, he may be capable of
reward, yet can have no title to it; if he act contrary, he may be worthy of
punishment, yet not bound to suffer it. But consider the Parts and Branches of
it not only as Rules and Acts of the Understanding, but of Gods Legislative
Will, so they have the form of Laws, and such God's Will has determined them
to be unto Man. The nature of them, as Laws, is to bind unto obe^ience, or upon
disobedience unto punishment. This is that which they call active obligation,
which is the essential act of a Law. Passive obligation, whereby Man is bound,
flows necessarily from the essence of it. That this Law should have a Promise
of Eternal Life annexed unto it, upon condition of obedience, and a threatening
of Eternal Death, upon Disobedience, was accidental unto it. That if Man
sinned, he should actually suffer the punishment threatened was so too.

That the particular Precepts thereof should be Articles of a Covenant, was not
essential, And, that perfect and perpetual obedience should be that condition,
upon which per^ormed, it was God's Will, Eternal Life should follow, and no
ways else, was accidental. So likewise it was, that the sin of one should be
the sin of all, and His Death, their death. For the Law might have been a Law,
without any such thing.

This Law may be considered,

1. As given to Adam, and in him to all Mankind.

2. As continued, yet with several accidental, and extrinsecal alterations in
the Kingdom of God-Redeemer. As it was given to Adam, it is of a twofold
consideration, in respect. 1. Of him, as Innocent. 2. Of him, as Fallen.


Adam, as Innocent, received this Law; and it was given unto him, as righteous
and holy, by Creation, and he was able to keep it: And he was bound to perform
it perfectly, and perpetually, together with other Positives. And this perfect
and perpetual obedience, was the only condition of life to him, and his; and
one sin one committed, made him, and his, liable to death. After that Adam, and
in him all his, had sinned, it was a Law of Sin and Death unto them; and if God
had made it a standing Rule of Judgment, in strict Justice man must needs have
been condemned to Eternal Death, and there was no hope or possibility of
Eternal Life by this Law. For suppose God had pardoned this first sin, and yet
continued this Law in force, man could not have been saved by it. For he lost
the Spirit of Sanctification: and if God had continued to say, Do this, and
live; because he could not do this, he could not live. Neither was there any
Promise of a Savior to expiate his sin, nor of the Spirit, to enable him to
keep it, nor of Pardon, upon expiation made, if he afterward transgressed it.

After that God in passing Sentence upon the Devil had said,

The knowledge of this Law, Conscience: which is nothing else, but the
knowledge of a man's Acts, Dispositions, Habits, as agreeable, or disagreeable,
to this or other Laws of God. This Knowledge, in respect of acts future, is the
Law of God within him, to bind him to obedience, and restrain him from
disobedience. In respect of acts past, it is a Judge within himself, or a
Witness for, or against him, before the Tribunal of God. This it is properly;
yet tropically, in Scripture, it is several times taken in another sense,
according to the several adjuncts thereof. For the practical judgment of man is
sometimes more, sometimes less perfect; and great is his Ignorance and many his
Errors, both in matter of Law, and of Fact; and most of all in applying the
Law unto the Fact; or Fact unto the Law. Sometimes it is a false Witness, and an
unjust Judge: and hence man's Security, in greatest Guilt; and Despair, when
there is hope of Mercy.

This Knowledge, of this Law-Moral, in Adam innocent, was more perfect;
Knowledge, though not utterly razed it out. For even the wicked Heathen, who
had not the Law written, yet by Nature did something contained in the Law, and
were a Law unto themselves, which did show the Works of the Law of God written
in their hearts, Romans 2. 13, 14, 15. Yet the knowledge of it was always
preserved in the Church by constant Teaching and reiterated Revelations,
improving the Natural Light of Reason. Yet some Positives and Ceremonials were
always added, and it was joined to the Law of Faith. God renewed the Doctrine
of it more perfectly, and in a more solemn manner unto Israel* both by an
audible Voice, and by writing it in Tables of stone. Moses and the Prophets,
Christ and His Apostles, more fully and clearly explain it. And by outward
Teaching and inward Illumination, God writes it by degrees in the hearts of His
people.

The use of the Law may be considered,

1. In respect of the Gentile. 2. Of the Jew. 3. Of the Church in general, but
especially Christian.
In respect of the Gentiles, who had other positive Laws and Customs, either by
Tradition, or the invention of the Devil, and wicked men, this Moral-Law, so
far as it was left written in their hearts, taught them their Duty to the only
true God, and also unto Man. For it was a Rule in matters of Religion, and in
matters of Justice unto them, both as they were single persons, and also
associated in a Family, or a Commonwealth. It was the Rule of their Civil
Government, both in making Laws, and in Judgment. And according to the
violation of this Law, God judged single persons, Families, Nations, and
Kingdoms. And the knowledge thereof which they had, or might have had, though
imperfect, did manifest in their own Conscience, the justice of God's Judgments
executed upon them. And so much the more, because by His patience,
long-suffering, and bounty, together with this law, he sought to draw them to
Repentance, But they holding the truth of God in unrighteousness, and
continuing impenitent, were inexcusable, and justly delivered up unto a
Reprobate mind; as may appear, Romans 1. from ver. 18. ad finem, and Chap. 2.
from ver. 1. to the 17th. And they that disobeyed this clear light of Nature,
were justly punished by God, with the ignorance of Jesus Christ, and the want
of the Laws and Promises of God-Redeemer.

It was of singular use to the Jew: For,

1. It was added to the Promise, made to Abraham, four hundred and thirty years
before.

2. It was so revealed, that it reduced all Moral Duties to a few Heads, and
digeste^ those Heads into an exact and excellent Method, and was given with a
special application to that People.

3. It was Supernaturally written in two Tables of Stone, that it might be
reserved in the Ark, as a rare and lasting Monument from Heaven.

4. It had annexed the whole Body of the Judicials and Ceremonials to continue
in force, whilst they should be a State Civil and Ecclesiastical, even till
the glorification of Christ, and the Revelation of the Gospel.

5. It had joined with it many Temporal Promises and Curses, Yet, as before,

1. It did minister no power of the Spirit to keep it.

2. It promised no Pardon, or Spiritual Blessing: for those belonged unto the
Law of grace in Christ, who was promised to Abraham.

3. It had no Priest that could expiate Sin or Sacrifice, which could purge the
Conscience from dead Works.

4. It ran in strict terms; as, Do this, and live.

5. It was given in such a manner, as to strike a terror into them; as guilty
Wretches, who seemed to be summoned before God, not so much to receive a Law as
to hear the Sentence of Death passed upon them. The special use therefore unto
them, was, to give them a clearer, and more perfect knowledge, as of their
duty, so of their sin and misery: Of their Sin, by the Precepts; of their
misery, by the threatenings: And this, to humble them, cause them to desire a
remedy, and have recourse unto the Promise of Christ, and that with a longing
after his Exhibition. And seeing there was no promise of power to keep it, or
of pardon; and the Priesthood, Sacrifices, and other Services, being in
themselves an heavy burden, could no ways be able to free them from the guilt
of sin they had the greater cause to rely upon him, and expect his coming. It
was also a Rule of their lives, both as single persons, and as Members of a
Body Politic, that by obedience unto it, they might live happily in that good
Land of Canaan, and not be obnoxious to those fearful judgments God had
threatened, and their Posterity for their sin, did afterward suffer. Other uses
of it, as joined with the Ceremonials, I have formerly delivered. That many of
them sought Righteousness, and Justification by this Law, together with the
Ceremonial, was their great mistake: For,

1. There was no power in the Moral Law, to justify them, except they could
keep it: but seeing they could not do it, it was added for transgression, Gal.
3. 19.

2. The Law Ceremonial had no power to sanctify them, and free them from sin:
For the Law was weak, and unprofitable, and made nothing perfect, that is, it
justified and sanctified no man, Heb. 7. 18* 19. The Priests, by their
Offerings and Sacrifices, could not take away sin, Heb. 10. 11.

The use of it to the Church,

1. To discover Sin.

2. To be a Rule of Obedience. And of this use it was always both to
Patriarchs, to Israel, and to all Christians.

The first end is, to discover Sin: For, as where there is no Law, there is no
Sin; so where there is no knowledge of the Law there is no knowledge of Sin.
Therefore it is said, that by the Law is the knowledge of sin, Romans 3. 20. And
the more clearly and distinctly God in his Law shall represent our Duty; and
that measure of Righteousness and Holiness, which God requires at our hands,
and we by the Law of Creation were bound to perform, or else suffer eternal
death, the more vile, abominable, and miserable, we plainly see our selves to
be; We easily understand what need we have of Christ's death and intercession,
God's mercy, and the Spirit of Regeneration, lest we run on endlesly upon this
heavy score. The more we know our vile and sad condition, the more we know the
freeness of God's grace, and the abundance of his mercy, if He will be pleased
to deliver us. And lest the Law should work despair, it was always in the
Church joined with Christ either to come or else exhibited. Therefore it is
said, That the Law entered, that the offense might abound; but where sin
abounded, grace did much more abound. From which words we may understand,

1. That the Law was not given to justify us.

2. It Is never to be separated from Christ, and God's abundant grace in Jesus
Christ our Lord. And this is one use to be made of the Law, not only before we
are in Christ to prepare us for him, but also after that we are in Him, that we
may renew our Faith and Repentance, till we be fully sanctified. Yet the Law,
without the power of the Divine Spirit, can never so clearly and distinctly
represent unto us our sins, and make us sensible of them, or keep us from
despair.

In this respect, the Law may be said to be Evangelical, because subservient to
the Gospel.

He that shall preach the Law without Christ is truly a legal Preacher: And he
that shall preach Christ without the Law to discover sin, is an Antinomian.
This use cannot be made of the Law without Self-examination, and a serious and
distinct Review of our lives laid to the Line of this Law. And though the Moral
Law be the principal in this use; yet all positive Laws in force, serve to the
same end.

This was not the proper and first intended end: for as it found man holy, and
righteous at the first; so it required he should continue. Obedience and life
were the end: To discover disobedience, and man's sad condition thereupon, and
to cause him to look and cast about for a Deliverance, and desire Christ
represented as a Savior, was not intended at the first, but made an end by
God-Redeemer in Christ to prepare him for Christ. This use was merely
accidental to the Law, and was super-added by the Divine Wisdom and Mercy: and
in this respect it can no ways belong to the first Covenant of Works. To strike
terror into guilty man, and cause him to despair of life might be an effect of
it according to that Covenant. And now if it be represented, as first given to
Adam, it can have no other effect. But thus it was not to be understood, after
God had signified that He would provide a Redeemer.

Another use in the second place,

1. It Is not a bare Rule to inform our Understanding of the Duty, and so give
direction; but it is a binding Rule, as every Law is. It Is not merely given us
for Advice, Exhortation, Persuasion, but with a strong Obligation.

2. This Obedience is performed by sinful Man, by way of Return. For this Law
finds man sinful, guiltys and disobedient, both by Nature and Practice.
Therefore, the Scripture calls so often for turning to the Lord; which implies
two things:

1. That turning from our sins, we should for time to come, subject our selves
to God, as our Redeemer, and acknowledge Him.

2. That being subjected, we should be obedient unto His particular Commands.
And this Obedience; by way of Return, is called Repentance, which cannot be
without sorrow for sin past, Humiliation, hatred of sin, a love of God, and
desire to please Him.

3. This Obedience cannot be performed without the Spirit merited by Christ,
and restored unto us; first, to prepare us, then to dwell in us, by degrees
renewing the Image of God, and imprinting it upon us.

4. We must be in Christ, as the Branch in the Vine, and be conformed unto His
Death and Resurrection, before we can perform any obedience acceptable to God,
so as to tend toward the attainment of Everlasting Life. For without me,
(says Christ) ye can do nothing, Joh. 15. 5. And we are God's Workmanship
created in Christ Jesus, unto good works, Ephesians. 2. 10. It Is one thing to do
that which is Morally good, as the Heathen might do, and be rewarded
Temporally; another to perform Christian obedience.

5. It presupposes Faith, whereby we are united unto Christ, and sincere Faith
is virtually Repentance, and all Obedience, and a part and beginning thereof.

6. This Obedience is imperfect, and defective in the best man living upon
Earth; and therefore is not the condition of life. For if the Moral Law should
be in force, so as it was to Adam at the first, to require, and bind man unto
perfect and perpetual obedience; or else upon one act of Disobedience unto
Death, no man could be saved. Therefore, that manner of strict Obligation,
cease unto sinful man for ever. To think that the Promises, Threats, and
Obligation of the Law of Works continue under the Gospel, or remain at any time
in the Kingdom of God-Redeemer, is an error, and a great mistake. It Is one
thing to bind unto perfect obedience; another to bind unto perfect obedience,
as the condition of life. This latter was essential, even to the Moral-Law, as
given to Adam at the first, and in that respect it is truly and properly said,
that the Law of Works is ab^ogated. The Law binds according to the will and
pleasure of the Lawgiver, and no otherwise. If Man perform not perfect
obedience, and yet be bound unto it, he is in the hands of his Judge, above the
Law, to dispose of him as he pleases.

7. This obedience is performed to God-Redeemer, as satisfied, atoned, and
propitiated by the blood of Christ, who has merited, that it should be
accepted and rewarded. In this respect it is not proper; nay, it is not true, to
say that God in the Moral Law binds man to perfect, or perpetual obedience: For
so He does not. He binds to perfect and perpetual obedience, which he neither
does nor can perform; or to punishment suffered by his Savior, and, upon Faith
in him, removable; not to obedience and punishment too. For time-past, Man has
been already disobedient; and for time to come, he will not be perfectly
obedient, till the time of glory. Yet the Suffering of Christ does not free man
sinning from all suffering: For it is the Will of God, that even regenerate men
should suffer much for their own sins. Yet man's suffering cannot satisfy; it
may dispose him through the help of God's sanctifying Spirit to Repentance, and
make him capable of the benefit of that Suffering, which has satisfied the
Justice of God, who has accepted it for sinful disobedient Man, pleading his
Saviors suffering. This Obligation of the Law is purely Evangelical; and in
this respect, the Precept, and the Condition, are of equal extent, as well as
they were in the time of the Law of Works.

8. Faith and Repentance, as they are Acts of Obedience in general, are
commanded in the Moral Law: Yet, as Faith is in God-Redeemer, and Repentance a
return to obedience, to be performed to God in Christ, by the Spirit of Christ,
they are not to be found in the Law at all: as such, they are purely
Evangelical, and conditions of life, even to sinful guilty man. Though Faith,
and Obedience, as different from Faith, be conditions of the New Covenant; yet
there is both a difference, and an inequality between them, as a condition.
Faith unites us unto Christ; from whom immediately, by viture of the Promise,
we derive a right to Justification, and so to Life. In which respect, it may be
said, to be a Title-Condition; that is, ^a condition upon which follows
immediately a right to Righteousness and Life. Faith, considered as Faith in
general, in it self cannot be a Title, without reference to Christ's merit, and
God's Promise: For Faith, this Faith is terminated upon both, and as such, and
no ways else is Saving. The Promise is a kind of Donation of Righteousness, and
Life, as purchased by Christ: and God's the Donour, and the Believer by his
Faith becomes the Donee: Good Works are a condition; and all obedience which
follows and flows from Faith, as distinct from Faith, yet virtually included in
Faith, is so too.

Obedience is twofold:

1. In Morals. 2. In Positives.
Obedience in Morals, and good Works, as morally good, are a condition not to
give a right, but to render a man capable of communion with God, and make him
fit for the possession of that life Christ has purchased: For without
Holiliness we cannot see God: and except we walk in the light, as he is light,
we can have no communion with him: and till our obedience in Morals be perfect,
we can have no full fruition of him, Obedience, in Positives, is a condition
yet neither as giving right, nor making man capable, but because God's
institution makes them binding, except in case of necessity, wherein God
dispenses with Man. This is so far a condition, that life follows thereupon,
if it be joined with Faith and Obedience in Morals; and in case of Contempt,
life will not follow, not be communicable. From all this we may understand,
that there is a twofo^dness of the Moral Law, Evangelically considered;

1. To discover sin.

2. To be a Rule of Obedience. Thus the Composers of our Liturgy did
understand it, and that rightly according to the Scripture, when they added
this short Petition [Lord have mercy upon us; and incline our hearts to keep
this Law] after every Commandment.

This Petition is twofold: For,

1. Pardon of sin that is past.

2. For Grace to enable them, to keep it for time to come: The first includes a
confession of sin a, Belief in Christ, and a Petition for pardon: The second,
an acknowledgment of their inability to keep it, a necessity of the sanctifying
Spirit, a Petition or the same, and the end and effect thereof obtained* which
is to incline their hearts to keep it. And after all the Commandments, and
every particular, they desire God to give them a general pardon of all sins
against this Law; and such a measure of Grace, as that they might perform an
Universal Obedience: For so the Petition runs, Write all these thy Laws in our
hearts we beseech thee.

In the next place,

1. That as purely Moral, it is always in force: and God did never at any time
dispense with it, but made it the Foundation of all other Laws; and it shall
continue in force in Heaven. For in the very estate of perfect glory, all the
Subjects of that eternal glorious Kingdom shall be bound eternally to love
their God, themselves, and one another.

2. God bound Adam, in the day of Creation, to the perfect and perpetual
personal obedience of this Law, and of other Positives, as the only condition
of life; and so, that upon one sin, he and all his should be liable to death,
without any remedy, as from that Law. This was the highest obligation.

3. After that Adam, and in him all his had once sinned, this Law, with the
Positives, did render him liable and bound to death.

4. After that Christ was once promised, as a Surety, and Hostage, to satisfy
God's Justice, offended by the sin of man, it made him liable to death, and all
such punishments as God should inflict upon him.

5. After the Fall of Adam, it was in force so fa^, as to bind all such as were
out of the Church to Temporal* and Eternal Punishments for their sins against
it, without any hope of Pardon: and all such as were in the visible Church to
Temporal and Eternal Punishments, no ways removable, but upon Faith in the
Death of Christ.

6. It is in force always, since sinful Man received the New Law and Covenant
of Grace to bind him to repentance, present repentance, and return unto the
sincere obedience of it, to be performed by the power of the Spirit.

7. It always is in force, to bind the Regenerate Children of God here on
Earth, to endeavor and aim at an universal, perpetual, and perfect obedience;
and, upon defect* or default, presently to return to God-Redeemer, for mercy
and pardon of what is past, to be obtained by a Plea of Christ's Satisfaction
and Merit; and, also further, for the continuance and increase of His
Sanctifying Grace.

Lastly, after that Man is perfectly sanctified, it is so far in force, as to
bind him to perfect and eternal obedience unto it.

Such is the excellency of this Law, as purely Moral; that

1. If Man had kept it, God would give life by it.

2. That God never gave Man a liberty to be free from the Obligation of it.

3. That God would never pardon any sin against it, without satisfaction made
by the Blood of Christ, believed and pleaded by sinful Man.

4. That Christ merited, and God restored the Spirit of Sanctification, that
Man might keep it.

5. That He will not spare His own children, when they transgress it by
heinous, and especially scandalous, sins.

6. That no Man can have union with Christ, except he willingly separate from
sin, and return to the obedience of this Law.

7. That no man can have full communion with God before he perfectly obey it.

8. That there is one great change, in respect of this Law. First, perfect
Obedience unto it, with other Positives, was made the only condition of life:
But afterward that Promise of Life, upon those strict terms, and that severe
commination of Death upon Sin were abolished, and Faith was made the only
condition of life. So that it may be truly said, that the Law of Works is
abrogated; but not the Moral Law, considered in it Self* Yet this change was
but accidental (as before).

These things premised, Moral Law in general, I proceed unto the Exposition of
the DECALOGVE; which, though it was given to the Jews, contains the Heads and
Method of the Moral Law.

And it may be considered, either as a part of the Law of Works, or merely as
the Moral Law in general, or as part of the Gospel, in an Evangelical Notion.

As it was delivered in that terrible manner (with these Clauses, Do this, and
live; and, Cursed is every one that continues not in all things written in
this Book) it had something of the Law of Works in it; As it was annexed to the
Promise made to Abraham, and joined with the Ceremonies, typifying Christ, it
was Evangelical. As considered in general, abstracted from both these, it was
an Abridgement of the Moral Law, respecting Man in this life, not in the life
to come.

It Is to be understood not strictly, as given to Israel at that time; but in a
Latitude, as it is explained in other parts of the Books of Moses, especially
in Deuteronomy, in the Prophets, and most of all, as in the New Testament:
where it is explained by our Blessed Savior, and the Duties thereof pressed by
Him, and the Apostles, upon all Christians. And this is an Argument* that some
ways it continues in force, in the Gospel. As delivered in Exodus, and repeated
in Deuteronomy, it rather contains the Heads, to which other Duties, not there
expressed, may be reduced, rather then the Principles from whence they may be
deduced. It Is abridged in many places of Moses, the Prophets, and Apostles. Yet
that of our Savior is most perfect, wherein, according to Moses, he reduces
all to Love: For Love is the whole Law. This Loves either of God, or of our
Neighbor.

To love God above all, is the first and great Commandment of the first Table:
To love our Neighbor, as our Selves, is the last Commandment of the second
Table.

These two are purely Moral, especially the former; and the rest are such by
participation, as before: Therefore, the first is said to be the great
Commandment: The last, to be like it.

CHAP. VII.
An Exposition of the Moral Law, as methodically reduced to Ten Heads in the
Decalogue, by God himself: And of the first Commandment: With the Preface.
THE Decalogue (so called by the Septuagint, Exodus 20. and repeated, Deuteronomy. 5.
Wherein we have,

1. The Preface. 2. The Precepts, or Commandments themselves.
The Preface is twofold.

1. Of Moses the Historian. 2. Of God Himself.
The first Preface in these words [God spoke all these words] The meaning is,
that

1. These Words or Commandments, (for so the Word in the Original sometimes
signifies) These, I say, and none else.

2. These, and all these

3. Were spoken, published, and promulgate.

4. By God, and God alone, immediately in a wonderful* and extraordinary
manner, in the hearing of all Israel, prepared and assembled before Mount Sina
in Arabia.

By this we understand, that God Himself was the La-wgiver, and the immediate
Author of this Law: And therefore it is more excellent then any Law or Laws of
any Nation in the World. And seeing He spoke these, and these only, these, and
all these, it is not for Man to add and diminish: And all and every one are
authentic, and of Divine Authority, in an high degree.

The second Preface we have in these words [I am the Lord thy God, who brought
thee out of the Land of Egypt, out of the House of Bondage.] This second
Preface is of God Himself, wherein we have both His absolute and relative
Titles, whereby He asserts both His own absolute and supreme Power, and their
dependence upon Him.

The Titles are three:

The first is absolute [I am the Lord] which signifies His absolute and most
perfect Being in Himself, who is worthy of all glory, honor, power, and
subjection for evermore. For all glorious and most excellent perfections agree
to Him, who is so glorious and so excellent in Himself, and the Basis and
immovable Foundation of the World, and of all created Beings, which issue from
His infinite and Almighty Power; and, without His sustentation, return to
nothing: From this we understand, that this Lord and Lawgiver is only one,
and there can be no other: For He is the Lord of Lords, and King of Kings.

The second Title, which together with the third being relative is [Thy God].
To be the God of Israel was not only to be creator, preserver, and governor
in general, for so he was the God of all mankind; but it i^cludes some
special relation to them. For he was their God, and in such a manner as He was
to none others. He was their God by Election, Promise, and their voluntary
submission, and engagement, so that they were his Peculiar People. By this also
we understand their total dependence upon him; his absolute power over them;
and that whatsoever degree of subjection and duty he should require, it was
justly due unto him, and that not only by virtue of his Power but their solemn
engagement, Exodus 19. 8.

The third Title is, Who have brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of
the house of Bondage. This does put them in mind of their Bondage and sad
condition in Egypt, and deliverance out of the same. If we consider their
condition before this deliverance, We shall find

1. They were but Sojourners in that Idolatrous nation; had no Country or
habitation hereditary of their own, in any place under heaven.

2. They were under a cruel bloody Tyrant, and had neither governors, nor
governments independent of themselves.

3. Their male Children were born to be murdered, and to lose their life so
soon as they began to enjoy it in the light of the World.

4. They were made absolute slaves and drudges, and bound to base and hard
service, which they were no ways able to perform; and yet liable to grievous
punishments, if they performed it not. Yet out of this sad condition God did
deliver them in a wonderful and glorious manner. For

1. God fearfully plagued and punished their enemies, and took vengeance on
them for their cruel oppression.

2. Brought them out with an high hand.

3. They were no sooner departed out of that cursed Kingdom, but God took them
into his special Protection: A Cloud must cover them by day, and be a guide,
and Pillar of fire and light by night. The Angels of Heaven not only going
before them, but bringing up the rear.

4. When Pharaoh with the power of Egypt pursued them, and took them in the
straites; he divided the Sea, and made way for them through the deep, wherein
he drowned the host, and strength of Egypt, with their King, pursuing them.

5. His Providence over them being a continued course of Miracles had brought
them thus far toward that goodly land, wherein he intended to settle them, and
give them peace and prosperity till their Savior and Redeemer should come and
be exhibited. And as that land was a type of their heavenly inheritance, so
this deliverance was of their spiritual and eternal redemption by Jesus
Christ. So that as Gods benefits were unspeakable, so their engagements unto
God were high, and very great, and so great as they could never be sufficiently
thankful: And if he should give them any laws, they were bound in the highest
degree to observe them, not only for his glory, but their own happiness. For
God had delivered them out of the hands of their enemies, that they might serve
him in holiness, and righteousness before him all their days, Luke 1. 74,
75. This preface was of greatest force to engage them and the fittest that
possibly could be to prepare them for this law, and persuade them to obedience.
And to this end, it includes a multitude of most powerful motives: and though
it has special reference to the first and great commandment, yet it referrs
to all the rest as depending upon it. And seeing this law was given 430 years,
after the promise of the Blessed seed made to their Father Abraham, they might
have understood, that it was not given for justification and life, but to be a
Schoolmaster, or Tutour to order and direct unto Christ, in whom they were to
seek Remission of their sins and eternal life. Though many of them understood
it not in this manner. Yet we Christians who have a clearer light can have no
excuse if we be ignorant hereof.

These Commandments were written in two Tables; and

1. Are reducible to two heads: Such as determine

1. Our duty toward God. 2. Our duty toward our Neighbor.
2. These bind the conscience, and reach the very will, and heart of man, and
not only acts inward, or outward issuing from the heart.

3. As they are delivered unto us, Exodus 20. They were given to Israel in
particular, and the word Thou used in every Commandment, signifies, that God
in them spoke unto that Israel, whom he brought up out of Egypt, and stood
before Mount Sinai, when God spoke these words; and it signifies all Israel
jointly, as one person collective, and every one of them severally in
particular.

4. As given then at that time to Israel, it did neither promise Pardon of any
sin, nor power of the Spirit to keep it: Both these were to be expected from
the promise made to Abraham: and, annexed to that promise, it did serve to
discover sin, and to direct to Christ promised.

5. When we find the duties of the law pressed upon Believers in Christ, we
must know that they are to be performed to God Redeemer by the power of the
Spirit of Christ, (as has been said before).

6. There are some duties mentioned in Scripture, which are so general, as to
comprehend all the Commandments. Some that extend to all the first table, and
some to all the second, as we use to speak; Some are expressly delivered in the
several Commandments. Some deducible from the express words* Some only
reducible unto these heads by way of analogy, or some trope in Rhetoric, yet
expressly mentioned in other Scriptures: and one and the same thing may in
several respects be commanded or forbidden in several commandments.

7. This law is distinct both from the Judicial, and Ceremonial, yet both are
reducible to it. The first commandment virtually includes all the rest, and is
purely moral in the first place, as the last is moral in the second place,
and all the rest derive their Morality from these two (as was before hinted).
Other rules delivered by several authors for the better understanding of this
law, I pass by.

The first commandment is, Thou shall have no other Gods but me, and it is
negative, and so a Prohibition. It presupposes that there is One only true,
and living God, most glorious, and blessed in himself, the great Creator,
Preserver, Lawgiver, and Judge of the world, who as he delivered Israel out of
Egypt, and called them to be his peculiar people, so has redeemed sinful man
by Jesus Christ, and has called us out of darkness into his marveylous light,
and made those that were Lo -- ammi, not his people, to be Ammi his people, and
the Sons of the living God. This commandment Evangelically understood does
presuppose him to be such. The thing prohibited is either to deny or doubt that
there is such a God; or not to acknowledge him as such: or to believe there is
another God, or Gods, and to acknowledge him or them so to be. This denial,
doubting, false belief, and not acknowledging him, or acknowledging any other,
may proceed from negligent, or wilful blindness, which both are inexcusable.

So that the sins here forbidden may be reduced to Atheism, or Idolatry. The
one seems to be negative, and a sin of omission, though it is not always so:
the other affirmative or positive, and a sin of commission. And though the
having of other Gods besides him seems only to be forbidden, yet from the
affirmative part it does appear, that though we should have none other God, and
yet not have him as God and our God, is a sin against this law: And upon
accurate search, it will appear that every one that has not him as God, his
God, must needs have another God. And here it is to be noted, that though many
translate the words of this Commandment. Thou shall have no other Gods before
me, yet the principal meaning is, besides, or but me, as they are understood
by the Chaldy paraphrast, and the Septuagint, and may be expounded by those
words of Exodus 20. 23. Thou shall not make, With me, Gods of Silver, etc: These
words presuppose,

1. That none ought to be so accused, as to deny the Lord his Maker, in whom he
lives, moves, and has his Being.

2. That to have another God does not imply that there is another God, but that
men may account other things which are no Gods to be Gods.

3. That it was the custom, and practice of Egypt, and most nations of the
World to worship other Gods.

The first sin here forbidden, Atheism, which is more gross, or not so
palpable. The more gross is either to doubt, or deny, or not acknowledge, that
there is one glorious, and eternal Being, for ever blessed in himself; or if
there be, yet he is not the Creator, and preserver of all things, or, if he be
so, that he is not the universal Lord, Lawgiver, who takes notice of all men's
hearts, acts, doings, to reward, or punish them accordingly. These usually deny
the immortality of the Soul, the Resurrection of the Body, and the eternal
rewards, and punishments. These are not to be confuted, so much by any kind of
arguments, as by such as are drawn, e concessis, from something they themselves
grant to be true. This Atheism does not arise so much from the want of the
light of reason within, or sufficient representation of God without, as from
negligence, or wilful blindness, contracted by former sins, and sent upon
them by the just judgment of God, who has delivered them up to a reprobate
mind. Atheism less palpable is, when men profess they know God, but in works
deny him, being abominable, and disobedient, and to every good work, reprobate,
Tit. 1. 16. And all such as know him Speculatively, and yet do not acknowledge,
and respect him as God, the only God, are in some degree guilty of this Sin.
For the commandment requires us not only to know God, but to acknowledge,
and respect him, and him alone, as God.

Idolatry, Idol, an image as the Word does often signify, but a false God. For
to believe, that there is any God but one, or that any but he that made Heaven,
and Earth is that God, and to give the Worship due unto the only true God unto
it, is Idolotry. So that the object of Idolatry is a false God, that which is
no God, yet conceived to be such* and set up as God in the vile hearts of men.
An Idol says the Apostle, is nothing in the world: for there is none other God
but one, 1* Cor. 8. 4. Some give Divine Worship to those who are no Gods, and
deny it, or do not give it to the true God: Some give Divine honor to the true
God, and to false Gods too: Both are guilty. As one that has worn allegiance
to his own Sovereign, and yet continuing his subject swears unto another, is
guilty of high treason: much more He that denies fealty unto his own Lord, and
yet swears unto another. Honor properly Divine, as such cannot justly be
given to any but God: and to give it to any other is not to glorify God, as
God, the only God. When its said in the Place fore-alleaged, that an Idol is
nothing in the World, its not so to be understood, as though an Idol were no
real Being, or had no existence in the World, for the matter of an Idol is some
real thing for the most part; but that it is no God in it self, but only in the
conceit and judgment of the Idolater. The Gods of the Gentiles are said to be
Idols, 1 Chronicles. 19. 16. Where the Word translated Idols by the Septuagins and
others signifies, not-Gods, or no-Gods.

This Idolatry is more gross, or not so palpable as Atheism was. The more
gro^se is, when men Worship, as gods, either the invisible Creatures, as
Angels, or the Spirits of men deceased; or visible, as Living men, Birds,
Beasts, creeping things, the Sun* the Moon, the Stars of Heaven, the Elements.
These all are real Beings: But some fancy things that are not both to be, and
to be gods. The less palpable Idolatry, is from the baseness, and deceit of
our own hearts, as when we do acknowledge, and profess one only true God, yet
so love and affect the World, and the things thereof, as Honor, Glory, Power,
Riches, Pleasures, and this bodily life, as though there were some Power in
them to make us happy, which God only can do. And we love, fear, trust in men,
or other Creatures, and not in God, or more in them then in God, or as much as
in God. We often forge^ our God, and rely upon our own Strength, Wisdom, and
other outward means; and give the glory of our good success to our selves,
and not to Him. This to do, is inconsistent with the love of the Father, 1 John
2. 15. And we cannot serve God and Mammon, Math. 5. 26. As there cannot be two
Kings in full power in one Kingdom; So there cannot be two Gods in one heart
at one time. To us Christians, who make the Gospel the rule of our Worship,
it is not sufficient to acknowledge God as Creator, Preserver, and Governor of
the World: For so Turks, Mahumetans, and Jews do: we sin if we do not
acknowledge him, and Him alone as our Redeemer by Christ exhibited, and
glorified. Therefore to deny Christ thus represented unto us, or to acknowledge
another Christ with him, or besides him, or to give any expiating power to any
Sacrifice but his; or make any other Sacrafice the same or equal with his, or
to make any other our Advocate in Heaven, and the propitiation of our sins, is
against this law evangelically understood. For to us Christians, there is but
one God the Father, of whom are all things, and we in him; and one Lord Jesus
Christ, by whom are all things, and we by him, 1 Cor. 8. 6. Neither is there
Salvation in any other: For there is none other name under Heaven given among
men, whereby we can be saved, Act. 4. 12. In this respect all Jews and
Mahumetans, and such as Worship God, and not by Christ are offenders. Yet not
only they, but all such to whom the Gospel is preached, and yet receive not
Jesus Christ for their Lord and Savior, or receive him, and pro^esse him, and
not fully, and sincerely with their whole heart* as God requires, are guilty
and can in no wise be excused from the Transgression of this Commandment.
Hitherto is to be referred all Positive unbelief of those to whom Christ has
been sufficiently manifested by the light of the Gospel. For he that receives
not Christ, and refuses to submit unto him, refuses to receive, and submit to
that God, who sent him. Impenitency as it is an obstinate continuance in sin,
against the means, and Motives to repentance, is reducible to this head;
Because all such impenitents deny to return unto their God, as merciful in
Christ. These are Enemies and Rebels, against the Supreme Monarch.

The Idolatry of such as depend upon, or have compliance with, or give any
Honor to the Devil is most heinous: Charmers, Sorcerers, Wizards, and
especially Witches, and Conjurors, who have familiar Spirits, and contract with
them must needs be great Transgressors: And such as seek unto them, or depend
upon them, cannot be innocent. Of this sin of worshipping Devils, the
Idolatrous Gentiles were guilty. For the things they sacrificed they sacrificed
to Devils, and not to God, 1 Cor. 10. 20. The Apostate Jews also sacrificed
their Sons and Daughters unto Devils, Psalm. 106. 37. And so in one Act made
themselves guilty, not only of Idolatry but unnatural murder. Apostasy,
whether from God the Creator, once acknowledged; or from Jesus Christ, once
received, comes in here: And such Apostates as turn Persecutors, are the most
to be abhorred of all others. Under these two heads of Atheism, and Idolatry,
all Pride, Profane contempt or neglect of the Divine Majesty, distrust,
disobedience are concluded. And the habitual predominancy of any one sin is
inconsistent with the Evangelical obedience unto this Commandment.

The Affirmative part of this Commandment presupposes, Knowledge and belief
of one only supreme Lord, and Sovereign God, Blessed for evermore: And the
principal duties, are,

1. An acknowledgement of him as such against Atheism, and subjection to him
alone, as our Supreme, and only Lord. And though we be subject unto him, and
depend upon him, though we should never thus voluntarily submit; yet by this
Voluntary submission, we freely yield our selves unto him, as his Servants, and
his Vassals. This is the great law of Fealty and Allegiance, which is first
promised, and after that really, and continually to be performed. In
performance of this duty, we wholly give and resign up our selves, even our
very hear^s unto him, so that we are nothing in our selves; all in him. And we
who are Christians must subject our selves unto him, not only as Creator but
Redeemer. Therefore that faith whereby we so receive Christ as our only
Redeemer, so that we are ready to forsake all things to gain him is reducible
to this Commandment, as Evangelically understood.

This subjection includes and implies many duties more particular. assent, and
belief; His goodness and love manifested, requires love; His Laws, obedience;
His dignity and excellency, Adoration with humility and Reverence; His
Benefits, thankfulness, His threatenings of temporal, and eternal
punishments* fear; His glorious perfections of Wisdom, Power, Justice, etc,
manifested, Praise; His promises, hope, Prayer, confidence and desire; His
communication of himself unto us in mercyes and blessings for our safety,
deliverance, happiness; joy. So in other respects, other duties are to be
performed. Without all these (as occasion requires) this subjection is
imperfect. Yet this is so to be understood, that we may Believe, Love, Fear,
Worship* Obey others by commission from him, as they shall some ways represent
Him, or derive some Particle of power, or excellency from him. And all these
are to be performed to him.

1. As supreme.

2. In the highest degree.

3. To him alone as supreme in the Highest degree. He is the highest and most
excellent object of all our powers and facultyes, and the ultimate end of all
our Operations.

This Commandment is purely and primarily moral, and must be observed in
Heaven: And all other virtues and acts, required in other Commandments, are so
far just, as they do agree with this. Love of Father, Mother, Dearest relation,
Life it self, if once they come in competition with this, are no duties; are
unjust. We may exceed in the love of any thing, but in the love of Him we
cannot. He deserves infinite Love; yet he alone can infinitely love himself.
Therefore though he deserve it as infinite, yet he requires it not of his
Creature, which being finit cannot love infinitely. To love him in the Highest
degree, and above all is sincerity, yet not perfection. For though we may love
him above all, yet we may, and must love him more. But love him, so perfectly
as this law requires, we cannot, till we see him face to face, know him fully,
and are fully sanctified. Yet the highest degree of love in Angels, and the
glorified Saints, is but finite.

To conclude the explication of this Precept, ^. X.
we must know that not only the highest degree, but all Honor, Service,
Subjection is due only unto God ^n proper, and strict sense. For in respect of
him Men and Angels are equa^^, and but ^ellow Subjects one with another. And
to them as such, no Subjection, Honor, Service can be due. Yet seeing by
Commission from God, some of them may receive power and dignity above others,
so as in that respect to represent God; honor, service, and subjection may be
due unto them from their fellow Servants. In this sense, higher powers are
called Gods, and as such are not Fellow Servants, and subjects, but Superiors;
and in honoring them; we honor God, whose persons they bear. And as there
may be an inequality, and also a difference of this communicated power and
dignity, so there must be in the honor and ^ervice to be performed unto them.
For some have supreme; and some s^bordinate power amongst men; and this is the
inequality: Some have Spiritual; some have civil and temporal power; and this
is the difference: and according to the degree and quality of the power, such
must be the Worship and Subjection. For according to the power and dignity must
the service and honor be both for quantity and quality. In matters Civil and
temporal, Civil and temporal honor is due either in a family, or a City, or
a state. In matters spiritual, honor is due in a Church. What honor and
service may be due to Saints departed, and to Angels, we know not, because we
know not what Power and Commission God has given them over us living upon the
earth; Neither do we converse with them, nor do they ordinarily appear unto us,
so as ordinarily to converse with us. Honor them we may in general; as
participating an higher degree of spiritual excellency. But to subject our
selves unto them, obey them in particular, and present our petitions unto them,
we have no warrant; neither do we know that they have any such place or power,
as to require it of us, or we be bound unto it. But this we certainly believe
that Christ is at his Fathers right hand, is Lord of Angels, and men, who has
received and does exercise all Power in Heaven, and earth: and therefore to him
as Man, the highest degree of subjection, honor, service, next unto that which
is due to God, as God, is due to him, and none else. And it is strange that the
Socinian, who denies his Deity, and believes him to be a mere man, though
ex^ellent and ^ighly exalted should affirm that Divine Honor in proper sense,
which is due only to the supreme God, should be due unto him, and ought to be
exhibited. Yet the Orthodox Christian, who acknowledges him to be God should
give unto him as man an inferior honor, as sitting at the right hand of the
Throne of Majesty, and not in that Throne it self. For the Divine attributes
and perfections cannot be communicated to any Creature; and such as he, as man,
is, and no more. And the Lutheran who asserts the Divine proprietyes to be not
only Communicable, but communicated to Christ, as man, must needs place him
higher then the right hand of the Throne, and set him in the Throne it self.
And if they worship him as man with supreme Worship, as invested with supreme
power which is properly Divine, they cannot be excused from Idolatry. The power
of an Officer is derivative and cannot as such be supreme: But the Scripture
makes it evident that Christ is but an Officer, though the Universal, and
supreme Officer in the administration of Gods Kingdom, and according to a
Commission which one day He must deliver up unto the Father.

The reason of this Commandment is very clear: Gods is purely Monarchical, and
God himself is the absolute Lord and Monarch. As he only and alone made the
World; so he alone does govern it; and he alone has power to do so. For among
the Gods, says the Psalmist, there is none like unto thee (O Lord!) neither
are the^e any Works like thy Works. All nations whom thou have made shall come
and worship before thee (O Lord); and shall glorify thy name. For thou art
great, and do wondrous things; Thou art God alone, Psalm. 86. 8, 9, 10.

Therefore to transgress this Commandment, and worship the Servant, and
creature, above the Creator, who is God blessed for ever, must needs be, Crimen
laesae Majestatis, High Treason: and to deny him, and refuse to submit unto him
as Supreme Lord, must needs be Rebellion. And as Subjection is virtually all
obedience, so Atheism and Idolatry are the root of all iniquity. For, the Fool
has said in his heart, There is no God, and then he became Corrupt, and did
abominable things. And the Gentiles changing the glory of the incorruptible God
into an image, and his truth into a Lie, and worshipping and serving the
creature more than the Creator, were delivered up unto Vile affections, and a
reprobate mind, and then they were filled with all Unrighteousness,
Fornication, Wickedness, etc. Romans 1. 23, 25, 26, 28, 29.

That which is contrary to this Subjection is Pride, whereby man contemns God,
and with Pharaoh says, Who is the Lord that I should let Israel go? with
Rabshakeh blasphemes the living God and opens the mouth against Heaven: with
the King of Babel sacrifices to his own Nets: with Sennacherib attributes the
works of God to Man's power, and wisdom; makes men with Alexander the great,
and some of the Roman Caesar's, conceit that they are Gods and to require divine
Honor to be given them.

CHAP. VIII.
The second Commandment.
THe second Commandment is negative. 1. A prohibition of a Sin. 2. The Reasons
and Disswasives.


The sin prohibited, is 1. The making, 2. The worshipping of Images.


The Disswasive is, 1. From the jealousy, and justice of God, who will
severely punish this Sin of Image Worship. 2. From his mercy, rewarding such as
have a care to keep this Commandment. This is the brief analysis of the whole.


This has so near connection with, and such a dependence upon the former Law,
that many have taken them for the same; and no man can Violate this, without
violation of the former. It had reference in Special, to the Israelites as
newly come out of Egypt, where this Image Worship was a custom, and a law; and
to those times, when it was generally practiced in other Nations. For men began
betimes after the s^ood to degenerate and apostatize, especially the cursed
posterity of Ham, and Canaan his son. It was even then an universal practice.
And this may seem to be the reason, why God so much enlarges upon this
particular, and uses such powerful reasons to dissuade the people from it, who
were so much inclined unto it, that notwithstanding they had solemnly engaged
themselves to obey the Lord in all his Commandments, and had heard God
speaking these Words with great Majesty and terror, yet before Moses returned
from the Mount, they had set up a Molten calf, and did worship it.

Several Authors have delivered several occasions of the first beginning of
this Image Worship; persons: For some might have one occasion, some another,
and all agree in the thing. Yet of a universal custom, it is probable there was
an universal cause and occasion: and the same perhaps not bad in it self, but
accidentally through the corruption of man, and the suggession of the Devil
abused. God g^ve unto the Israel^^es the Ark, a sign of his special presence,
yet not to be Worshipped. Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, whilst Pilgrims, and
Sojourners erected their Altars in such places as God appeared unto them, and
there did worship. And it might be, that the Patriarchs before the flood had
some visible signs of Gods special presence; yet af^erwards abused to Idolatry,
and superstition. From this, Laban and others might take occasion to make their
Teraphims, and other signs of the presence of the true God first, then of their
false gods, and in the end made them as gods or objects of Worship: and so much
the rather, because the Devils did ^ometimes appear near unto, and sometimes
spoke out of their Images being consecrated. And this was suffi^ient to
persuade the more intelligent, that their God was near unto, or in, the image;
and the simple people, that the Image was a God (if once consecrated); so that
to them the image was the body, and the Devil the soul of their cursed Deity.
Whether these things be so or no, it is certain man naturally desires the
presence of his God, or some visible or evident sign thereof at least, not
only to help his memory but to affect his heart, and strengthen his hope. And
it is in vain to worship that God which either is not, or cannot be present,
virtually at least, unto his suppliant, and devo^ed Servant. And the Worship of
that man, who has no assurance of the presence of his God, must needs be cold
defective, and uncertain: Neither can a Rational man believe effectually, that
he is a God indeed, which cannot be present in the time of need.

To return to the Words of the Commandment, The first thing in them is the
Prohibition: 1. The making of images, 2. The worshipping, and serving of them.
In both these, we have 1. The image or likeness of any thing. 2. The acts
about these objects, which are making, worshipping, serving. An image or
likeness is



1. Something in it self absolutely considered.

2. Something in relation to another thing, whereof it is an Image or
likeness, which is represented by it. For the form of an image, or likeness
as such is to represent some other thing. This image is, Quid fusile,
tornatile, sculptile:

1. Something cast in some mould, when the matter whereof it is made, is
melted: Such are all images made of metal.

2. Something framed by the Turner, and this kind is usually made of wood.

3. Something carved or engraven in stone or wood: And this is the word here
used, when it is sa^d* Thou shall not make to thy self any graven image. The
word is (...) in Hebrew; (...) is used often by the Septuagint in Greek* to
signify Pesel, and sometimes (...); and in this place they turn it (...): And
lest we should think that this Pesel is only some rude matter of woo, metal,
stone, the word Likeness is added; to let us understand that the matter is
molded, and r^ceives the figure and shape of some other thing as being made to
repre^ent it: which it cannot do, without some likeness. This likeness may be
either more perfect, as an image, or less perfect, and hidden as in
Hieroglyphics. And some do observe, that every image is a likeness, but every
likeness is not an image. The word, likeness, which in Latin is turned
Simulachrum, may be added also to signify, that the subject of this
Commandment was not only Statues, or standing Images, but pictures and all
other resemblances. Now this Image or likeness must be visible and represent
some other visible things. These Visible things, which might be represented
vi^b^y, are reckoned by induction from the place, to be things in Heaven, in
the earth, in the waters; And these are real things made by God. And lest any
should find some color of exception, its added (of any thing): Thou sha^t not
make the image or likeness of any thing that is in the^e three places. These
things are ennumerated more particularly, man, beasts fowl, creeping things,
fish, Sun, Moon, Stars, and the host of Heaven, Deuteronomy. 4. 16, 17, 18, 19. Among
th^se, there is no mention of God, Angels, the Spirits of men: for these are
(...) visible. Yet because these have appeared unto men in some bodily form, or
figure assumed, men have devised how to resemble them at the second hand,
according to the figures assumed, though not immediately as they are in
themselve. Yet because this appearance was never made but in the likeness of
some of the forementioned things, therefore these images and likenesses must
needs be here included.

The first act in respect of the Images, resemblances of those things which is
prohibited is to make them to or for our selves. Not that it is unlawful to
make the Image or likeness of any thing: For Moses and Solomon had warrant to
make the likeness of Cherubins, Palm Trees, and other things to beautify the
Tabernacle, and Temple. And there were the Molten Images of Oxen made to
support the great Laver and brazen Sea in the Temple; and of Lions on either
side his Throne out of the Temple. And Orthod^x Christians who detest
Image Worship, make no scruple to draw Pictures and make Statues. The meaning
therefore is, that we must not make these, or cause them to be made, or use
them being made in or for religious Worship. For we must observe that the
subject of the first 4. Commandments is, (Cultus Dei) the Worship of God, and
to understand this making to our selves, without reference to this is to
mistake.

1. Therefore these Images and Likenesses must not be made to represent the
true eternal and invisible God. For this cause Moses says, That Israel saw no
similitude in the day that the Lord spoke unto them out of the midst of the
fire, Deuteronomy. 4. 15. Whereby it was employed.

1. That no religious worship was due to any but God.

2. That no similitude must be made to represent him. After that God in high,
and stately terms had set forth his glorious, eternal, and incomprehensible
Majesty, he adds, To whom will ye liken God, or wh^t likeness will ye compare
unto him? Esaias. 40. 8. Neither ought we (as the Apostle says) to think that
the Godhead is like unto Silver or Gold, or stone graven by art and man's
device, Act. 17. 29. For the matter of these Images is metal o^ stone, or
wood, and this is natural: The form of them as Images is artificial from the
art and device of man; the re^igious form is to represent a Deity after the
false conceit of man's corrupt heart. It Is true that every creature made by God
does speak Gods wisdom and power: and the Heavens, and in them the Sun
declares the glory of God in an eminent manner, and measure. And the Souls of
men, and the Angels those glorious and immortal Spirits resemble him most of
all his works. Yet these stand at an infinite distan^e below his Majesty, and
God did never command man to Worship him in or by these more lively Images and
resemblances of ^is infinite excellency. Surely, i^ we have not far higher
apprehensions, and more excellent notions of him, we cannot possibly worship
him aright. How therefore should the Image or visible likeness of any bodily,
and visible being molded and fashioned by the hand or art of man represent him
so glorious? The stock is a Doctrine of vanities, Jer. 10, 8, In this respect
the Molten Image is a teacher of lies, Hab. 2. 19. It Is falsehood, Ier. 10. 14.

2. As an Image must not be made to represent God, lest our conceits and
worship o^ him be base and corrupt; so we must not think that there is any
Divine power in an Image made and consecrated by man, or at the appointment of
man. For the power of things made by Gods own hand must needs be far more
excellent, then the power and virtue of any thing made by Man. For the works
made and consecrated by God, are as far more excellent as the Heaven is above
the Earth. Yet there is no Divinity nor divine power in them, no not in the
Angels of Heaven. Images may indeed be conceived by some to have some strange
power, when the Devil's in them, or by them, or near unto them work some
strange effect: But these are but the Delusions of the Unclean Spirits, and the
cheats of his damned Flamins and Priests. The Image it self can do nothing:
neither could the Brazen Serpent: for it was God that healed such as being
stung with fiery Serpents looked upon it.

3. We must not think that any Image, or any other thing made by man, without
warrant, direction, command and promise from God can be a sign of his special
presence, as the Ark, the Tabernacle, the Temple were. God may voluntarily bind
himself to be present in a special manner, in some special place to his people
worshipping him in that place, according to his commandment. But it is not in
the power of any Man or Angel, either to tie God's special presence to any
Image or to any place. The Devil (if God permitted it) might by compact with
the cursed Conjuring Priests bind himself to be in an hollow Image to speak out
of it, or appear or do some strange thing near unto it. Thus the Heathen (no
doubt) were deluded and confirmed in their Image Worship: And its lamentable
that Christians should be thus enchanted and bewitched by their juggling Priests.

4. We must not make an Image or similitude, in Belief that it will help or
further our religious Worship, or make it more acceptable to God: neither must
we use them, or rather abuse them, to that end. To worship the true God in or
by an Image is a Corruption of his Service, as any rational impartial man may
easily understand. Therefore Moses said to Israel; Take heed therefore unto
your selves, for you saw no manner of similitude on the day the Lord spoke unto
you in Horeb out of the midst of the fire, lest you corrupt your selves, and
make you an Image, etc: Deuteronomy, 4. 15, 16.

5. We must not think either that an Image consecrated, or the use of it in
religious Worship has any sanctifying power. For nothing can be effectual in
this kind, or conducing to man's spiritual good which is not instituted by God,
with a promise of his concurrence thereunto.

The second act or acts prohibited are, Bowing down unto an Image, or serving
it. These imply that the former act of making these Images and resemblances is
here forbidden as relating to religious worship.

1. To bow down is an act of Worship and Adoration, wherein by some outward
gesture or carriage of the body before the thing to be worshipped, we testify
the inward acknowledgment of the excellency of that thing, and our submission
to it. These outward reverentiall acts are testifications of the inward
deportment of our Souls: and they are specified not mere from the object, but
the inward recognition of the Soul. Some of these are common, so that the same
outward acts may be performed to God or man; the inward cannot: For they must
of necessity be either Civil or Religious: One and the same cannot be both. If
it be the custom of any people, or nation, or persons, to make some of these
outward acts, and testifications proper unto a Diety, and to be performed
thereunto, then to use them to any thing else is Idolatry. These are many, ^s
bowing the head, kissing the hand, kneeling, prostrating the body, and such
like; all signified here by the word, Bowing.

2. The other act here mentioned, is so serve or worship; and so sometimes may
be the same with the former: But it is here understood as distinct, to signify
Sacrificing, Burning Incense, Praying, and the like. Both these acts are
usually tendered to, and before Images, and that several way: 1. To the Images,
as gods, endued with a Divine Power, able to hear Man's Prayer, bless him, and
deliver him: and this is directly to terminate the Worship upon it, as a god,
against the former Commandment. 2. Some direct this Worship to the Image, as
representing some other thing besides, and the same more excellent then it self.

The thing represented, may be either the true God, or some Saint, or Angel, or
Soul of Man departed; or the Devil, yet not conceived to be the Devil; or some
other thing.




1. To perform any Worship any ways unto the Devil, is abominable.

2. To direct Divine and Religious Worship to, and terminate it upon any thing,
but the true God, is Idolatry.

3. To terminate Worship any ways upon an Image, is not only unlawful, but
irrational and absurd: for an Image is (...), a thing made by the Art and
Device of Man, and there is no excellency in it to make it a fit Object of
Worship.

4. To terminate Worship partly upon the Image, as a partial Object, and partly
upon the thing represented, is impossible, if the act of Worship be one and the
same individual Act.

5. If any perform the Worship only before the Image, without any thoughts of
the Image, and terminate it only and merely upon the thing represented, it is
to make no use at all of the Image, as altogether needless, and vain to that
act. Yet thus to do, has a color of Superstition, if not of Idolatry; and can
no ways be excused, because that Image was no sign of God's special presence,
by Institution or Promise from God.

6. To worship God, in, or by an Image made by the hand and art of man, must of
necessity be a corruption of that divine performance: and there is no Warrant
or Command from God, to make or use an Image with that intention. Men may make
Images to represent other things, and by looking upon these Images, they may be
another act of the Mind remember the things represented, if they know them
distinctly as such: and the more lively the Representations, and the more
perfect the knowledge of the things represented are, the greater help it is to
the Memory. Yet it does not follow from hence, that in matter of Worship, the
Worship performed to the Image, redounds unto the Samplar. For though a man may
intend in Worshipping the Image, suppose of God, to worship God: Yet

1. We must consider, that this Proposition presupposes, nay expressly says,
that the Worship-Divine is first given to the Image, which needs must be
Idolatry; it only redounds unto the Samplar.

2. The Image and the Samplar are really and infinitely distinct and different,
and cannot possibly make one Object.

3. God did never promi^e to any man to accept that Worship, which is performed
to the Image, as performed to Himself. So that this Image Worship, is an
obscure perplexed absurd, irrational dangerous thing, and altogether
unwarrantable. Though this Image Worship be so expressly and peremptorily
forbidden* both here, and in many other places of Scripture; and God says,
Thou sh^lt (...) bow down thy self to them, nor worship them: Man yet says,
Thou shall bow down to the^^, and worship or serve them. That the Heathens
should do this, is not strange: but that Christians should be guilty of this
sin, cannot but be matter of amazement. It Is the Public Doctrine, and the
general, and constant practice of the Church of Rome, and all her Adherents, to
make and set up Images in their Churches and Places of Public Worship, to bow
down before them, and to worship them several ways. And to justify this
Practice and Doctrine, the greatest Wits have been set on work.

1. Some of their private Catechisms, and Books of Devotion, omit these words
of making and worshipping Images.

2. Some acknowledge the words, as part of this Law given by God; but say, This
part was but Positive, and only bound the Jews.

3. Some so interpret and expound the words, as that they may not be understood
to forbid their practice.

4. They make many distinctions of Worship, and of the manner of Worshipping
Images, that so they may persuade men, that though some manner of Image Worship
be forbidden, yet theirs is not.

5. Some tell us, that the Worship only of Idols, and false Gods, are
forbidden here to be made and worshipped; though this be very false and
contrary to the Trent-Catechism: Yet notwithstanding all this,

1. They, even their greatest Scholars, and Clerks, in this particular, differ
amongst themselves.

2. It Is difficult for their Scholars, impossible for the illiterate and
Ignorant people, to understand these distinctions, yet both of them must
believe and profess their Doctrine, and practice it.

3. Suppose they do all agree, as they do not, and could determine clearly some
manner of Image Worship, which might be lawful, as they cannot; yet this
Image^Worship is needless and unprofitable.

4. This practice was always dangerous, and an occasion, at least, if not a
cause of Idolatry; and it is certainly known, that many of the ignorant sort
make their Images Idols, and are gross Idolaters.

5. There is no Commandment, no Warrant, no Permission, no Toleration from
God; no example of any Saint, Patriarch Prophet, Apostle, of any kind of
Imag^-Worship, in all the Book of God; but many Prohibitions of all kind of
such Worship.

6. It Is a great scandal both to the Jew and Mahumetan, and so a great
impediment to their Conversion.

7. It was the invention of the Devil, and his wicked Agents, it never had any
better Author, if we enquire into the original of it.

8. It Is no way suitable to the pure and simple Worship of one God in Christ,
according to the Gospel. Yet notwithstanding all these things, it being
confirmed by so many Laws, and long-continued Custom, will not, without great
opposition and resistance, be abolished. And so much the rather, because
Demetrius, with the Crafts-men, by Image-making, and the Priests, by Offerings,
gain so much, and the people love to have it so. This is the Cup of
Fornication, wherewith the Whore of Babylon has made drunk the Kings of the
Earth; and, in the end, She her self shall drink of the Cup of the Lords Wrath.

The Reasons and Disswasives follow: the Lord your God is a ^ealous God. Here
He resumes His Titles, and signifies, that He is very tender of His glory, and
will not endure His People to glance upon these Images, which is a kind of
Spiritual toying and playing the Wanton, with other Paramours, and Corrivals.
He full well knew their proness, and the danger: And therefore commands all
Monuments of Idolatry to be destroyed* and prohibits the very names of other
Gods* that the very memory* with the Monuments may p^rish for ever. They who
have renounced the Devil, and all his Pompatical Worship, and avouched God to
be their God, and Christ their Savior, must be pure and chaste; yea, free from
the very appearance of this evil, which tends to his dishonor and their ruin.
This sin begins in Superstition, ends in plain Idolatry, which is a corruption
of his Worship, a derogation from his honor, a stain of their integrity, a
diminution of that true love and respect they owe unto him, a breach of
Covenant; and, in the end, a persidious revolt and apostasy: Therefore he
cannot endure this Image Worship, but will severely punish it. There be
distinctions devised by men to maintain this Image Worship, that by them they
may puzle and delude us. But dare they insist upon them, when they are
convented before God's Tribunal? Will he allow them? Can they justify
themselves by them? Can they assure us, that there is no danger in Imagery, and
this kind of Worship? Can they ever instance, in any People that used it, who
in the end proved not Idolaters? Whatsoever man can say in behalf of
consecrated Images, it is certain, the effect of this jealousy will be severe
punishment: for it follows, that God will visit the sins of the Fathers upon
the Children, unto the third and fourth Generation of such as hate him: And
this may be a second Reason, or the same with the former, as being an effect of
that cause; a punishment issuing from that jealousy, which will burn like
fire, and not be quenched.

In this Reason, we may observe, 1. The cause meritorious of this punishment.
2. The subject that shall be liable unto it, and suffer it. 3. The extent of
this punishment, upon this subject.


In these words, he seems to give the Rules of Judgment, in Comminations, and
Promises, according to which he will proceed with such, as shall observe, or
violate his Laws in general: yet these are proper to this Commandment. The
cause that does deserve the punishment is sin; this sin of Image Worship, here
called Hatred.

The Subject and Persons who shall suffer, are not only Superstitious, and
Idolatrous Parents, but their Children. The extent is, to the third and fourth
Generation.

This punishment threatened, is expressed in the word, Visit, I will visit. God
does visit sometimes in mercy, sometimes in justice and displeasure: Here it is
Visitation in justice, rendered by the Septuagint; in this place, by a word
signifying to render; and in many other places, by a word signifying to
Revenge: Both these together, teach us, that here, to visit, is to render
vengeance, and justly to punish. And when God says, He will do it, it informs
us of His determination, that it is such, that upon the Commission of the Sin,
the Punishment shall certainly be due, and the Delinquent liable unto it, and
shall unavoidably suffer it, if it be not prevented by timely repentance, and
God's Pardon. This punishment, is either Temporal, or Eternal, private or
public, Sword, or Famine, or Pestilence; and sometimes the Captivity;
sometimes the ruin of Families, Cities, States, Nations; besides the Eternal
Poenalty. This Commination was effectual, and Israel found this Judgment
certain, and felt it often lie heavy upon them. This, as other sins against
other Commandments, bring the like Judgments upon Christians under the Gospel:
Yet so, that as it was pardonable unto them, upon repentance, by virtue of the
Promise; So upon the like terms, it is to us, by virtue of Repentance, and
Faith in Christ already come. The Sin which makes liable to this Punishment, is
hatred of God: Of those that hate me. The Sin of such as hate Him, in this
place, is the making and worshipping of Images.

To hate, in Hebrew, is many times not to love; or not to love so much as (...)
due, we should. And, as a Woman, who affects another man, besides her Husband,
though she may love her husband, yet does not love him so much as she should
do: Her love is not the love of a Wife, as a Wife; to her Husband, as her
Husband: for that should be singular, and exclude all Corrivality and So* (...).

So whosoever is inclined and aff^cted to Image Worship, cannot love God, as
God, who is jealous, and can endure no Competitour. To serve God, and Baal, is
impossible, according to His Rules.

The subject of this Punishment and Visitation, is the Fathers; that is, the
Idolatrous Fathers. And these are principally in the sin, and so principal in
the punishment. These are the Authors and first beginners of this sin, and by
their example instruction, and direction, cause their Posterity to sin, and
that long after they are dead. So Jeroboam made Israel to sin; and his
institution and example began that sin I which once begun, continued till the
time of that Kingdoms ruin many years after. The extent of this Penalty is
such, that it does not stay in the Parents, but proceeds, and reaches the
Children; and not only the immediate Children, but Posterity, to the third and
fourth Generation.

This is not so to be understood, as though the period wherein the penalty
expires were the fourth Generation: But, in Scripture, three and four
Generations, are many Generations, and God does not precisely limit Himself to
this or that determinate number. It Is true, that in the time of four
Generations, the Posterity of some Idolaters may be either cut off, or
reformed. Yet it seems unreasonable that Children should bear and suffer the
Punishments of their Fathers sins: And therefore, some restrain the Visitation
to Temporal Punishments, and determine the Children to be only such as
continue in their Fathers sins. And it is true, that the Children, by
repentance, many times escape the Punishments deserved both by their own, and
their Fathers Crimes; and no person truly p^nitent, shall suffer Eternal
Penalties for the sins of their Fathers, no not of their Father Adam. Yet this
is certain, that not only penitent Children, but such as were never guilty of
their Parents Idolatry may suffer for the sins of their Fathers, at least
Temporally. So Daniel, with his three Associates and Fellow-Captives, Ezra
Nehemiah, Zorobabel, Joshuah the High Priest, lay un^er the guilt of their
Fathers Idolatry, as one person in God's own account with them. Yea God does
inflict not only temporal but spiritual Judgments, for the sins of Ancestors.
So the cursed Posterity of Ham must be Servants many years for his sin. The
Posterity of the first Apostate Gentiles lay under God's displeasure, destitute
of the means of Conversion, for 2000 years at least. And the Children of the
unbelieving Jews, who crucified the Lord Jesus, and refused to believe the
Gospel, abide in B^indness, and under the Curse, for these 1600 years and
upward. The Countries, and the Eastern Empire, where Image Worship was
established in * a General Council, is overrun, So some call it, though it was
neither a general, or a lawful Council.
and lies now under the power of the Turk, that great Oppressor of Christians,
and Enemy to Christ: and the greatest part of them are deprived of the Gospel.
And all the Western-Nations, and other Countries and People, who received at
the hands of the great Whore the Cup of Fornication, are delivered up to
strange Doctrines, and God has sent them strong Delusions, that they should
believe a Lie, and many false Miracles, and other things contrary, not only to
Scripture, but Reason and Sense and this for many years. The pretense of the
Worship of the true and living God, and Jesus Christ His Blessed Son, and the
subtle Distinction devised to m^intain their Image. Worship, will not justify
them, but prove, that the great City built upon seven Hills, which in the time
of the Divine Apocalyptist, reigned over the Nations, even whilst She
professes her Self Christian is Babylon in a Mystery. Histories tell us, that
the Old Babylon, which once was an Imperial Seat, and now a ruinous Heap, was
the first and most Idolatrous Ci^y in the World; and that Image Worship, and
Idolatry, was there first established by a Law: But her Whoredoms were open and
manifest, and she professed her self to be what she was. Yet Babylon, in a
Mystery, professes to believe in one only true God, and to renounce all false
gods; yet in practice is fearfully Idolatrous.

The last Reason is, Mercy, understand such Blessings, as God promised in the
Law to Israel, which are often mentioned in the Books of Moses, especially
Levit. 26. and Deuteronomy. 28. The Subject of these Mercies, are the Israelites.

1. As loving God. 2. Keeping His Commandments.
1. The love of God, in this place, is opposed to the former Hatred; and is
that pure and chaste affection of the Soul toward God, whereby it abhors all
Image Worship, and even the appearance of it, in toying with Images, or the use
of any thing, in Religious Service, invented by Man. Therefore, as
Superstition, Idolatry, and all Worship of Images, is called Fornication and
Adultery, contrary to the Contract and Covenant made with God, as our God
alone; so the worshipping of one God in purity, according to our duty, and His
Institution, is called Chastity: And such as did not pollute themselves with
the Worship of Idols, are called Virgins, Rev. 14. 4.

2. Where there is this pure Virgin-love free from all Idolatry, there will be
an universal obedience, and keeping of God's Commandments, especially of the
two first, which virtually include the rest. By Commandments, therefore, in
this place, are strictly understood the first, and this second, with all the
Branches thereof: Yet because these, especially the first, are the Root of all
the rest, therefore the rest may, by consequence, be understood.

The extent of this Mercy, is to a Thousand Generations, that is, for ever: For
if Israel had been faithful to their God, they might have continued an happy
People unto this day; and so God's Promise was. God never withdrew His mercy
from them, nor executed His Judgments upon them, but when they forsook him, and
violated these Commandments. It Is true, that the last Judgment which lies upon
them, at this day, had another cause than Image Worship, and it was the
rejection of their Savior and Messiah, when God had sent Him to save them,
according to the Promise made unto their Fathers.

For the more full understanding of this last part of the Commandment,

1. As given to the Jews. 2. As by the Light of Nature continued to the
Gentiles. 3. As most clearly manifested to Christians, by the Gospel.
These Promises and Threats are called by some the Sanction; that is, the
confirmation, ratification, and establishment of a Law: Yet they add no binding
force unto it; for that is wholly from the Will of the Lawgiver once
expressed, Only this they may do, make the Law the more effectual. The
Threatening, is a great restraint from Violation, and the Promise of Reward, a
strong Motive to Obedience. These Threatenings, and Promises in this place, had
special reference to Israel, in the Land of Canaan, and both the Punishments
threatened, and Mercies promised, were Temporal: for since the Fall of Adam,
there is no Promise of Spiritual and Eternal Mercy, but in Jesus Christ
promised, or exhibited. And it is observable,

1. That Isra^ls sin usually, if not always, began in the Violation of this
Commandment.

2. That in the public Judgments executed upon them, this is expressed
sometimes as the only sin; sometimes the first sin; sometimes the chiefest,
and always employed, as one cause thereof.

3. That when they observed this Commandment, they enjoyed always this mercy
here promised, in their Successive Generations.

4. The public judgem^nts executed upon them for this sin, did seldom at any
time lie upon them further then the fourth generation, as in the Captivity of
Babylon, which was the longest continuance of any other which that people
suffered, so far as they continued a people. Isreal's Captivity, and the
penalty of the ten Tribes, as a distinct polity, lies upon them to this day:
For the generality of them were, and do continue banished, but where we
certainly know no^. A part of them adhered to the Tribe of Judah, and Benjamin.
As for the Gentiles, their Apostasy began in the Violation of this, and the
^ormer Commandment, and their punishment was not so much temporal as
Spiritual. For this sin of Idolatry and Image Worship, they were delivered up
to vile affections, and a reprobate mind, and continued excommunicate, and
accur^ed for many years. This their sin and punishment we may read, Romans 1.
from verse 18. to the end. And they were never admitted into the Church as
Proselytes or Christians, but upon renouncing of the Devil, and his Pompatical
and Idolatrous Worship, and their turning from Idols to the living God. As for
C^ristians, who turn from the living God and Christ their Savior to Idols, and
the Worship of the work of men's hands, and to receive the cup of Fornication
from the hand of the great whore, their penaltyes shall be grievous, and not
only temporal, but spiritual, and eternal, if they come not out of Babylon*
and repent betimes, as we may read in the book of the Revelation. especially
Chapters, 14, 15. 16, 17 18. Whether any sin but final unbelief be threatened in
the Gospel with death shall be examined (God willing) when I come to consider
the Laws of Go^ Redeemer as they are a rule of judgment. It Is true that the
Laws of God Redeemer p^esupposing man as sinful require a present return by
repentance and faith, and the continuance in any one sin against the moral
Law, or any other positive in force, is formally a transgression, as it is a
continuance without repentance and faith. There was a special reason, why these
reasons were given in this Commandment, and it was because they were so prone
unto this sin; and he knew that in time to come, this would be the great
transgression.

Thus far the explication of the words of this Commandment: Bowing and
Worshipping, they terminate their Worship either upon the Image, or the thing
repre^e^ted by the Image: for both are sins: And the distinctions devised by
Iconolatrists will not excuse them before God. This Image Worship is here
represented as not instituted, but forbidden by God; devised by Men or Devils;
as corrupting and polluting the Pure Worship of God. From hence it follows.
That

1. All kind of Religious Worship not instituted by God, and warranted either
by some particular express ^u^e of Scripture, or grounded upon some general
precept is here forbidden.

2. So is also all such manner of Worship as is devised and invented by Man, or
Devil.

3. Whatsoever tends to the Corruption of the Pure instituted Worship of God,
cannot be lawful.

4. To conceive that there is any holiness* or sanctifying power in any such
worship, or manner of Worship; or to think that the observation thereof* is
acceptab^e to God in it self, or renders the party performing acceptable to him
is a sin here prohibited. This sin here forbidden may be called superstition in
a large sense. For to account that holy and divine, as an object of Worship
which is not such, nor can be proved such by reason, or divine revelation, and
also to invent religious rites and ceremonies, or to use them, and this without
any warrant from God, is superstition. It seems to be an Extreme, opposed to
profaneness. For nothing can be holy or unholy, but that which God has made
such. For man to determine the object, the kind, the manner of worship, and
institute rites upon his own head, or upon the suggestion of Satan, or any
other, must needs be an usurpation, and an inc^oachment upon the Sovereign
power of God, who alone has right to determine and institute these things. As
he has prohibited religious Worship to be given to any but himself; so he has
said that we must not do unto him the true God as the Heathen did to their
Gods. What he commands, that they must do; and must not add, nor diminish,
Deuteronomy. 12. 31. 32. The Heathens made Images to represent their gods; instituted
rites, some ridiculous, some vain, some abominable; and did Worship the Images,
and their Gods in them, by them, before them, and sacrificed their innocent
Children unto them. Men out of devotion, or some other reason may add unto the
rules of worship given by God, or they may neglect them, and omit them, and
institute something of their own, but both are against this Law.

In this Commandment therefore, Moses, all of all the revolting Jews* of all
Mahumetans, since the time of Mahomet, and of Christians, after that
superstition entered into the Church, as it entered betimes. For some of the
Jews being made Christians, and disper^ed into severa^l Countries retained
some of their Pharisaical traditi^ns, and many of the Levitical Ceremonies, as
being zealous of the Law, and many of the Heathens converted could not at first
be weaned from their heathenish customs, and rites. And of this some of the
ancients complained in their times. Some relics, both of Levitical rites, and
Heathenish Ceremonies we find in many places at this day. I will not in this
brief exposition ^pend time in the examination of the Ceremonies of the Mass,
which are very many in such a short piece of Service. It Is matter o^
Lamentation to consider how soon Superstition and Idolatry entered into the
Church; and being diffused through many places, and having continued for a long
time, they put on the face o^ Universality, and Antiquity, though neither of
these be a sufficient ground to warrant any thing not instituted from Heaven.
Both these entered secretly and by degrees. For Commemoration con^inued for a
time, and received gave occasion unto, and ended in, the invocation of Saints
and Angels. Images and Monuments of God, Saints, and Angels, secretly crept in,
and were tolerated and allowed for Instruction, and at length abused to
Adoration. And in the end the worship of Images was defended, commanded, used,
established by civil Laws, and Ecclesiastical Canons, though it was much
opposed from the beginning. But that which made up and brought unto perfection
both Superstition, and Idolatry amongst Christians was, a Doctrine which did
peremptorily affirm (and many did, and do believe it) that a Wafer, or a piece
of Bread, by a few words of a Priest was changed into the Body of Christ, and
Wine into his blood contrary to Scripture, reason, sense. And it was, and is
commanded, that, upon this supposed imaginary change, this Wafer, and this Wine
should be worshipped as God, with divine and religious worship. And it is
stupendous, and a matter of amazement that Christians, who profess the
Scriptures to be the word of God, that the God, who made Heaven and Earth, is
only one, and our Lord Je^us Christ, one only Lord should believe, A morsel
of bread, not only to be a sign of Gods presence, but to be the only true God,
and so be worshipped with the highest degree of Worship. Yet the Eternal,
Glorious, and most Just God looks down from Heaven, sees all this, and in due
time will certainly judge it. I need not here insist upon particulars, and
enumerate the superstitious rites, and ceremonies invented, and used either by
Heathens, Jews, Christians, or Mahumetans. Many of them are expressly named,
and particularly delivered, in Scripture; Many others, both in Christian and
profane Historyes.

What is here commanded may be easily understood, Prohibition, but also from
the end and scope of this commandment. For it was added to be a Fense unto the
former Commandment, and to prevent the violation thereof. For how can we
worship God as God, and the only God, except we know what manner, or kind of
worship is most suitable to his Majesty, acceptable to him, and conducing to
his glory, and this in all times. Yet these things he alone does know, and has
power to institute; and his institutions are the only rule of Worship; and
tend most effectually to preserve it pure and undefiled. It Is true, that many
rites and Ceremonies invented by man, may have a fair face of devotion, and
Reverence, but they never proved to do any good but much hurt. For they did
beget false notions and apprehensions of the Deity, who is to be conceived of
by us, according as he is represented in the holy Scriptures: For if our
apprehensions be false, our affections and worship will be base and adulterate.
Therefore the general duty here presented is to worship God with that Worship,
which he has instituted in his word, without addition, or diminution. As for
circumstances of time, place, and order to be observed in the Worship of God,
either public, or private, they ought to be regulated by the general rules of
Scripture, particular examples of such, as are related in the Scripture to have
performed the service and worship of God according to those general rules, and
the prudential dictates of right reason, no ways different from, but agreeable
to, the Word of God. For these are not any parts of Worship, but accidental to
the Worship of God, yet not to it precisely as worship, but as a serious act,
which requires in the performance thereof due circumstances, order and decency.
As for significant ceremonies, annexed to the service of God, no ways
conducing to the better performance thereof, I think they are better spared,
and omitted, then used and observed. For though consi^ered in themselves
without any reference to Gods worship, they be indifferent, and so in general
may be lawful; yet if we examine their original, the first occasion of their
use and institution, the persons who use, or rather abuse them, and understand
withal how needless and unprofitable they be, and how offensive unto some
weak Brethren, and also besides these, may be instituted many more of that
kind, and may be imposed upon the same ground; and that in the Church of Rome,
they have been an occasion of superstition: it must needs be concluded by
impartial, and ju^icious men, that they are not expedient. To say, and
publicly declare that they have no sanctifying power; that they are neither
holy nor unholy, will not serve the turn: For the same may be said of Images at
first when they began to be used; and do what we can, many of the people do
account them to be holy, make them parts of Gods worship, and are more careful
in the observation of them, then they are of the more weighty duties of
Religion.

To understand the more particular duties here commanded,

It might be taught by many kind of Persons, and many ways. The Persons were
extraordinary, as Prophets and Apostles, and such as were immediately inspired
from Heaven, or ordinary, private or public. Every Person, and Servant of
God, endued with the knowledge thereof, might instruct one another, every man
his Brother. Parents were bound to instruct their Children, and Masters their
Servants. But the Public Teachers in Congregations and Assemblies, were
persons of more eminent knowledge designed for this purpose, as ordinary
Prophets, Levites, and Doctors, amongst the Israelites, Presbyters, and
Ministers, who are called Pastors and Teachers, in the time of the Go^pel, and
also Catechists.

Therefore the Ordination, and Public Approbation of Teachers, according to
the Rules of the Word of God, is hither to be reduced as a part of Worship.

This Doctrine, for the manner, is taught by Word* or by Writing: By word of
mouth* as by Preaching, Expounding, Catechizing. The learning of this Word, is
also a part of this Service: And to this belongs Hearing, Reading, Conference;
and asking and proposing Questions; to receive Answers, and Instruction,
Meditation, Repetition. For the means by which the knowledge of this Heavenly,
and Saving-Doctrine is either communicated, or received, are hither to be
referred. This Teaching, and Hearing, are Duties, as commanded by God, and
instituted by Him, as a part of His Worship: Yet such it is not, except the
Doctrine taught and heard be Divine, and from Heaven; and, as such, taught and
received by an undoubted assent and acknowledgment of it as infallible. In the
teaching of this Word, Precepts must be delivere^ as Precepts, Prohibitions as
Prohibitions, Promises as Promises, Threatenings as Threatenings, Reproofs as
Reproofs, Exhortations as Exhortations; and so of the rest of the distinct
parts of this Word. To communicate and receive this Word, as a means to know
God His Works, and His Will, is a Duty of this Commandment; but to
communicate, and receive it, as the Word of the everlasting King, and only
Lord, with the highest degree of honor and respect, is a Duty of the first
Commandment. And God in His Wisdom ordained this signification of His Mind, by
Word and Writing, as far more excellent and perfect than that by Images, and
the works of men's hands, as not only base and imper^ect, but dangerous and
unsafe. This of Word was more suitable unto the Nature and Constitution of Man,
as a Rational Creature, who had a Tongue given him to speak, and teach, and an
Ear to hear and learn, and an Eye to read, not only in the Book of Gods
gloriou^ Works: but also of His Blessed Writings. And when He gave this Law, He
spoke it, and did write it; but did not represent and signify it by any Image,
much less by any work of men's hands. This Representation, by His Word, was the
purest and the best for man that this life is capable of.

Prayer is another principal part, matter, the form, and the outward expression
of Prayer. All these must be such, as God has instituted and prescribed to Man
in His Word, and agreeable to the same. There may some circumstances
observable, in the performance of this Duty, be left unto the Reason and
Prudence of Man. For God has not determined all the Particulars to be observed
in the Method, the outward expressions, the gestures. This Prayer may be, in
private and in secret, the work only of the Soul: But with company, and in
public, there must be outward expressions and gestures of the body. The
outward expressions, without the inward acts, and affections of the Soul, are
not properly a Prayer* but only a carcass thereof. To draw near unto God with
the Lips, and not with the (...), is a poor service, and no ways worthy to be
called the act of a Man, as he is a Rational Creature; much less the Worship of
God. To this head of Prayer, may be reduced Praise, Thanksgiving, Confession of
(...), singing of Psalms; which if they be merely Doctrinal, belong unto the
Word; i^ any thing of Petition, Praise, Thanksgiving, to be offered to God, be
in them, then they belong to this of Prayer. Fasting also, and Humiliation, is
annexed to Petition, and especially Deprecation may come under this Head.
Public Prayer, in an unknown Language, is both unprofitable, and
unwarrantable: For the People, ignorant of the Language wherein it is
expressed, cannot say, Amen. Yet Set-Forms and premeditated Prayers are not
unlawful, if they be offered to God with Understanding, Attention, and
Affection: neither do they, as some son^^ly affirm, stint the Spirit of
Supplication. They may be a great help unto weaker Christians, and supply their
de^ects. Yet for men to tie themselves to such or such a form of words, with
affectation, as though there were some greater efficacy in thsoe words and
expressions, then in others, as good and significant, as they, can be no less
then Superstition. For so to do, is to turn Prayer into a Charm, or
Enchantment. Again, to tie our selves to a form, (...) neglect those gifts,
which God has given us, cannot be excused: for it is ce^tain^y a ^ault. The
forms and expressions used in Scripture, if rightly applied, (...) the best:
But assectate and curious terms, and the gaudy colors of Rhetor^^^, used by
some in their Devotion, are not tolerable: For we must not comp^e^ent with our
great and glorious God. To think we cannot so well say, Amen* ^o the devout and
godly Prayers of others, which we know not, before we he^r them, as to those
Set-Forms, which we know, and have used before, is a Foolery.

To offer unto God some part of our goods to relieve the Poor, ^. XV.
or maintain His Worship, or for some other Religious U^e, is a Duty here
required: So likewise, to give Him some part of our time. To consecrate the
seventh part of our time, belongs unto the ^ourth Commandment, as it
determines that distinct portion. To this Commandment belong all Ceremonies
instituted by God, and especially Sacraments; as Circumcision, and the
Passover, before the Exhibition of Christ, and His coming in the flesh, and
Baptism, and the Lords Supper, in the times of the Gospel. And whilst they are
in force, they bind us to observance, because instituted and commanded by God,
with a Promise of acceptance, and a Blessing, i^ performed aright. To these
must be added, the Offerings of Cain and Abel, and all the Patriarchs: As also
the Jewish Tabernacle, and Temple, Al^ars, Levitical Priesthood, Vestments*
Sacrifices, Oblations, Purifications, and Religions, Ceremonies and Services
instituted by God, are reducible to this Head. And Word and Prayer were of
perpetual continuance, in all times and places. Yet many of those Ceremonious
Institutions were not: for many of them did bind so as they were limited to
certain times and places; and upon the coming of Christ, did either expire, or
were abrogated. Such as did typifie Christ, His Office, His Sacrifice His
Service, and such things, as were fulfilled upon His Exhibition, and (...), did
expire. The Reasons why God did institute these outward ^^^rnal Ceremonies, and
such a multitude of them, and annexed them to the Promise* you have formerly
heard. And all these, in their time, were of Divine ^uthority, and Obligation,
and could not be neglected and contemned, except upon Divine Dispensation, and
in the case of Necessity, without great offense. Neither did God ever by the
Prophets, reprove the Jews, for the observation of the^e Ceremonies He
commanded: For that could be no disobedience, but obedience. But when they
either neglected these, or added something of their own heads, or the
Ceremonies of the Heathens, and were careless of the performance of the Moral,
and more weighty Duties, then he was offended. And he signified plainly that He
would have mercy, and not Sacrifice; the Knowledge of God, and not whole
Burnt-offerings, Hos. 6. 6. And as our Savior said to the Pharisees Scribes
and Jews of His time, who were zealous and strict in paying of Tith, of Mint,
Cummin, and Annyseed, and neglected the principal and weighty Duties of the
Law, as Judgment, Mercy, and Faithfulness: These (that is, the greater) they
ought to have done, and not have left the less and petty duties undone, Math.
23. 23.

As, Doxologies, and Benedictions; So, to that of the Word and Sacraments, that
of Church Discipline, especially in the Acts of solemn Admonition, Suspension,
Excommunication, Absolution, Penance, and the Execution of bot^. And here it is
observable, that the Christian-Worship, under the Gospel, instituted by Christ
and His Apostles, is more Spiritual, plain, easy, and more immediately
conducing to Piety, and performance of pure Moral-Duties, than the Worship of
former times was. And though the Temple-Service and Worship was abolished; yet
the Synagogue-Service, for the greatest part, was retained, and* by Divine
Institution. continued in the Christian Church. Such were reading of the
Scriptures, Expositions, Exhortations, which were Sermons, Prayer, Discipline.
Yet this is not so to be understood, as though all these might not be used in
the Temple, which was called, An House of Prayer; for they might. But they were
not proper to the Temple, and only to be performed there; as Sacrifices, and
other Services of the Priests were.

Though Christ and His Apostles, Beggarly Rudiments, and Ceremonies of the Law,
abolished the Temple-Service* took away the Partition Wall, and thought it not
fit to charge the Gentiles, turned Christians, with that Burden, which their
Fathers could not bear; and God has destroye^ that City and Temple, where once
he put his name, and commanded these Ceremonies to be used; yet we find
Christian Churches turned into Temples, their Tables into Altars, and not only
many of the Levitical, but the Heathenish Rites observed in them, to the great
offense of Jews and Pagans: and also a Sanctifying Power and Holiness ascribed
unto them, with a Belief of their excellency, and a confidence in their Divine
Virtue. And the Reformed Christians, which have laid these aside, and reduced
their Worship to the Primitive Simplicity, and conformed it to the Rule of the
Gospel are accounted Schismatics and Heretics. Yet we know for certain, that
many of the Ceremonies and Rites of Rome, were never instituted by Christ and
the Apostles; are needless unprofitable, and at least an occasion of Idolatry;
and certainly Superstitious. And there can be no doubt, that Prayer directed to
God alone, by the mediation of Jesus Christ, without the Worship or Invocation
of Saints and Angels, are effectual, and commanded by God: and Worship, without
any Images, is safe and acceptable to our God. For that Worship only is
agreeable to this Commandment, which is

1. Instituted of God.

2. In force, under the Gospel.

3. Has a Promise of a Blessing, upon the right performance of it. And that
which is not instituted by God, nor in force under the Gospel, and has not a
Promise of a Blessing, is needless, unprofitable, superstitious, dangerous,
unlawful, and contrary unto this Commandment.

CHAP. IX.
The Third Commandment.
THis Commandment is Negative,

The first Commandment ^orbids the Worship of strange Gods, who are no Gods.

The second, the Worship of Images, or by Images.

The third, the taking of His Name in vain, or false-swearing. For, 1. He is to
be acknowledged as God. 2. Worshipped, according to His own Institution. 3.
This Worship is to be performed in a due manner.


In the words themselves, we have 1. A Sin forbidden. 2. A Penalty threatened,
and to be suffered by him that shall be guilty of that Sin.


The Sin is, to take God's Name in vain.

And least any one should presume, Every one must know, That the Lord will not
hold him guiltless that takes his Name in vain.

This is the substance of this Law.

To take God's Name in vain, to swear falsely, and to use God's Name, to
persuade men to believe that which is false. Thus it is expounded, Thou shall
not swear by my Name falsely: neither shall thou profane the Name of thy God,
Lev. 19. 12. And thus the Chaldee Paraphrast understands and (...) the words in
this place Exodus 20. 7. and also. Deuteronomy. 5. 11. And though the word Magan
signifies vain; yet the word (...) Shekar, used by him in the latter part of
the Commandment, signifies Falsehood or a Lie: and Ed shekar is a false
Witness, Deuteronomy. 19. 18. By which we may easily understand, that the Lord, in
the^e words, forbids false swearing: and because, in swearing, we use God's
Name and a false Oath is unjust, and, in respect of the end to which it was
ordained* is vain: Therefore to swear falsely, is to take up, or use God's Name
profanely, or in vain.

An Oath is a kind of Testimony, Oath. If God swear* we have infallible truth,
because His Word, much more His Oath is infallible: Because He may both
deceive, and be deceived. Yet the better the man is, the more credible is his
Oath. And in matters which cannot be made evident by other proof, an Oath is
the highest degree of confirmation: and more we cannot expect, when more cannot
be done. Therefore, upon an Oath taken we rest. For an Oath, for confirmation,
is unto men an end of all strife, Heb. 6. 16. In the Oath of man we have a
twofold Testimony; one of man, another of God: and the Testimony of God is
used to confirm the Testimony of Man. In this respect, an Oath is said to be a
producing of God, as Witness of the thing sworn, and the word of Man. Diverse
Schoolmen* Casuists, and Civilians, and Theological Writers, both Papists and
Protestants, agree in the Definition of an Oath, That it is a Calling of God to
witness for the confirmation of a matter that is doubtful. This Definition
implies, that the general nature of an Oath is Divine Worship: For to call upon
God, is a part of Divine Worship, according to the first and second
Commandment. The matter of it is something doubtful, or which may be doubted
of, a matter of Controversy, or contradiction. For an Oath is needless in any
thing, which may be evidently proved any other ways. The Form of it is to
produce God, as a Witness of that which is, or may be doubted of: and He cannot
be produced as a Witness, but by Invocation. The end is, to confirm that which
is doubtful, by the infallible Testimony of God. Yet certainly, there is a more
general nature of an Oath: for it should be so defined, as to comprehend all
Oaths; not only the Oaths of Men or Angels, as this definition only does, but
the Oath of God also: For the Scriptures expressly testify, that God did swear;
yet He cannot worship Himself, nor call upon Himself, though He did swear by
Himself. Therefore an Oath in general, seems to be the confirmation of that,
which may be doubted of, by that which is most certainly and infallibly true
and granted by the Parties, to be assured for to be such.

1. The matter of an Oath is that which may be doubted of, yet is certain in it
self, and ought to be certainly known to him that swears.

2. Ordinarily it is such a Proposition, as cannot be cleared by demonstration,
or any other way.

3. The end of it, is confirmation to him that knows it not certainly.

4. This confirmation must be made by an higher, and an infallible truth: and
such is the Eternal Being of the Deity, which yet can be no proof or
confirmation, but to him that grants that God is, as all should grant. Yet in
this definition, I humbly submit to better judgments. Here it is to be noted,
that this Proposition, God is is higher and more certain to man then this, that
God is so, or so affected ^o His Cre^ture; or this, That God will do so or so,
as He promises or threatens. And as all Proofs are Per Notlus, so an Oath is.

After this consideration of the nature of an Oath, Men: For the Commandment
was given to Man. Of these are many Distinctions: For some are judici^l, some
extrajudicial; some (...), some implicit; which, besides others, I pass by.
The principal, and most usual, is that of Assertory. and Promissory. Assertory
is of that which is past or present: A Promissory, of something to come: and
this latter is often used to confirm Leagues or Contracts, public or private.
And the thing doubted of and confirmed is the sincere intention of the Party,
promising for the present, and the performance of the thing promised for the
time to come. The confirmation, in both these kind of Oaths, is the same, and
that, is by calling God to Witness. These, and all other Oaths, used by men,
whether they be public, or private* presuppose the infallible clear
O^niscience of the Deity, and His most perfect Justice: and the Party, swearing
by that very act, pretends to acknowledge both, And upon this, credit is given,
because he can bring no higher proof; and also it is supposed, that no man will
forfeit his interest in God, as all perjured persons do. By this Act of
Swearing we submit, and put our selves into the hands of the great Judge, to
punish or reward, condemn or justify us, as we shall, in this particular,
prove innocent or guilty. For there is no Oath, but in some respect is
execratory. Therefore it ought not to be taken, but upon due deliberation, and
with that Reverence, which shall be suitable unto the Majesty of this ^upream
Lord, whom we call to Witness. And seeing no Oath, but By God* can be in many
things a sufficient confirmation, therefore all Oaths ought to be By God at
least by consequence, and taken in such a manner, as is agreeable to His
Majesty.

We are commanded ^o swear by His Name in the first Commandment, and with all
due Reverence and fear in this: And to give this honor, and high respe^t unto
any other, is Idolatry. This is a Reason why we may take an Oath from
Idolaters, swearing by their Idols, and ^alse gods, whom they believe to be
true god^; yet We must not swear by them.

As for the Rites used in this Act; as, Putting the hand under the Thigh of him
to whom the Oath is taken, as Abraham's Servant did, Genesis 24. 9. Or, ^ifting up
the hand toward Heaven, as the Angel did, Dan. 12. 7. Or, laying the hand upon
the Altar, according to the Custom of some places, or upon the Bible, as it is
with us; they are indifferent, and not of the essence of an Oath. They seem to
be added, to signify what a serious, solemn, and weighty thing it is to swear.

The Sin forbidden, is not, to swear, but to swear falsely: for we must not take
the Name of the Lord our God in vain; which, as you heard, is to swear falsely.
A man swears falsely in an Assertory Oath, when he either swears that which he
does not certainly know to be true, or that which he knows to be false. For the
thing confirmed by such an Oath, ought to be certainly known unto the Person
swearing: In a Promissory Oath, he is guilty, who when he swears, either has
no intention, or no sincere and constant resolution to perform the thing
promised: He also, who after he has sworn, either forgets, or neglects the
performance, or upon indifferent and unjust grounds, alters his mind, and
seeks unwarrantable evasions, and takes advantage upon imperfect expressions,
and so does manifest, that he does not truly fear the Majesty of that great and
glorious Lord, whose Name he used, that by it he might make men believe, and
depend upon His Promise, confirmed by Oath.

Thus far the Sin prohibited: The penalty threatened upon the sin committed,
follows in these words, The Lord will not hold him guiltless that takes his
Name in vain: Where we have* the Sin, the Punishment, the Judge. The sin is, to
^wear falsely, and so to abuse and profane the Name of God, and that either in
an Assertory, or Promissory Oath: For, in both, truth is required, and our Yea
should be Yea, and our Nay Nay; otherwise we shall be guilty. The punishment is
this, That we should not be held as guiltless and innocent. Where it is employed,
that as we swear truly or falsely* ^o we shall be judged: and, not to be judged
guiltless, is, to be judged, and also punished as guilty and that certainly,
and unavoidably. For the Septuagint u^e a double Negative; Not, Not, intimating
unto us, the true Sense to be this; that the perjured Wretch shall in no wise
escape, but certainly shall be punished. The Judge is the Lord, who knows the
Hearts of men; and, as a Judge, takes special notice of all sins, and
especially of such heinous Crimes as Perjury is: And though such guilty persons
should escape the hand of Man, yet they shall certainly feel the hand of God.
The punishment due unto this sin is not only eternal; which certainly, if not
repented of, shall be suffered; but also some Temporal exemplary Penalty* that
men may hear, and fear, and know that there is a God, whole Throne is in
Heaven, that judges the World.

Thus He punished all Israel with three years Famine, and seven of Readiness Sons
with death, for his Perjury, 2 Samuel 21. 11. Zedechiah was guilty of this sin,
and was fearfully punished for the same, even because he had violated his Oath,
whereby he had solemnly con^irmed the League made with the King of Babylon,
Jer. 17. Not only the Holy Scriptures, but other Histories, relate God's just
Judgment, executed upon perjured persons: for the flying Roll hovers over their
heads, and shall certainly enter into the house of him that swears fa^sly by
His Name: and it shall remain in the midst of his house, and shall consume it
with the Timbe^ thereof Zach. 5. 4. The time when, and the manner how they
shall be punished, God has reserved to himself. He sometimes makes use of the
Magistrate: though with us, the Pillory is a punishment less by far then ought
to be inflicted. But many times the Magistrate is in this particular too
remiss, and many times is ignorant: yet God will in no wise suffer this sin to
escape unpunished.

Sometimes one who abhorrs the sin may be surprised, with fe^r, or violent
passion (as Peter was) and may forswear himself; yet when he recollects
himself, and re^lects upon his sin, he goes into some secret place, and weeps
bitterly, because he has offended his God. This cannot be so grievous an
offender as others, who have little, or no fear of the Deity.

There is great reason why this Crime should be so severely punished:

1. God name thereby is profaned: For it argues either plain Atheism, o^ a
great measure of unbelief; and a contempt of the Divine Majesty: and therefore
must needs highly dishonor God.

2. It cuts in sunder the ligaments or bonds of humane society, and fearfully
perverts judgment. So that if this sin be suffered, and not punished; Gods
name will be dishonored, judgment perverted, leag^es and contracts invalid,
and few men can be trusted. For if an Oath, wherein a man pawnes his soul, his
interest in God, his Eternal estate, cannot be believed what can?

There is also a Vain Swearing, excused, but is here forbidden, though it be
not so heinous as Perjury. Men in Swearing may take the Name of God in Vain
several ways; but especially in respect 1. Of the matter, 2. Of the end, 3. Of
the manner.


1. The matter may be of little or no moment, and such as is no ways fit to be
confirmed by Oath; The subject whereof should be weighty, and of great
importance.

2. The end of an Oath is to glorify God; to make that credible to others,
which cannot any other ways be made sufficiently evident, and which is of
special concernment; to do right to men; to direct judgment; to give others
security, and such like: So that there is some kind of necessity of an Oath.
But many times an Oath taken, tends not to any, or more of these ends: and the
mat^er is such, as that it may be believed, or not believed, without any
prejudice to God or man. In this case an Oath must needs be vain.

3. Gods name is taken in vain for the manner, when men swear ignorantly
without Knowledge of God, or the nature of an Oath; or without serious
deliberation; or without reverence of Gods glorious Name. For an Oath is
dreadful, as Gods glorious name is dreadful: and our interest in him is all
we have to trust to: and to pledge this, and give our selves as hostages upon
every trifling occasion is an high presumption, and desperate folly. Therefore
common swearers are most grievous offenders, and ought not to be suffered in
any civil State, much less in a Church Christian. And their sin is so much the
more heinous, because at first its so easily avoided, and the custom thereof
prevented. For there is neither profit, nor pleasure, nor other worldly
advantage to tempt them unto it. And there can be no such persons, but they
must needs be Profane, and ungodly Wretches.

Because the name of God is taken up in other matters, abominable and
unlawful; therefore in this respect they may be reduced unto this
Commandment, and here forbidden, though the things or acts themselves are
against the first. So likewise the name of God may b^ Profaned in some kind of
Lots, Adjurations, Vows, Curses* especially when they are used without warrant,
and Commission from God. Yet some kind of Lots, Vows, Cursing, Adjurati^^, are
lawful, and no ways against this or any precept of God. Extraordinary Lots,
such was that, which was used together with prayer in the choice of Matthias
is, no doubt, agreeable to Gods law, Act. 1. 24, 25, 26. Vows are promises
which are made to God, whereby we bind our selves to the performance of some
service. If the thing be commanded; or indifferent, and in our own power, it is
lawful: Especially when it is made with deliberation and reverence; otherwise
it is not. Excommunication is a Curse; and if the cause be just, and the
offen^e such ^ shall deserve it; and it solemnly performed, it is not
prohibited. So Adjuration in many Cases is not unlawful. And this is a
general rule that to abuse profanely any thing sanctified by God is against
this Commandment. Hither is referred Blasphemy: And by Blasphemy may be
understood, not only words, but thoughts, and the disposition of the Heart.
Yet many Blasphemies are against the first precept. And there is blasphemy
against God, Christ, the Holy Ghost, against the works, and words of God,
against the (...), against his institutions. Rabshakeh's blasphemous words seem
to be Atheistical, as denying the very being, or at least the universal
providence, government and power of God. It was a special kind of Blasphemy of
the Pha^^ses when they ascribed that miracle which Christ did by the finger of
God, and power of the Holy Ghost to the Prince of Devils, Mat. 12. 24. There
was in i^ a complication of sins to be referred to several heads. All false
Teachers; all ^sapn^ wres^, or falsely translate Scriptures, have great affinity
with swearers: For as Pe^jured persons make God so far as in them lies a false
witness, so do these: and do not ^ear to make God the author of their
abominable errors, and deny the truths contained in his Word. They will not
receive that for the Word of God, which he has testified from Heaven: and they
will make that his word which is false, or was never testified by him.
Whatsoever has affini^y with a false or vain Oath, so far, and in that respect
it is here prohibited.

And because swearing being one part of Gods Worship,. (...)
and sometimes by a (...) is taken for the Worship of God in general, as Esaias.
45. 23. and 65. 16. Psalm. 63. 11. Jer. 5. 7. and 12. 16. Therefore all undue
performance of any part of Gods worship is here prohibited. Upon this ground to
read the Scriptures, preach, hear, discourse o^ the Word of God, and not with
respect which is due to the Word of God must needs be guilty. To Pray, sing
Psalms, give thanks, or praise God; to administer, or receive the Sacraments
unworthily, and in such a manner, as shall not be agreeable to the excellency
of these ^ivine institutions, wherein we draw near to God, and God to us, must
needs be an offense. And many do offend often in this particular, by ignorance,
neg^igence, want of due consideration, and the profane, and irreve^ent
dispo^^tion of the heart, either before we enter upon these divine services, or
in the time of performance, or immediately when they are finished. The^e are
the causes why these blessed ordinances make very light impressions, or none at
all upon our Souls; or if these impressions are lively, they be soon razed out
again. We should remember that in these acts of worship, we have to deal with
God, and converse with him, as he with us, and we approach his Eternal Throne.
And how much will it dishonor him, and derogate from his glory, to be so
profane, irreverent, heedlesse in his very presence? And if we duly consider,
we shall easily perceive how heinous the offense will be, in these performances
to suffer our minds to rove, and wander, and to leave our hearts behind us; or
come before him, and approach his Throne only with our lips, or worship him
with base profane and indisposed Souls. There be some who by the outward
carriage, pos^ures and ges^ures o^ their body, pretend an high degreee of
^everence, zeal, devotion, humility in the service of God, and yet their (...)
are profane* corrupt, and unholy: and this is a kind of gross hypocrisy
contrary to this Commandment. It Is a matter of Lamentation to all Gods
Children that when they sincerely intend, and seriously endeavor to perform
their Religious service to their God in a due and holy manner, yet cannot so
fix their thoughts, continue their heavenly disposition, and raise and increase
their devotion, but find their minds ready to wander, and be distracted, and
their devotion to be interrupted, or abated: and in that respect acknowle^ge
their desects in their best performances, and sue for pardon, earnestly
desiring that state of glory, wherein they shall be free from all distractions,
and worship their God with greater perfections. When we look upon the greatest
part of Christians, and take notice of their carriage in the Worship of God,
not only in private but in p^blique; their outward Profaneness, and
irreverence speak aloud the inward, profane, irreverent, and base disposition
of their Souls. Yet though hereby God is dishonored, and his worship polluted,
they are senseless of any such sin even when the Judgments of God lie heavy
upon them for this sin. We have an evident example hereof in the Corinthians,
who for their unworthy receiving of the Sacrament of the Eucharist, were so
severely punished, 1 Cor. 11. 30.

Thus you have heard what sins are here prohibited expressly or implicitly.
Reverence, devotion, holiness, here required. And the first thing commanded is
swearing truly, and in such a manner as that God may be honored, and that the
parties swearing may be innocent. And God in these words does not command us to
swear (for that belongs unto the first precept) but to swear tru^y, justly, and
in an holy manner. For God foreseeing that the condition of man would be such,
as that many times an Oath would be not only convenient, but in some respect
necessary, he thought it fit to regulate the same. And therefore did command us.

1. To swear by his name, not by creatures or false Gods. 2. Because in
judgments, leagues, and contracts, it was to be solemnly used with some Rite
and ceremony; he therefore appoints to be a part of his Worship, and that not
only to men but Angels. 3. Because it would not prove to be of no force and
effect if not taken in due manner; in this Commandment he therefore prescribes
the manner and binds to observe it.
Not to repeat the Dictinction of Oaths, Assertory, and promissory, whether
negative, or affirmative. In an Assertory Oath it is required.

1. That the matter confirmed by it be certain in it self, and certainly known
to the party swearing: For if truth, and certain knowledge be required in our
ordinary speech, and conference with others, when we affirm, or deny any thing,
much more is it required in an Oath. 2. The matter must be of that weight and
importance, as to be worthy of so high and divine confirmation: For God is not
to be solemnly invoked, and attested in tri^les and matters of small moment. 3.
It must be such as may be ju^^ly doubted of, and that there is a kind of
necessity of an Oath for confirmation, both because it is of special
concernment to determine it, and take away the doubt, and also there is no
better way to do it than by an Oath. Otherwise, an Oath is needless; and such
as be too hasty to swear when there is no necessity are to be suspected as
false or profane wretches. 4. The party swearing must aim at that end, for
which an Oath was ordained, and take it so as that it may end in the glory of
God, and the good of man.
Besides the conditions required in an assertory Oath,

1. The thing promised must be just, and lawful. If a man may not do, much
less may he promise, and swear to do that which is unjust: Neither, if in this
case we swear, can the Oath bind us; but becomes (ipso facto) void. For the
^b^gation of Man cannot be in force, when it is contrary unto, and inconsis^ent
with ^^pe^iour obligation of Gods Commandment. Hen^e that Axiom, Juramentum
non ligat ad illicitum. No Oath can bind us to do that which (...), or not do
that which he has commanded. For it is contrary to (...) end of an Oath, to be
Vinculum Iniquitatis, to bind to offend the supreme Lo^d. Therefore it is a
fearful abuse, and profanation of an Oath, when men swear to conceal Treason,
and bind themselves to do mischief; as those (...) men did, who conspired to
murder Paul, Act. 23. 21. It Is true that by the variation of cirumstances, and
other accidents and events of divine providence, that which was lawful in the
time of swearing, may become unlawfu^ before the time of performance, and in
this case God does free a man from his obligation.

2. The thing promised by Oath must be possible, not only in it self, but to
the party swearing, and so that prudent men may judge it to be in his power.
Yet if by providence it become impossible to the party before the time of
performance, he is free: But he must be willing, and surely endeavor the
performance: for if through his own folly, negligence or wilfulness it become
such, so that the cause is in himself, who might have prevented it, he must
needs be guilty. Otherwise, Nemo tenetur ad Impossible.

3. The party swearing must have a sincere intention to perform his Oath: and
must carefully remember how deeply ^e has engaged himself, and use his utmost
en^eavour to be faithful, lest God be dishonored, his conscience wounded, his
neighbor deceived and disappointed.

And because an Oath taken before man should express the mind of the party
swearing to them whom it concerns to believe him, an assertory, and also a
promissory Oath, the words must be plain and full, so that they may be
understood: for otherwise, if they conceal that which should be expressed, or
express their mind doubtfully the Oath will be ^o little purpose: and if this
be done of purpose to deceive, it is abominable. Therefore all Aequivocations,
and mental reservations are to be abhorred as contrary to the very end of an
Oath. If these be used, all Oaths are Vselesse. For the party swearing speaks
one thing but means another: and whosoever depends upon any such must needs be
deceived. Neither is it safe for any man, after that he has solemnly bound
himself by a Promissory Oath to seek evasions, to disoblige himself by Curious,
and nice distinctions, or strayning or wresting the words. For we must consider
that God will judge us.

As in swearing, Divine Worship, we take up the Name of God: And as in Oaths,
so in other things, especially in religious services we must not take his name
in vain; but perform them so, as that God with whom we have to do may be
glorified. As fasting and prayer for vain glory to gain an opinion of our
holiness, and to think to be heard of God for our many words, and repetitions
are here prohibited, as also all formalityes in divine Worship; so, the
contrary is commanded. And God requires a due disposition of heart, and a
preparation before, this disposition continued in the act of performance, and
an holy carriage after our devotions are ended. For as God is holy, so must we,
when we draw nigh unto him, be holy. And this precept discovers an abundance of
profaneness, hypocrisy, formality in most, and many imperfections in the best,
when they worship before God.

CHAP. X.
The Fourth Commandment.
BEfore I enter upon the explication of this commandment,

1. The order is clear enough. For after that God had required subjection to
himself, and secured his sovereign power in the First; instituted and appointed
the services which man must perform unto him, prohibiting all superstitious
inventions of men in the Second; and prescribed the manner how his institutions
must be performed in the Third; he determins a certain time, wherein, all
other business set aside, religious duties ought to be performed unto him in a
more solemn manner, and that time consecrated in a special manner to his Divine
Majesty in this Fourth. This is the order and connection of this part of the Law
with the rest, whereby we understand that this Commandment presupposes the
former necessarily, so that without them its nothing but a bare duration, and
part of time, no ways different in it self from other times. And for this
reason must of necessity derive its morality, so far as it is moral, from some
thing antecedent.

2. The reason, Paradise, and in that Garden God had planted Eastward in Eden,
to dress it and keep it, Genesis 2. 15. And this work must take up some time. But
since his Fall, he must eat his bread in the sweat of his face: and as his
necessities, so his worldly employments are not few; but so much of his time is
taken up in these earthly works, that he cannot keep a perpetual Sabbath to his
God, as we hope to do in Heaven. For this cause God in his Wisdom thought it
fit to measure out of his time a determinate portion, wherein man must
sequester himself from the business of the World, and spend the same in his
better and diviner employments. What portion was fittest, and sufficient
neither too much, nor too little, he only knew, as He only had power to limit
it, and bind man to the Sanctification of it. The Jews observed one day in
seven, in a certain order, so likewise do Christians, though the seventh day
of the Jews was the last, as Christians is the first of the week, as our weeks
are now reckoned. And if any people in the world, then surely Jews and
Christians had their warrant for the observation of holy times, from Heaven.
What the Patriarchs from Adam to Moses did in this particular, we cannot so
clearly determine, because the Scripture in this point is silent. That God set a
special Character upon the seventh day of creation is evident, Genesis 2. 2. 3.
Because having finished his glorious works in six days, he rested the 7th. and
blessed and hallowed that day, and so he did none of the rest. Some take it for
certain, that God even then ins^ituted the Sabbath: and others do think it
probable that God from the beginning required of man the 7th. part of his time,
and the 10th. part of his goods for his service; and reserved both as a chief
rent to be paid to him as chief Lord, in acknowledgment of his supreme
dominion. If reason were consulted, it could not deny, but that these are due
to God; especially if he require them by a command: If Scripture which is a
rule above humane reason; some think it might be demonstrated, that God did
command Man to gave both in all times. Yet to give both, is not moral but
positive. That is properly Moral which is intrinsecally good, just, necessary,
and such as directly and immediately makes a man better; and that which is good
in this manner cannot any ways be performed by a wicked man, or an hypocrite.
Yet the tenth of a man's goods, and the 7th. of his time, may be given to God by
a Cain, by an hypocritical Pharisee: tho with an heart rightly qualified they
cannot be offered to God by such kind of persons, whose very hearts are corrupt
and depraved. That which is just and holy in it self, and renders a man
acceptable to God is of universal, and perpetual obligation from the beginning.
If any particular duty afterward become such by virtue of Gods command, though
the matter of the duty and the thing commanded in it self be not intrinsecally
just, then that duty is not moral but positive, and receives its morality, ab
extrinseco from Gods Command, not from the nature of the thing. In respect of
this Morality not only the Sabbath, but the Sacraments and the precept
concerning the Tree of Knowledge, of good and evil, may be said to be moral:
and so moral and ceremonial Laws, which are really dif^erent should be
consounded. Yet if any will call such commands Positively moral, I will not
wrangle about words: Yet I must say that term Positively moral is not proper
nor accurate. As in Grammar there be words which derive their signification,
and in Logic arguments which receive the force of arguing from Primitive; so
even in this decalogue, which we call the moral law there be Commandments
which derive their morality from others, and all from the first. Yet this is
the di^ference between such Commandments, and others which are purely
positive, or ceremonial, That these derivatives have a nearer connection with
pure morals, and conduce more effectually to pure justice and holiness, then
these positives do, whose matter in it self is indifferent and no better.

The end of this Commandment, Heathens. The end of the Sabbath, to the Jew,
was constantly to worship God, in remembrance of Creation, and deliverance out
of Egypt, Deuteronomy. 5. 15. and to distinguish them from the Heathen, who had
forsaken that God, who created Heaven and Earth, and worshipped Idols: and
their Sabbath tended, and did conduce to these ends.

The Christian observes his Sabbath in remembrance of Christ's Resurrection,
and his Deliverance from Eternal Death thereby, and consecrates himself in that
day, the more solemnly unto that God* who has not only created but redeemed
him. And take away their Sabbath-Christian, their Religion is not likely to
continue long.

To enter upon the Commandment; It Is Affirmative, and includes a Negative: 1.
The Commandment it self. 2. The Explication of it.


The Commandment it self, is brief, and delivered in few words.

The Explication is large.

The words are these, Remember the Sabbath Day to keep it holy, Exodus 20. 8.
Keep the Sabbath Day to sanctify it, Deuteronomy. 5. 12.

Remember, in the former place is explained in the latter, by the word Keep;
which word, according to the Hebrew, Chaldee, and the Vers^on of the
Septuagint, sometimes signifies, to have a special care to keep or observe a
thing, and the Arabic word This word is used by the Syriack Translator.
Natar, is of the same signification: And the meaning of it is; Have a care,
and take special heed to sanctify the Sabbath: For when we are forgetful of a
thing, we neglect it. To remember a thing, is sometimes to do it, if it be a
thing to be done: as when God says, He will remember His Covenant, it is meant,
he will be careful to keep and perform it, Genesis 9. 15. God had a special reason
to prefix this word, which signifies or imports special care and heed.

1. Because Religion did so much depend upon the Sanctification of the Sabbath,
and man's Salvation upon Religion.

2. I believe the Israelites in Egypt had much neglected the Sabbath and Holy
Times; neither if they had been careful, could they so well observe them,
because of their cruel Bondage.

3. Some of these Israelites, contrary to God's Command, went out upon the
Sabbath to gather Manna, as though that had been an ordinary (...) and God did
signify himself much herewith displeased, Exodus 16. 26, 27. (...) hence no man
can conclude an higher degree of Morality, in this (...), then in others: For
of the four first, it is least Moral. Thus far it is 1. As it is commanded by
God. 2. As requiring a special and more solemn performance of Moral Duties. 3.
As necessary, for preservation of Religion amongst men.


The Sabbath Day:] The word, Remember, take care, and hee^, is but general,
though a special Item; yet here it is specified by the Object, The Sabbath Day;
and the end, the Sanctification of it. For the thing to be remembered, and so
carefully observed, was the Sanctification of that time. The word Sabbath,
taken from the Hebrew Language, and used in many Languages of the World,
signifies

1. By it self Rest.

2. Joined with the word, Day, a time of Rest.

3. A certain determinate time of Rest.

4. An Holy Rest not a rest from all Works, but such as are secular.

5. The word, Day, does distinguish it from Years, and Months, and Weeks, as
greater and longer times; and from an hour, as a shorter measure of time: And
because it may signify, either a natural day of 24 hours; or as it is an
artificial day, so far as it is a time of work, and is opposed to a Night,
which is a time appointed by God for man to rest in. For here it is differenced
from those six days wherein man may labor, and do his secular works, which
also had their several nights, and times of rest, from the Creation. And as our
secular^work, on other days, is not confined merely to the time of Light,
natural from the Sun approaching unto, or appearing in our Horizon; no more is
this Sabbath Day. Yet God did not take from it, nor deny man, in it, a Night,
as a time of Rest. And men, in these things, should not be more precise than
God would have them to be.

It Is not material, whether we turn it, The Sabbath; or, A Sabbath, though The
Sabbath is more emphatical, and more agreeable to the Hebrew, Chaldee,
Septuagim; all which put a double Particle, One upon the day; another upon
Sabbath, Remember The Day of The Sabbath.

This word, Sabbath Day, does not determine, whether it should be one day in a
Year, or in a Month, or in a Week; Whether it should be the first, or last of
a Week, or any of the intervenient Days: neither does it inform us, when the
Week begins or ends. Yet that People of the Jews might easily understand, that
he meant that particular Sabbath Day, wherein they were prohibited to gather
Manna, which God denied to give them that time. And if they had been ignorant
of this, they might easily know, that it signified such a time, as God should
determine, and judge sufficient, for preservation of Religion and His Worship,
and yet leave a competent portion of time for man's necessities. This appears
by the Explication following.

For all this, I do not think, that God did ever make such account of this or
that seventh day, as that one and the same should be of necessity, and of
universal and perpetual Obligation to Jews and Gentiles: Neither is there any
Morality in the number of seven, or any necessary dependence of the continuance
of Religion upon this or that seventh day. The light of Natural Reason seems
unable of it self to know this time; yet if it be once revealed by God, it
cannot but acknowledge the Equity of it. It may dictate unto us, that if God
once determine the time, that time is the fittest. The Heathens might have some
Astronomical knowledge of the seventh day; but Theological they could have
none, except by Tradition.

To sanctify it] This is the principal part of this Commandment, To
sanctify this day. But its one thing for God, another thing for man to
sanctify it. God may hallow it by his practice, as he did the first 7th. day
of the World; or by his institution, and command: For his command, institution,
designation of the day makes it relatively holy, distinguishes it from, and
advances it above other days, and binds man to honor it in his practice. Man
sactifies it, for that is the sanctification here intended, yet presupposing
the former.

1. When he es^eemes and accounts that day such as God has made it.

2. When not only he rests from secular works, but applies that time to the
due performance of those heavenly services, which God requires of him
especially and principally on this day. It Is a time wherein the soul must be
more employed then the Body: it is a time wherein we must converse more with God
than men, with Heaven than with earth: it is a time ordained not for the
temporal so much, as the spiritual, and eternal good of man: it is a time
wherein we must not only cease from our worldly labors, business,
employment, which take up, and toil the body, but seques^er our hearts from
worldly thoughts, cares, a^fections, which distract our minds, and diviner
facultyes. Thus instituted of God, and thus hallowed of man, its the best, and
most excellent, and noble part of our time, and resembles in some degree that
eternal Sabbath, which we hope to hallow more perfectly in heaven: When we
shall be free from all sin and sorrow, and Rest our selves with unspeakable
content and joy in our God! This will be that glorious Festival, and Holy Day,
the Sun whereof shall never set but ever shine! For it shall have no end! But
this Blessed and Eternal Sabbath is not prepared for profane wretches, who
neglect to serve their God on earth, but for such as shall be most care^ull to
sanctify God Sabbaths in this life. For the more careful we are of the one,
the more sure we may be of the other. The sum of the Commandment, is this;
That whatsoever time God shall determine and design to man for a Sabbath, man
must remember it, and be very careful not only to rest in it, and forbear his
secular employments therein, but he must be careful to sanctify it in the
holy performance of Heavenly services without distraction.

After the words of the Commandment follows the explication, Wherein God,

1. Explaines the word Sabbath Day, and determins in particular what day he
meant, and singles it out from amongst the rest.

2. Teaches him how to sanctify it.

3. Gives the reason why he did determine upon that day for Rest and
sanctification rather then upon any other.

So that in the words following we have.

1. The determination, of the day. 2. The sanctification, of the day. 3. The
reason of both.
1. The determination of the day is in these words; Six days shall thou
labor, and do all thy Works; but the 7th. Day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy
God. Herein He

1. Takes out of man's time Six days, and assigns them for secular
employments. 2. He pitcheth upon the 7th, which he appropriates to himself, and
designs for the Sabbath.
The former words; Six days shall thou labor and do all thy works, are
neither a Command, nor a Permission, nor a Toleration, nor indulgence in strict
sense, whatsoever they may imply. But the proper intention of them is to single
out six days, that God may let us know that none of them is the Sabbath, but
the 7th. following. They first presuppose that measure of time we call a week,
according to the number of the first seven days of the World which God created
in six days, and ceased from Creation the 7th.

2. They imply that the Sabbath is weekly.

3. That it is none of the Six days. In these six days man may labor and do
his Work, and all his Work. By Man's Work may be meant,

1. The work of sin in opposition to the Works of God, and of the Spirit, which
are contrary: and as God never gave any liberty, so he never granted any time
for sin. From sin we must keep a Perpetual Sabbath.

2. Man's work is his labor and employment in the affairs of this world, which
are lawful, and in themselves no way unlawful. They are not only lawful,
but, in the time allotted by God, necessary; and he that neglects them shall
offend. And by this work is not meant only the toil of the body, but the
thoughts, cares, and consultations of the soul: which both are unlawful on the
Sabbath, not only because God has exempted all that time from them, but also
because they will distract and hinder us in the work of Sanctification.

As these words are no command; so they are no prohibition of serving God and
sequestring some part of the Six days for performance of heavenly duties. For
as man upon the Sabbath, may eat and drink, and do works of necessity, mercy,
and charity; so upon these Six days, he may and must serve and Worship his
God, and single out some parts of them for that purpose. Every day we should
present our selves before our God, and converse with him, and make some part of
it a Sabbath. And if by Gods gracious providence our condition be such, as that
we enjoy a larger measure of this secular time then ordinary, so that we have
leisure to sanctify the same, our sin is great, if we neglect the opportunity,
and spend our precious time in idleness, vanity, and sin, or needless
business of the world. We must not neglect the duties of our calling; and our
necessary employments, or spend our spare time only in contemptations, and
devotions, so as to omit the opportunityes that God has given us to do good to
others. But we must take heed le^^ we turn our Religion, and continued devotion
into formality.

And whereas it is said; Thou shall do (all) thy, Work.

By the Particle, (all) may be signified all kinds of secular works, though
they be many, and various, according to the multitude and variety of
employments, which are honest and beneficial, or any ways convenient for man.
God excepts not any; he gives full liberty and latitude as man's condition shall
require. Yet man should be so provident, and so diligent especially if he have
multitude of Businesse^s, as to finish (all) his works in the Six days, so as
not to entangle, or distract or hinder himself in religious services, and the
sanctification of the 7th. day. Neither must he cast himself so into straits,
as to impose upon himself necessityes upon that day, wherein both body and mind
should be free and prepared to Worship his God. For though works of necessity
may be done that day, yet no man that shall create necessityes unto himself can
be excused.

The next words, (But the 7th. day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God) inform
us of three things.

1. That the Sabbath is one day in seven.

2. The Seventh.

3. That this Sabbath is the Lords; not only because he rested in it, and did
bless, and sanctify it; but because though he be Lord of all time, yet he
has separated it from other days, and challenges a special propriety in it,
so that man must not have so much as the use of that time for his work, but
must consecrate it to Gods work: And to engrosse this day to our selves for
wordly employments must needs be Sacrilege. That which is the Lords, must be
given unto to the Lord.

Yet here it may be a question; When the Sabbath did commence, and which was
the first day from whence we must begin to number till we come unto the 7th, To
say that this day which God Commanded Israel to observe was the 7th, day of
Creation, wherein God rested, it is hard to prove. That it was the 7th. weekly
from the first falling of Manna is certain; and so no doubt, they understood
it. But whether that fell out to be the 7th, of the Creation, who can tell? It
might be so, and it might be otherwise. Yet herein we have no need to perplex
our selves. As they knew their Sabbath, so we do ours. Time in it self is
neither holy, nor unholy. Its holy (ab extrinseco) from Gods command, and man's
observation of i^. Let us be careful to do our duty which is sincerely to
sanctify our 7th. day, which is the next thing in the explication.

2. In it thou shall do no Manner of Work,

In the former Six days all work, any work except the work of sin might be
done; in this, not any work. And in these words, with those which immediately
follow, we may observe and consider.

1. What it is to sanctify.

2. Who the persons be that are commanded to sanctify this day.

1. The sanctification is understood by the cessation and rest. The rest is, we
must not do any work; where by work is meant secular work, such as may be done
lawfully in the six days. These are not only such works as toil the body,
but also such as distract* and take up the Soul. Therefore here is forbidden
Travayling, and passing from place to place, either on foot or horseback, or
any other ways; all labors of husbandry, of trades, and manufactures; all
secular studyes, and exercises in humane learning, all consultations debates
and resolutions about State-affaires; all judicial proceedings in secular
Courts; all plays, sports, recreations, which either toil the body or distract
the soul, and take up so much of this holy time as secular businesses do; all
thoughts and cares about worldly things, all words, and conferences, so far as
they are inconsistent with the holy observation of the time. For man's works
imply all these.

Yet this clause does not prohibit such works, as are no ways profane, but
rather tend unto the sanctification of the day.

The Jews might circumcise upon that day;

The Priests might kill their Sacrifices, and make their fires to burn them.

The Disciples must pluck ears of Corn, and eat them:

Our Savior might heal the sick.

Any man might Water and fodder his Cattle, or lift up a beast fallen into a
ditch, or deliver man or beast out of danger. All which inform us,

1. That necessary works, and such as tend to the preservation of man or beast
are lawful to be done this day.

2. That all such works as tend to the sanctification may be done likewise.
People may travail to the place of assembling, to hear the Word of God, to
pray, to perform holy duties. The Minister may study to prepare himself, may
preach, and teach, and do other ministerial works, even unto weariness. We may
eat, and drink, refresh our selves, visit the sick, heal them, administer
Physic, relieve the poor, and not profane the time. This was the Rest: Yet
what was the end of this Rest? For this was but to prepare and make way to a
far more noble work, to which this rest was subordinate. For surely 'twas not
Gods intention to command man to cease from his secular works to do worse, or
to do nothing. For if the thing commanded had been only rest, then a Beast
might keep the Sabbath as well as Man, and receive as much benefit from it.
Therefore this time was subordinate to an higher end then rest: and rest was
ordained for a diviner employment, as the service of our God, and the
sanctification of our souls. For we must Remember the Sabbath day to sanctify
it: But it cannot be a Sabbath except we rest; it cannot be sanctified except
we apply, and consecrate that time of rest to God and the service of his
glorious Majesty. The Jews were directed by the Prophet how to observe a
Sabbath in these words: If thou turn away thy foot from the Sabbath, from doing
thy pleasure on mine holy day, and call the Sabbath a delight, the holy of the
Lord, honorable, and shall honor him, not doing thine own ways, nor finding
thine own pleasure, nor speaking thine own words; then thou shall delight thy
self in the Lord, Esaias. 58. 13. 14. In which words we have.

1. A Prec^pt. 2. A promise of Reward.
The matter of the precept is the sanctification of the Sabbath, by which
Synechdochically is understood man's duty unto God. For to sanctify the Sabbath
sincerely includes all the duties of the first table, which have God for their
immediate object. In this sactification we may observe.

1. The quality of the day. 2. The observation of it.
1. The qualityes are these:

1. It Is a Sabbath and day of rest. 2. It Is Gods day. 3. It Is holy, Gods holy
day. 4. It Is honorable, and more excellent then other days.
2. The observation requires,

1. That we rest, and that* 1. From our sin, and our vain pleasures. 2. From
our own Labors, Works, Words, and all secular acts.
2. That we consecrate it unto God with joy and delight, so that our
observation may answer the quality of the day, and tend to the glory of God.
The persons charged with this Duty,

1. Every one who is sui juris, and can dispose of himself for labor and rest.
2. Those persons are either Superiors, or Inferiors. Superiors are either
private, as Parents and Masters of Families; or public, as
Magistrates and Governors: And these must

1. In their own persons rest and sanctify this day.

2. They must cause others, subject to their power, so far as in them is, to do
the like: For as they are charged, so they must have care of the persons
subject unto them, and use all means to cause them to serve their God, and obey
Him, as well as themselves. In this respect it is true, that Magistratus est
custos utriusque tabulae, and so is every Superior invested with power.

The Inferiors, are either rational, or irrational. Rational, are either
members of the Family, or of the State, or Church, or Strangers.

Members of the Family are either Children, as Sons and Daughters, or Servants,
as Man-servants, Maidservants.

Strangers, are either strangers in a Family, or in a City, and they may be
Native or Aliens, and Aliens may be Proselytes, and incorporate, or not
incorporate.

Irrational, as Ox or Ass, or any Beast that is used for travel, or labor, in
carrying* or other Works of Husbandry. This last of Brutes is not so to be
understood, as though the Law were given to Brutes, and irrational Creatures:
For they are not capable of Laws. The Law is not given to them, but of them.
It Is given to Man, who is the Owner and Master of the Beast.

1. That he might be merciful unto his Beast: For God will not have man to be
cruel unto his laboring and harmless Beast: For he that is cruel to these will
be cruel to his Servants, and such as are under his power.

2. Because his Beast could not be used for Travail, Carriage, Draught,
Plowing, treading out the corn, or other service, except some man, as the
Master, or his children, or his Servants direct them, and make that use of them.

And from hence it is evident, That one end of this Commandment was the
refreshment of Man and Beast: and God, in this, had respect unto poor Servants,
who might by cruel and covetous Masters be abused and oppressed, and also
debarred from the service of their God, to the hazard of their poor souls. Poor
Servants had Souls, as well as the best, were bound to serve their God, and had
as much need of Spiritual comfort, as free men, or their Masters. And in those
days, if any Servants were under cruel and profane Masters, their case was
lamentable: For being either taken in War, or sold, or born Servants, their
Masters might force them to labor that day, or to suffer cruelly, if the
Magistrate did not relieve them.

These words signify, that no man in power should suffer any, Subject unto
them, to profane the Sabbath, so far as they could hinder it.

Neither did this charge unto Superiors excuse Inferiors, who had liberty to
sanctify this day, if they did neglect, or profane it. And such as were
restrained, were bound to use all means to obtain this liberty to serve their
God. To say, that this Commandment was given of Servants, not unto Servants,
is not true: For then it would follow, that if they had good and Religious
Masters, or such as would permit them to observe the day, yet they were not
bound unto that duty, neither did they offend, if they did profane it. So far,
indeed, as they were merely passive, and subject to the absolute power of their
Superiors, who would in no wise suffer them to rest, and sanctify this day,
when they desired it, and they should every way endeavor to enjoy this
liberty, and after all this could not, then the sin must lie upon their Masters
and Superiors, upon whom God would charge it, and that heavily too. And let
all Inferiors who enjoy this liberty, be thankful to their God, who has
showed such great mercy to them.

The reason of the Institution of the Sabbath follows; Israelites must rest,
and also give liberty to their Servants to rest, is, because they themselves
were Servants in the Land of Egypt, and had little intermission granted them
either for to refresh their Bodies, or sanctify Holy Times. And this very rest
and liberty might put them in mind of their great deliverance, and stir them up
to thankfulness upon their Sabbath Days, Deuteronomy. 5. 15. Another Reason, and the
same more general, was, from the great work of Creation, worthy of eternal
remembrance. And herein God is a Pattern, and proposes his own example unto
man for imitation; that as he in six days created Heaven and Earth, and rested
the seventh day, and so sanctified, and honored it above other days; so man
might labor six days, and rest the seventh, and sanctify it to the Lord. This
example does more distinctly and clearly inform man, that the World was not
from everlasting, but had beginning, and that God did create it, and so became
the universal and supreme Lord of Heaven and Earth, by the Work of six days.

The seventh day, wherein he rested from his work, was a fit time for man's
rest, that on that day man might contemplate the glorious Works of God,
acknowledge God to be the Creator, and every Sabbath say, Thou art worthy, Oh
Lord, to receive glory, honor, and power: for thou have created all things,
and for thy pleasure they are, and were created, Rev. 4. 11. Besides the
example of God's labor, rest, and Sanctification, He knew that six days in the
week was a fit proportion of time for man's secular works, and one in seven,
for Diviner Employments. And this is given the reason, why God sanctified the
seventh day, and blessed it, because that after, in six days, He had created
Heaven, and Earth, He rested the 7th day. And howsoever this great Work of
Creation is never to be forgotten by Man, yet because to sinful man, the Work
of Redemption is a greater blessing; Therefore the first day of the Week, being
the day of Christ's Resurrection, and the Restoration of Mankind, is more to
be observed and remembered. The Lord said unto Judah, Behold, the days come,
when it shall be no more said, The Lord lives, which brought up the Children
of Israel out of the Land of Egypt; But the Lord lives, that brought the
Children of Israel from the Land of the North, etc. Jer. 16. 14, 15. So it may
be said to us Christians, since the time of Christ's glorification, That it
shall be no more said, the Lord lives, that in six days made Heaven and Earth,
and rested the 7th day: But the Lord lives, who after His Death and cruel
Passion is risen again, and has redeemed sinful man from Hell, and Eternal
Death. For if two great Blessings be received, one after the other, the latter,
and the greater is more to be remembered, and the time thereof rather to be
observed. Therefore we do not observe the 7th day, wherein God rested from the
Work of Creation, but the first day, wherein Christ rose again, and rested from
His Work of Humiliation. And though therein we do not forget the Work of
Creation, yet we rather remember the Work of Redemption, and glorify our God
for the same.

From this Explication of the Words of God we may understand,

1. Rest, For we must remember a Sabbath, and in the same we must do no manner
of work.

2. Sanctification, For we must remember the Sabbath Day to sanctify it. Rest,
is twofold.

1. Of the Body. 2. Of the Mind; and in both these we must rest.
1. The Body must rest from secular works, which hinder and disturb us in the
service of our God.

2. The Soul must cease from such Thoughts, Cares, Meditations, and Affections,
which as much distract us in the Worship of our God, as labors of the Body do.
Again, bodily works of man, as man endued with understanding, cannot be done
without the Soul, attending, directing, and moving it, much less can Heavenly
Duties be performed without the Soul, which in the time of these Services must
be drawn off from the World, and sixed upon far more excellent Objects. And
because many Games and Sports, which are accounted Recreations, do as much toil
the Body, and distract and take up the Soul, as secular Works do, therefore we
must needs judge them to be contrary to the Rest here commanded. And our very
words of Conference and Discourse, upon this time, may be such, as are neither
consistent with the Rest, nor the Sanctification required in this Precept. Yet
this Rest is not to be so strictly taken, as though all kind of Work, and
Bodily Labor were unlawful on this day. Therefore,

1. Works of Necessity may be done this day: and which those are, the Light of
Reason, is sufficient to determine: as to save Man or Beast, in danger to
receive harm or p^rish, if not that day relieved. Therefore, the very
Pharisees, who were so precise in the observation of the outward Rest, could
not deny unto our Savior, but that upon the Sabbath it was lawful to lift a
Beast out of a Pit or Ditch* into which it was then fallen. And upon the same
ground, it cannot be unlawful on that day to fight and defend our selves,
against an Enemy.

2. Works which tend to the refreshment and ordinary preservation of Man and
Beast cannot be unlawful. Therefore, on this day we cloth our selves, and take
our ordinary food and repast; and a Beast may be watered, and fed this day, as
well as others.

3. Works which tend unto the Sanctification of the Day are not prohibited: For
we may travail unto, and return from the places of public Assemblies for
Prayer, Reading, Preaching, and other Divine Services. The Priests, under the
Law, did kill their Sacrifices, and so profaned the Sabbath, and were
blameless, Math. 12. 5. And it was thought no profanation, to circumcise an
Infant upon that day, Joh. 7. 23. Of this nature is the toil and labor of the
Ministers in their several Congregations.

4. Neither is any work of mercy, as visiting the Sick, administering Physic,
relieving the Poor, and such like, contrary to this Rest. And the reason of all
this is, because the Sabbath is for man, and not man for the Sabbath: and
therein God intended our good, not our hurt. The principal thing required, is
the sincere Worship of God, from an heart seriously bent, and inclined
thereunto: nor the performance of some outward piece of service, in such a
precise nick of time* Yet we must take care always to have a sanctified heart,
and a desire to sanctify the same, and what we lose one time, we must
endeavor to recompense at another.

The second Duty here commanded,

1. A knowledge of the day, that it is determined by God.

2. A preparation of the whole man, with a desire and resolution to observe it.

3. An actual application of that time, to a performance of Religious Duties:
and whatsoever Works tend most to the glory of God, those do most sanctify the
Day.

This is the reason why Christ's miraculous Cures did not profane this day,
and that Works of Mercy are so suitable to this time. Though public, and
Congregational Duties are principally intended; yet Family, and Closet-Duties
are required: and though other days may be sanctified and observed, as times of
Humiliation or Thanksgiving, yet this is done upon a more, general ground, and
not by virtue of this Commandment, which is confined to the Seventh Day. What
the particular services of the Sabbath be, I need not mention: For they are
such as God has instituted; and the principal are Word and Prayer, as you
heard in the Explication of the second Precept.

The sins here forbidden, are,

1. All profane and sinful thoughts,

2. All secular thoughts, words, deeds, which are contrary unto, and
non-consistent with, the Rest and sanctification of this time, and with Diviner
Employments. These are lawful at other times, unlawful in this.

3. The neglect of Holy Duties in this time of Rest. For though we should rest
this day, not only from all secular labors and works, but also from worldly
thoughts, and motions of the mind (if it were possible) and not apply our
selves to Religious Worship; yet the Day remains to us unsanctified.

4. All profane Sports, yea, and all Recreations, which hinder and distract us
in the service of our God.

5. All Hypocritical, all irreverent; yea, all imperfect performance of Holy
Duties. Men may be strict, zealous, devout in the outward parts of Religion,
and yet stand at a great distance from their God. For God requires not any kind
of Sanctification of this day, but that which is hearty and sincere. And
because our best service is imperfect, therefore we can keep no perfect Sabbath
on Earth: that is reserved for Heaven. Let us therefore endeavor the best, aim
at perfection, desire pardon of defects, and long after the estate of glory;
wherein we shall perfectly hallow an Eternal Sabbath before the Eternal King.

There he many causes of the profanation,

1. Some are Atheists, who are devoid of Faith, and the fear of God. These
believe not, that there is a God who will judge the World, and render to every
one according to their Works: They fear not His Divine Power and Majesty. They
have no care to worship Him. They persuade themselves, that all Religious
Service is vain, and that the Worship of a Deity has no better reason and
ground, then the fancy and conceit of some precise superstitious Fools. They
think that the Rest, and Sanctification of every 7th day, is a needless
expense, and loss of time, to the hinderance and neglect of many considerable
businesses.

2. Some, though not so profane, do not consider how much the Preservation,
and continuance of Religion, depends upon the observation of Holy Sabbaths.
Take these away, you shall by Experience find, that Religion will decay, and
that in a short time. We, by the Light of Nature, may easily understand, that
there is a time necessarily required for the dispatch of all business: and if
so, then the Religious Service of our God, and the Salvation of our Souls, are
the greatest, and most weighty business we have to do in this World: and
therefore do of necessity require, and may justly challenge, not only some
time, but a competent and due proportion of time. Yet we find, that men of
great understanding, and very prudent in these Earthly things, are very
inconsiderate and imprudent in this particular.

3. Some take no notice of those Characters God has imprinted upon some days,
and by some glorious work done on them, honored them, and made them more
excellent then other days. They do not consider, that the Jews being the people
of God (from whom Salvation was) observed, and that according to God's Command
and Example, one day in seven; and that Christians, from the Apostles days,
have consecrated the 7th part of their time unto God, and that by sufficient
Warrant from Heaven. And this forgetfulness, and want of consideration, is one
cause of their neglect, and dis-esteem of the Sabbath.

4. Some do know, believe, and profess these things; yet are Worldly-minded,
neg^igent in matters of Religion, and at all times, and so on the Sabbath are
indisposed to Heavenly Duties: so that they hallow no time, and unhallow this
sacred time, which God does arrogate to himself. And such as being Earthly
minded, are most active in secular business, are most careless and negligent in
the observation of God's Sabbath.

5. The want of preparation before we enter upon the Sabbath, and Divine
Service, our careless carriage in the performance of Holy Duties, and our
intermixing of secular business, profane though^s and discourses must needs
abate, and that very much of the sanctification of the Day.

6. Some are persuaded that all days, since the abolition of the Jewish Polity,
are alike: and therefore it is Jewish or Superstitious, to observe any
determinate time, and to prefer one day above another.

7. Some, out of a Spiritual Pride, and high conceit of themselves, as above
all Ordinances, neglect Sacraments and Sabbaths, as far below their high
seize.

The Reasons to persuade us to sanctify the Sabbath are many, Moses, and the
Prophets.

1. God commands us to sanctify His Sabbath, and repeats this Command many
times. And though their Weekly Sabbath was not the same with ours, for the
particular Day; yet the end, and many particular Duties of Sanctification are
the same.

2. As the Jewish Religion, so the Christian, depends much upon the Sabbath:
and as theirs was necessary for the continuance of their Religion, so ours is
for the continuance of ours.

3. God did severely, and many times, prohibit the Profanation of this sacred
time.

4. When, and where it is neglected, and profaned wholly, or in part, there
Religion decays accordingly, and that in a short time.

5. He has promised to such as shall observe his Sabbath, many, and great
Blessings, both Temporal and Spiritual, public and private, to particular
Persons, Nations, and Commonwealths. And in these Promises, he did not so much
regard this or that 7th day, as the continuance of Religion, by the
Sactification of such Times, as he himself should determine.

6. He has threatened most fearful Judgments to be inflicted upon them, who
shall, by neglect of Holy Duties, or by Worldly and Bodily Labors, and
Employments, or any other way, profane the same.

7. According to these Promises and Threats, he has dealt not only with
private Persons, but Kingdoms, and States. For he has blessed such as did
observe the Sabbath, and cursed such as did profane it. This is evident, not
only from the History of the Scriptures, but from his Judgments, in all Times.
We might easily, by observation, understand it in our Times: It Is somewhat
remarkable, and not altogether to be neglected, that even in this Nation, upon
the public allowance of Sports and Recreations upon the Lords Day, which is
our Christian Sabbath, Civil and Bloody Wars, and ruin of the Royal Family,
should so shortly follow* and that the hand of God should be most against
those, who by Writing, Words, or Practice, had maintained the lawfulness of
that Doctrine. I forbear to cite the particular places of Scripture, whence
these Reasons are taken and the Examples of God's Judgments; because this is
done already by many others, who have written of the Sabbath.

Before I conclude this Doctrine of the Sabbath, Lords Day, which we Christians
observe; and, as Christians, are bound to sanctify. These things, I suppose,
will be granted by rational and impartial men,

1. That we under the Gospel, are as much bound to serve and worship God, as
the Jews were under the Law.

2. That the Lord's Day is as necessary for the preservation and continuance of
Religion as the Jewish Sabbath was.

3. It Is as fit, and as due proportion of time, as theirs was: For our
condition, in respect of the business* and necessities of this life, did not
differ from theirs, but is the same.

4. It Is as useful, and conducing to our Spiritual good, and the attaining of
our Eternal Sabbath as theirs.

5. It Is the 7th part of our time, and a 7th day in order, as theirs also was;
and so consecrates no less time to God, but so much as the Commandment
requires.

6. The morality of the Commandment, and the principal thing therein aimed at,
is not this, or that 7th day; but this, or that 7th day, which God shall
determine for Sanctification.

7. As God set a Character upon their Day, so He has upon ours. Upon the 7th
Day He rested from the great Work of Creation, and therefore sanctified and
blessed it, and honored it above other days: and, in remembrance of the great
and glorious* Work of Creation, He commanded the Day to be observed: So upon
the first Day of the Week, when Christ had finished His great Work of
Redemption He began His Everlasting Sabbath. For upon this Day He rose again;
upon this Day He sent down the Holy Ghost; and by these two glorious Works He
honored this Day above all others, even above their Sabbath. The Creation was
a glorious Work; the Redemption is more glorious: The Creation is a great
benefit; the Redemption is greater. And if we must remember the former, we must
much more remember the latter. If the Day whereon He rested from the former, be
fit to be observed, much more is the Day wherein He rested from the latter. The
Resurrection of the Son of God made Man and the sending down of the Holy Ghost
are never to be forgotten, but eternally to be remembered by Christians: For
upon them depend our Eternal Salvation; and without them we cannot attain unto,
or enter into our Everlasting Rest. And he is unworthy the Name, much more the
Privileges of a Christian, that will not remember these things. And we can
hardly find any to have dis-esteemed, or neglected this Day, but they were
either profane Wretches, or giddy Sectaries, and Heretics.

For the alteration of the Day to be sanctified,

1. Seeing Christ did not rise again, nor send down the Holy Ghost upon the
Jewish Sabbath, but upon the first day of the Week, there was more reason to
observe this our first, then that their last Day of the Week. And surely,
seeing Christ could have risen upon their Sabbath, and sent down the Holy Ghost
upon that Day, and yet did not either of them upon the same, nor any other Day
of the Week, there was some reason in it. And by singling out this time, for
those Blessed Works, He did intimate, that this should be His Day, wherein all
Christians should honor Him, to the end of the World; and that the former
Sabbath was to be laid aside.

2. The former Sabbath did several ways respect the Jews in particular;

1. As having the Ceremonial Law annexed unto it; the Services and Rites
whereof were to be observed in the Tabernacle and Temple upon this Day. 2. It
was a Sign between God, and them, that they might know, that it was the Lord*
which did sanctify them, Exodus 31. 13, 17. Ezekiel. 20. 12. So that it was part
of that Partition Wall, whereby they were separated from the Gentiles.
Therefore, after that Christ was risen, the Holy Ghost given from Heaven upon
this Day, the Apostles received Commission to preach unto all Nations, and God
taking away the Partition Wall, made of both, one Body-Politick in Religion; it
was though altogether convenient, to surrogate the Lord's Day, in the place of
the former Sabbath: and, upon these grounds, the first day of the week began to
be observed in the days of the Apostles, and had the name of the Lord's Day, and
both the observation, and the name, have universally amongst Christians,
continued since that time. By laying aside the former Day, was signified, that
the Covenant with the Fathers, which had this Sabbath annexed, was now with
that Day expired, and abolished by a more excellent time, which succeeded it;
which being sanctified by us, does distinguish us from the unbelieving Jew in
all Nations. For, by it, we profess our Belief of Christ's Resurrection, and
our Sanctification by the Holy Ghost, sent down from Heaven.

Many remain to this day unsatisfied, Sabbath of the Jews, determined in that
Commandment of the Moral-Law given unto them, could be altered. For the
Morality of it, we must observe, as before,

1. That some Commandments were primitively, some derivatively moral; so that
there were degrees of morality in that Law, which is called Moral; and in that
respect* though they were all moral, yet there is a great inequality in their
morality.

2. This Commandment, as some others, have something positive in it.

3. This Commandment was positive, in respect of the time: For neither time in
general, nor this or that particular time, nor this or that portion of time, as
a day, one day in seven, this or that 7th day, are moral. They are not
intrinsecally good, nor have any connection inseparable with the last end and
felicity of man.

4. This Commandment derives its morality, ab extrinseco, from the Divine
Determination of the time, and the Rest for Sanctification commanded in that
time. The Sanctification of one 7th determinate day every week, for the worship
of the true and living God, as it was a fit proportion of man's time, and
excellent means for the preservation and continuance of Religion, had some
connection with the supreme end, and did conduce to the attaining of it. The
Divine Determination of that time, for that end, signified by a Command added,
did plainly make it moral.

For the alteration of the day it is certain,

1. That if God had in the beginning determined one and the same 7th Day to be
of perpetual and universal obligation,

2. It Is certain, that the day prescribed to the Jew, in time of the servitude
and bondage of the Law, was altered, and another substituted, and observed in
the place thereof.

3. This was altered after Christ's Incarnation and Glorification, sending down
of the Holy Ghost, the Revelation of the Gospel preached to Jew and Gentile,
and in the Apostles days, according to an Order given by them to the Churches
planted by them, 1 Cor. 16. 1, 2, 4. The day substituted was the first day of
the week, ibid. and the Lords Day, and was so called and observed universally
by Christians, from that time, to our days.

4. In that, one day in 7, as also this or that 7th day, were positive, and not
moral; therefore the 7th formerly observed by the Jew, was alterable*
considered in it self.

5. The 4th Commandment given to the Jew, did not say, that, that 7th day,
determined then by Him, should never be altered, but be the Sabbath to Jew and
Gentile, to the end of the World.

6. There were (as you heard before) great and weighty Reasons, why the
Apostles not only might, but should after it: For if the Character set upon it
by the Work of Creation, and the deliverance of Israel out of Egypt, the
separation of them from all Nations, till the exhibition of the Messiah, was a
reason and ground to God for to institute, and for them to observe them, much
more was the Character set upon the first day of the week by Christ's
Resurrection, the general manifestations, and apparitions of him, rise uon that
day, and the coming of the Holy Ghost, as far greater blessings to sinful man,
then Creation and deliverance out of Egypt was a sufficient ground and reason
to lay aside the former day* as joined with the Ceremonial Law, the Covenant,
with their Fathers in the Wilderness, and the separation of the Jews from all
other Nations, and to institute and observe the first day unto God-Redeemer, by
Christ exhibited, as the former was observed to God-Creatour, and Deliverer of
one Nation out of Egypt. Neither was there any need of a new express Precept,
seeing to the Apostles the Reasons for the alteration were so weighty, clear,
and evincing. For the former Sabbath, being joined with the Ceremonial Law
given to the Jew, did presuppose the Church confined to a Nation, the Gentiles
excluded, the people of God in minority and servitude under a Tutor, and Christ
fo come; therefore, for the positive part, it was to cease with the legal
dispensation. And as there followed a new manner of Worship, and a new
Administration so there must be a new day. The Commandment it self requires
one day in seven; and if so, then no day could be so fit, as the day of
Resurrection, and the coming down of the Holy Ghost from Heaven. By the
observation of this, we acknowledge the Levitical Priesthood and Service to be
abolished, Christ exhibited, the Work of Redemption finished, and that Jesus of
Nazareth, who was born at Bethlem, brought up at Nazareth, crucified at
Jerusalem, rose again the third day, ascended into Heaven, has sent down the
Holy Ghost, is the Son of God, and Savior of the World.

CHAP. XI.
The Fifth Commandment.
BEfore I enter upon the words of this Commandment;

1. Concerning the difference.

2. The order of these two parts of the Law. For our Savior reduces the whole
Law to two heads.

1. Of the Love of God.

2. Of our Neighbor. And as God and our Neighbor differ, and that very much;
so the duties of this latter part differ, from those of the former: for as the
former have God for their object; so these have Man. The former respect our
communion with God, the latter our communion with our Neighbor. The former
presents the duties of men as subjects to be performed to their Sovereign the
Great, and everlasting: the latter commands duties to be performed to man, who
is the fellow-Subject. The former give morality to the latter; The latter
receive morality from the former, and depend upon them, and are so far good as
they agree with the former. The former have more connection with, as they
conduced more immediately unto, the last end Gods glory, and Man's happiness.
So that the difference between them is very great. According to this
difference, there is an inequality. It Is true that they are equal, as they are
commands, and also commands of God, and bind unto obedience, unto God, and the
matter of both is just; Yet their inequality is great, because the duties of
the former, according to the object are far more excellent and if they come in
competition with these of the second Table, they must be preferred. Yet we must
make a distinction. For in both parts of the Law there be some duties moral,
some positive; and one and the same duty is in some respect moral, in another
positive. This therefore is the certain rule that moralls of the first part or
Table, as some call it, are to be performed before the morals of the second
Table, and positives of the first before positives of the second. Upon this
account, if the love of Father, and Mother, a moral duty of the latter part,
come in competition with the love of God required in the first part, then its
true our Savior ^aith, He that loves Father or Mother more then God, or
hates not Father and Mother for Christ's sake, is not worthy of Christ. In this
respect, obedience to our lawful superiors inconsistent with our obedience to
God is unlawful; for we must obey God rather then man, the supreme Lord before
the subordinate. But if we compare positives of the first Table, with morals of
the second, the morals of the second must be preferred before the positives of
the first. Therefore we may intermit the outward solemn worship of God upon
the Sabbath day to save the life of a Beast, or much more of a man, though the
work should take up the whole time of one Sabbath or more. This lesson our
Savior taught us, when he proved that it was lawful to heal on the Sabbath.
This inequality is employed in the words of our Savior to the Scribes, and
Pharisees, when he not only reproves them, but denounces a judgment against
them, in that they paid tith of Mint and Annise, and Cummin, and omitted the
weightyer matters of the Law, judgment, mercy, and Faith, Math. 23. 23. Where
he intimates,

1. That there be less and greater duties.

2. That to pay Tyth of our goods and* fruits* is a duty of the first Table;
and judgment, mercy, and Faith of the second.

3. That payment of Tithes, though a duty of the first Table is inferior to
Judgment, Mercy, and Faith, duties of the second Table. In the time of the
Law, Sacrifice, New-Moones, Sabbath, Solemn-Feasts, and prayers were duties of
the first rank, and form, to be performed to God; yet then God required
justice, and mercy to Man before them, as appears, Esaias. 1. from verse 11. to
the 18. And he desires Mercy more then Sacrifice, Hos. 6. 6. And if any except,
and say; that Sacrifices and Sabbaths were part of the Ceremonial, not the
moral Law; I answer, that the Weekly Sabbath, and so prayer were duties
required in the moral Law, and all the Ceremonies of worship were branches
thereof in those times.

After the difference,

As the object of the duties required in the former precept was God, so the
object of these latter are Men, with whom we do converse. We must love, and
honor Saints departed, and the blessed Angels; yet the Persons here
principally understood are men living upon earth, with whom we have ordinary
Communion. For these Commandments do refer unto this life, and respect men
living in this vale of tears, and therefore much of this Law shall cease to
bind in Heaven. To do as we would be done unto, and to love our Neighbors, as
our selves do virtually contain all the particulars of this part, and are the
brief abridgement of the whole. To leave every man unto his liberty in the
distribution, and digesting of these later Commandments unto a method, and to
unfold the excellency of that order which God has observed, I will at this
time deliver mine own apprehensions of the same. Upon consideration, I find
that these six last precepts may be distinguished into two sorts.

1. Such as receive, or

2. Such as give morality. Some, a rule o^ judgment. Those which prescribe a
rule of justice do determine Jus Personarum, aut Rerum, the right of persons,
or things belonging to persons. The fifth determins the right of persons, the
rest the right of things, which are life, wise, goods, or estate. The 6th. is
concerning life; The 7th. concerning our Neighbors Wife: The 8th, concerning
men's goods. In the 9th, we have the rule of judgment. Gods order and method
(if we can observe it) is most accurate and excellent. The last (which gives
morality to the former five) commands the love of our Neighbors as of our
selves, as you shall hear hereafter. And this is the root, and rule of all the
rest. For as our Savior comprised all the four first Commandments in the
love of God; so he collected, and included all the latter precepts, in the love
of our Neighbor.

These things first observed, Philo says had (...), and was placed in the
confines of both the two Tables, and joins them together. Whether it was the
last in the first Table, as some conceive, or the first in the second, or part
of it in the former, and part in the latter, I will not dispute. This is
certain, they were all written in two Tables, and this of necessity is next to
those which concern our duty to God. Parents and superiors represent God, and
yet are men, and so that Commandment has some affinity with the former,
though more agreement with the latter. This Commandment determins the right of
persons, who are superiors, inferiors, equals. To Equals the offices of love,
and humanity are due, but no honor: for its the ^ight which inferiors must
give to superiors, as superiors, and of them it is principally intended. For
God did so order it, that though all men, as men, are subjects, fellow subjects
amongst themselves, and under the power of God, as their Lord and Sovereign,
yet there should be an imparity, not only of excellency and dignity, but of
power amongst them: for without imparity there can be no order. The first
imparity is natural, wherein Parents are superior to their Children, and that
in po-wer. And I will consider and understand the Commandment, first of
natural Parents and their Children, and afterward proceed to the imparity
which is by institution, and which may be reduced Analogically to this
Commandment: Wherein we have,

1. The duty Commanded. 2. The reward promised. In the duty we may observe, 1.
The persons, who are bound to perform it. 2. The persons to whom its to be
performed. 3. The duty it self.

The persons bound to perform it, are not expressed, but easily understood.

1. To be inferiors.

2. To be Children, who only have relation to Father and Mother, as such: for
Children are such as have Father and Mother, and Father and Mother are such as
have Children, who receive their life and being from God by them: For they are
both begotten and preserved by them. Parents are in Gods place, and his
deputies, and instruments: and the benefit which we receive by them, except
they be unnatural, is such as cannot be requited. It was Gods will to bring us
into the world in this manner, and to make us so much depend upon our Parents,
that we might see what great reason we have to honor them. And whosoever will
not perform this duty, must needs transgress against the very light of nature,
and those principles which God has imprinted in their Souls. So that (as
Philo says) The offenders are guilty of impiety against God, and inhumanity
against man, and stand liable before the Tribunal, both of God and man: and
those that are undutifull to their Parents, are usually profane, and
irreligious toward God. This duty in respect of Children is general, and
binds them all and every one; none can be exempted: All and every one have
Father and Mother too, since Adam and Eve were created by God, and not
procreated by man. Therefore Adam is called the Son of God, Luke 3. 38. The
conception of Jesus Christ and his birth were extraordinary; for he had a
Mother but no immediate Father, therefore he may be excepted: Yet it was said
that he was subject unto them: that is, not only to his Mother Mary, but his
Father by law Joseph, to give example to all Children, seeing he the Son of God
subjected himself unto them. This duty arises from the relation as the
foundation thereof. For by the manner of the receiving, and continuing of their
being, they are inferiors, depending upon Parents, and under their power.

The parties to whom the duty is to be performed are Father and Mother: Father
who begets them; and Mother who conceives, bears, bring forth, nurseth and
takes care of them in their helpless age. In this respect they have
propriety, superiority of power above them. And lest Children should think it
sufficient to be subject to their Father he adds, (and thy Mother.) For though
the Mother be subject as a Wife to her Husband, yet she is superior to her
Child, as she is a Mother, and may command, and must in no wi^e be neglected or
disobeyed.

The duty it self is expressed in the word (Honor) which is but single, Shem,
and Japhet honored their Father, when in a modest manner they covered his
nakedness. Reverence must be in the heart, and expressed in their words, their
gestures, and outward carriage toward them. Subjection is a resigning of their
own Wills, and acknowledgement of their power and superiority, and that they
themselves are not, (Sui juris) their own Masters; but their duty till the time
of emancipation is, to serve. Obedience is to do their just commands, and must
be regulated by their directions: for they must hearken unto their instructions
both for the matter to be done, and the manner how it ought to be performed;
and they must execute it freely, and with diligence: for if it be not free, and
willing, its no obedience. If Parents fall into want, grow decrepit, and fail
not only in strength, but understanding, and so cannot help themselves; Reason
it self, much more the Word of God, will dictate unto us, that Children should
not only cover their infirmities, and bear with their imperfections, but also
help, succor, relieve them, and endeavor to recompense that tender love, and
kindness which their Parents showed unto them, when they were Children. And
this is to be done unto them, with all due respects, as unto Parents: for in
their lowest condition, such they are, and such they must be accounted. And if
all these duties be not performed, how can Children be said to honor Father
and Mother, as here they are commanded to do? And if Heathen Children be bound
thus to honor their Parents, and some of them by the light of nature have done
it; how much more are Christian Children of Christian Parents obliged to this
duty? which should be performed out of knowledge, the love of God, and Faith in
Jesus Christ, as a part of Christian obedience, and thankfulness.

This is the duty commanded: given them, and that it might go well with them.
The reward is,

1. An enjoyment of that good land God should give them, 2. A long life.
3. Prosperity and comfort. This is said to be the first Commandment with
promi^e. Its the first Commandment and it has a promise. The second Table is
called the Law, Romans 13. 8. 10. And all the Law, Gal. 5. 14. That is, all the
Law which prescribes the duty of man to man. It has several Commandemnents,
and this is the first of them; and it has a promise, and so none of the rest
following have. It Is neither the first Commandment of the Decalog^e, nor the
first with promise; But it is the first of that Law, which prescribe^ our duty
toward man, and has a promise annexed. The end of this prom^^e^ to encourage
Children: For though they are bound by the law of thankfulness unto it, an^ by
the performance thereof cannot recompense the love and care of their Par^nts,
and they should be very unworthy if they should neglect it; yet it was Gods
super^bundant mercy to add the promise: and the Apostle makes the use of it to
move Children, to obedience. The land which the Lord their God should give them
was the land of Canaan, and therefore it had special reference to the
Isralites; yet so that all other dutiful Children of all nations have a right
in it, and especially Christians. Why else should the Apostle take it up to
move Christian Children, to obedience, Ephesians. 6. 1, 2, 3. The enjoyment of our
own native Country is opposed to captivity, banishment, dispossession,
disinheritance, and a Vagabond life: Long life to an unnatural, or a violent
death which takes away life, even then when natural vigor continues, and there
be no internal causes of immediate dissolution. A prosperous life is opposed to
the cu^ses, and miseryes which others suffer. Yea all these mercyes are opposed
to all those judgments, as inflicted by God, and suffered by wicked, and
undutifull Children for their neglect, disobedience, contempt, and rebellion
against their Parents. These blessings promised are but temporal, not
spiritual and Eternal. For those are acquired by Faith, and derived from
Christ, and the promises in Christ, in whom Christian Children receive not
only this temporal, but a spiritual reward upon this obedience performed in
Faith. Neither does this promise take effect in all dutiful Children, so as
that always they enjoy this reward, and be free from the like jud^ements in
general, which ar^ contrary to this reward: For even dutiful Children many
times suffer Captivity, banishment, untimely death, and other miseryes; but not
for this sin of obedience, whereof they are not guilty, but for trial, and
some other cause best known unto God, who will recompense the want or loss of
this reward, with some far greater mercy. There be extraordinary and reserved
cases wherein good Children may suffer, and have a share in public, and
general calamityes, and ruins, and sometimes may bear the sins of their
Parents. The performance of the promise does most appear, either in the times
of peace, and prosperity* or in deliverances, and comforts, in the time of
misery; or in those fearful curses, which fall upon such, as have been
disobedient, stubborn, and undutifull Children; who are punished sometimes with
pen^ry and want, sometimes with crosses, and discomforts in their own Children;
Sometimes with loss of their estates, and banishment from their native soil,
and place of inheritance; sometimes with a violent, and shameful death or an
ignominious life: and all this for the violation of this precept, besides other
temporal, and eternal punishments for their other sins. Examples of those
rewards, and punishments we may read in Scripture, and in other Historyes.

Hitherto I have explained the express words of the Commandment. to provoke
their Children, Ephesians. 6. 4. Where we may observe, that in duties the inferior
must be first: The Wife must be subject to the Husband first: The Children must
be obedient to their Parents first: Servants to their M^sters, first. Subjects
to the higher Powers, first. Yet so that superiors have their duties, which
they are bound to perform. The duties of Parents are either negative, or
affirmative. Negative are many, as opposed to the Affirmative. The Apostle in
the former place expresses only one; They must not provoke them. This is done
when they deny that which is necessary, and convenient for them in respect of
their ability, and estate; when they command them unjust, or unreasonable
things; when in their rash passion they revile them and give them ignominious
terms though they deserve them not: When they use too much severity, and
sometimes plain cruelty, not so much out of a desire to amend them, as for to
satisfy their own humors, and fury, as though they would revenge themselves
upon them as enemies. To this purpose the Reverend, and Learned Bishop D^venant
expounds those words, Col. 3. 21. Parents must know that there is a great
difference between Children and Slaves, and a grea^er between Children and
Enemies. If they will punish them, they must be Judges, not parties; know the
cause, and the merit of it; be just, and not cruel; Correct them, not Confound
them. The affirmative duties may be reduced to two.

1. Preservation* 2. Education.
1. They must preserve them, have a tender care of them, maintayn them, and
provide for them according to their ability, lest that life which God by them
has given, be miserable, or perish. They must have a care of their education,
and bring them up for this life, and that which is to come. For this life: they
must train them, and teach them, or cause them to be taught in some honest kind
of pro^ession, as in Husbandry trade, or Merchandi^e, or Learning, according to
their inclination, and capacity. Thus Adam and Eve brought up their Children;
Cain to be an Husbandman, and ti^^er of the ground; and Abel to be a Shepherd.
They must not be suffered to spend their time in idleness, plays, sports, and
Vanity: but must exercise themselves in some honest profession, whereby they
might benefit them, and be useful to their Country. For the life to come: so
they must bring them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord, and learn
them betimes, even in their tender years, so far as they shall be capable, to
serve their God, know their Savior, and seek Eternal Life, Ephesians. 6. 4.
Children have Souls, as well as Bodies, and are capable not only of a
temporal, but an eternal estate. And Parents should endeavor to provide for
both, especially for the better, that their Children might be the Sons, and
Daughters of the Living God, and Heirs of Eternal glory. What comfort can it
be to have Children miserable in this life, or if in this life happy, eternally
miserable in the life to come; as it often falls out, through want of
education? To this education belong instruction, example, correction. Familyes
should be nurseryes, and Seminaryes of Religion. And if Parents for want of
knowledge, or leisure cannot thus educate them, let them commit them to
Schoolmasters, Tradesmen, Ministers, and others, who are fit for that
purpose. What Parents in this Particular should do, Tutours Guardians and such
as are trusted with Orphans, are bound to perform.

By this discourse we may easily understand, did carefully endeavor, and seek
their good. God will surely punish them: For the promise of life, peace, and
prosperity to good Children implies a commination of a curse against wicked,
and grace-lesse wretches, who cannot be obedient to God, when they are
disobedient to Parents. God high displeasure against incorrigible Children is
signified by that law he gave to Israel. If a man have a stubborn, and
rebellious Son, which will not obey the voice of his Father, or the voice of
his Mother, and that when they have chastned him, will not hearken unto them;
Then shall his Father and Mother lay hold on him, and bring him out to the
Elders of his City, and unto the gates of his place: and they shall say unto
the Elders of his City, this our son is stubborn* and rebellious; he will not
obey our voice: He is a glutton, and a Drunkard. And all the men of his City
shall stone him with stones that he dye: So shall thou put evil away from
amongst you: And all Israel shall hear, and fear, Deuteronomy. 21. 18, 19, 20, 21.

These are the sins of Parents,

1. To be unnatural: Of this sin many Fornicatours, and Adulterers are guilty.
For fearing shame, or some other punishment from men more then from God, they
murder their Children, either before or after their birth, or desert them being
born, and leave them to perish.

2. To take no care to maintayn them, and provide for them; or prodigally to
wast that which should relieve them.

3. To discourage them, dull their Spirits, provoke them, use them as slaves, or
beasts, or enemies.

4. To be ignorant, or negligent, so that they either cannot, or will not
instruct them, or cause them to be instructed.

5. To be profane, ungodly, wicked, and to give them bad example, and be
patterns of impiety, and iniquity unto them.

6. To be found indulgent, remiss in Discipline, and correction, and to bring
them up idly, or delicately.

7. To neglect their education in Religion, and take no care of their poor
Souls. The sins of Tutours, Guardians, and such as are trusted with Orphans,
are carelessenesse, or unfaithfulness. And these must know, that though these
desolate, and poor Creatures cannot or may not question them; yet God will
right them, and will certainly call these unjust Stewards to account, and
severely punish them for their negligence, and injustice. And as he will bless
godly faithful, careful parents, and such as supply their place, and comfort
them in their Children, or some other way: So he will punish the negligent,
ungodly, unfaithful in their own Children, and many other ways, and will
require the blood of their Souls at their hands, and their last reckoning will
be sad and heavy. Few Fathers endeavor the Regeneration of their Children; Few
Mothers travayl again of them, that Christ may be formed and born in their
hearts. And one great cause of the corruption, not only of familyes, but
Church and state, is the neglect of education. When Parents do not use the
power God has put into their hands, nor take the opportunity he has given
them to instill the principles of religion, and piety into them in their tender
years, when they are so ready to receive the first impressions. It Is a matter
of sorrow, and lamentation to consider how much Parents do neglect their duty,
and to see the sad events thereof. For many of them transmit their sin and
guilt, and derive it to posterity, who inherit their iniquity, and misery.

Hitherto of this Commandment,

Father, and Mother, are terms of relation, expressly named in the Text; and
these imply another Relation, Husband and Wife, who are the Foundation of a
Family, and were the beginning and first root of Mankind. And after that Woman
was once created, and man had a fellow, the relation of Husband, and Wife
followed, and was the first relation, according to God's Institution, which
requires that man and woman should be Husband and Wife, before there be Father
and Mother. They are

1. Man and Woman, of different Sex, by Creation. 2. Husband and Wife, by God's
Institution. 3. Father and Mother, by God's Blessing.
Yet there be many, who violate this Institution, and propagate the World with
an illegitimate, and spurious, or incestuous Brood; though by Repentance, and
Faith in Christ, this sin may be pardoned, and God's Judgment averted, both
from Parents and Children. In this first Society, there is an imparity, though
not so great as that of Parents, and Children: and the Duties thereof are two;
Subjection, and Love: For the Wife must be subject to her Husband; and the
Husband must love his Wife. This is the Command of God, by the Apostle, Wives
submit your selves unto your Husbands, as unto the Lord: For the Husband is the
Head of the Wife, etc. This is the imparity of Superior, and Inferior. And
Husbands love your Wives, as Christ loved the Church, and gave Himself for it*
Ephesians. 5. 22, 25. This subjection was due from the first Wife, to the first
Husband, even in the estate of Innocence. For even then Marriage was
instituted, and by it was constituted one of the nearest Societies in the
World, and the same indissoluble, except by Death, or Adultery; and that not
only by Covenant, but especially by God's Institution, whose Will it was, that
they should be one flesh, and that man should forsake Father and Mother, that
dear relation, and cleave to his Wife. This Subjection before the Fall, was so
a Duty, as that it was not a punishment. For then Man was the Head, a
Superior, because made first; and Woman was made after Man, of Man, for Man,
and man was of the more noble Sex: and it was God's Will he should be
Superior, in the first Contract, according to his Institution. But after the
Fall, it was not only a Duty to be performed willingly, but a Penalty to be
suffered patiently. And a grievous Penalty it is, when a Woman is married to a
proud, insolent, imperious Fool; and to such Women who are of the like temper,
and violently bent to have their own Will, though never so unreasonable. As the
imparity between Man and Wife, is less then that between Parents and Children;
so the subjection of the Wife to the husband is not so great, as that which is
due from Children to Parents, much less then of Servants to their Masters. The
place of the Wife, though inferior to the Husband* is honorable: She is
Partner with him, and shares in the government of the Family, and may command
both Children and Servants. He is the Master, she is the Mistress, though
subordinate to him, as her Head, as the Body is to the Head. The duty of the
Husband, is to love his Wife, and that not with any kind, or degree of love,
but with a dear, tender special love. He must love her as his Wife, as one
flesh with him, his own body, part of himself, nearer to him, then Father or
Mother. Yet, as obedience of Children, so both love of Husband, and subjection
of Wife, is limited, and must be in the Lord, that is, subordinate unto that
love and subjection, which is due to Christ, and agreeable to the Will of His
Command, and not contrary unto it. And both the Duties, presuppose other
Vert^es, in both Parties, or else they will be not only imperfect, and
deficient, but unlawful, and not in the Lord, but against the Will of the Lord.
And this subjection of the one, and love of the other, Evangelically
understood, are more perfect* and noble Virtues, in true Christians, then in
others: as the Bond of Marriage does represent the Union of Christ and His
Church, who are contracted on Earth, and the Marriage it self shall be
solemnized in Heaven with great glory, and full joy that shall never end. The
want of this subjection in the one, and love in the other (much more the
contrary sins) are forbidden in this Commandment, and are the causes of many
other sins, confusions, discomforts, miseries, ruins of Families. And by these
two, and the contrary, may be understood all other Duties here commanded, and
sins forbidden, and all such as depend upon them, or are necessarily joined
with them.

After the Relations and Societies of Husband and Wife,

1. Such as have little use of Reason, and are only fit to be governed, and
not to govern; yet having health and strength, are able to do good service by
the direction of others.

2. Some, through want and penury, or a competent Estate or Family of their
own, became mercenary hired servants, who otherwise were free: Such are most of
our Servants.

3, Some, for Debt, ^ell their Children, and sometimes themselves, for
Servants, and Bondslaves: These might be called Vendititii, who sold their
children and themselves.

4. After that, a greater multiplication of Mankind into greater Societies; as
Cities, and Civil States. They waged War one against another, and by the Law
and general consent of Nations, the goods of the Conquered became a lawful
spoil, and the persons captives and slaves to the Conquerours; and so Servants
were increased: These were Servi Capti, Servants taken in War, who had their
life for a prey, and their maintenance, for their service.

5. And if these, or any others, were detained as servants in a Family, and
suffered to marry; and had children, these children were servants, called in
Latin, Ver^ae (...) by the Septuagint, Genesis 17. 13.

6. If any were bought, they were called, in that respect, EMPTITII, (...),
bought with money. Yet these being Servants before, by this Act became Servants
to those who bought them.

7. Many were brought into Servitude most unjustly by Men-stealers, who are
called Plagiarii.

8. Amongst these, may be reckoned Apprentices, who in some Trade or
Profession, serve under their Masters, till the time of manumission, and
liberty.

The Duty of all Servants, Sui juris, either free, or their own Masters; and
that their Masters Will must be their Will, because they are under their Power
and Command: These two Duties of Faithfulness and Diligence are proper: and
though they be bound to Reverence, Subjection, Obedience, yet these are common
Duties, which all Inferiors, under the power of another, are bound to perform.
Let all Servants hearken to the Doctrine of the Apostles, and practice it.

They must be obedient to their own Masters in the flesh, with fear and
trembling, in singleness of heart as unto Christ; not with Eye-service, as men
pleasers, but as the Servants of Christ, doing the will of God from the heart,
with good will doing service to the Lord, and not to men: Knowing that what
good thing any man does, the same shall he receive of the Lord, whether he be
bond or free, Ephesians. 6. 5, 6, 7, 8. Knowing that of the Lord ye shall receive
the inheritance: for ye serve the Lord. But he that does wrong shall receive
for the wrong he has done: and there is no respect of persons, Col. 3. 24, 25.
They must not purloin, but show all fidelity, Tit. 2. 10. And they must honor
not only their Christian, but their unbelieving Masters, 1 Timothy 6. 1. and not
only the gentle and good, but the froward, 1 Pet. 2. 18. In all which places,
we may observe the Duties, the Sins, the Rewards, the Punishments of servants.
Their Duties, are fidelity and diligence in their Service: Their Sins,
murmuring, purloining, unfaithfulness, negligence: The Reward of good servants
is, not only maintenance, and wages, on earth, but God's blessing and a reward
in heaven: The Punishment of bad servants is, not only such as the severity of
their Masters shall inflict; but the curse of God here, and hereafter. Amongst
servants may be reckoned Factours, and such as undertake the business of
others for wages; and thereupon, because they are trusted, are bound to
account. Under this head may be reduced, all such as are hired to do work for
others. Besides all these, there are in a family such as neither be children
nor servants, but such as sojourn, and dwell with the Master of the family, and
are in some sort under his power, as strangers, and sojourners in a foreign
State may be said to be unperfectly subjects, to the power of the State where
they live for a time. The Duty of Masters is to give unto their servants that
which is just and equal, knowing that they also have a Master in Heaven, Col.
4. 1. They must not oppress them, abuse them, or deny unto them any thing,
which the Laws of God, the just Laws of men, and their own contract does
allow them. If it be a sin to be unmercifull to a Beast, much more is it to be
unmercifull to a man. And though servants cannot right themselves; yet God will
hear their cry, and judge their cause. Before I conclude this point of the Duty
of Servants, and Masters, one thing is to be observed, That christian Masters
should be, of all others, most just unto their meanest servants; because they
profess their belief of that Master in heaven; and as he is merciful and just
to them, so they should be unto their servants. Christian servants also should
remember that they do service, not only unto man but God, and to God not only
as Creator, but to him as Redeemer, and to Jesus Christ, who is exalted at the
right hand of God: and though they be Servants to men, yet if they truly
believe, they are Sons of God, and may expect an inheritance in heaven. And
besides their other sins, this is grievous, if they run from their Masters as
Onesimus did from Philemon.

A family is the seminary both of the Church, Israel, set at liberty by God,
and brought out of Egypt, was incorporate into one commonwealth, civil, and
ecclesiastical. For in the constitution of a commonwealth, the community is
the subject, and matter; the order of superiority and subjection is the form.

There must be a supreme power, one universal Will and Power, and the subject
wherein it must originally reside, and also by which it must be exercised, must
be determined: this once done, it presently appears, who are subject unto this
power, and in what degree. The parties who are trusted with the exercise of
this supreme, and public power, make Laws, constitute Officers for peace and
war, and execute the Laws, manage public business, and affairs, and use
all means to promote the public good, procure the peace and safety of the
Whole, and defend the Body from violence without, and protect the just from
injuries within. The Subjects severally and jointly submit themselves, and
promise fealty and obedience. There be many commonwealths, and they differ one
from another in the manner of their constitution, and administration. If the
power be disposed in one it is called a Monarchy, which may be Despotical, when
it is absolute, and unlimited in one person; or Regal, when that one is trusted
with the administration, and the executive power. If the power be absolute in
some few, it is called an Aristocrasy; and so it is, if they be only trusted.
If it abide in the whole body, yet wisely disposed, it may be called a free
State: if so that the basest, as well as the best, have power of
administration, especially in highest business, it is a Democrasy. Tyranny,
Oligarchy. Ochlocrasy, are corruptions of these constitutions.

In a commonwealth thus constituted we have higher powers: Romans 13. 1. And
they must submit themselves to every ordinance of man, that is to the
government of man over man, and the higher powers, for the Lords sake: Whether
it be to the King, that is, for those times the Emperor, as supreme; Or unto
Governors, that is, Officers, as unto them that are sent, that is,
commissioned by him, for the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of
them that do well: For this is the end of all civil government as ordained of
God, 1 Pet. 2. 13. 14. This subjection differs from that of Wives to Husbands,
Children to Parents, Servants to Masters: for it is an higher, and public power
of the supreme Governors of a State, as such. And they must be subject not
only for fear, but for conscience sake, Romans 13. 5. This fear is not only that
of Reverence, which is the unto them in respect of their honor and dignity;
but it is a featr of violating the Laws, or rebelling against the power,
because the higher powers do not bear the sword in vain. They must obey their
just Laws: For Titus must put in mind the Christians of Creet to be subject to
principallityes and Powers, to obey Magistrates, and to be ready to do every
good work, Tit. 3. 1. Yet this obedience unto man is limited, and is so far
due as it is agreeable to the Laws of God. They must also pay Tribute,
Custom, and whatsoever Charge shall be justly imposed. For seeing they watch
over us, and take care of the Whole, and we enjoy the benefit of their care,
prudence, and pains, it is fit we should maintain them, and be willing to
erogate so much as shall be needful for the preservation of the State. For the
public good and safety is the good and safety of every private person. They
must also be willing and ready to assist their Governors with their persons,
states, and lives, for the safety of their Country: And this, many Princes
included and required, in their forms of fealty and allegiance. And this
Fealty, if regular, and rational, is due, first, unto the State, and then unto
the Governors: To the Kingdom first, and then to the King.

Out of the words of the Apostle, Pet. 2. 13, 14. we may observe, that
goverours are supreme, or subordinate; and amongst the subordinate there be
many degrees, according to the several degrees of power derived unto them, for
their several employments, in the distinct and different acts of
administration. And subjection, honor, obedience, are due unto these,
according to their measure of power and Authority. This subjection and
obedience unto the higher powers, and Magistrates, is limited, not only by
the Laws of God, but the constitution of every several State. These Officers
are for peace of War, by Sea, or Land, and may command those under them, and
they must be faithful, and obedient. I will not in this place enlarge, and
declare the duties of soldiers; nor debate the Question, Whether a soldier in
pay, and yet in Quarters in his own country, when there is no visible Enemy, be
exempt from the power of the civil Magistrate, or no? It Is certain that the
power of Admirals, and Captains by Sea, and Generals, and Commanders by Land;
respect soldiers properly as soldiers, and is regulated by Martial Laws,
which are different from the civil Laws, for the administration of Justice in
a time, or place, of peace. The duties of soldiers as such, are to be
faithful and obedient to their Commanders, vigilant in their places, resolute
in service, orderly, and quiet in their Quarters, contented with their pay. The
Sins of military men, except they be kept in order by severe discipline, are,
to be cowards, mutinous, treacherous, Revolters; and likewise to plunder,
murder, commit Rapes, and many other kind of Villainies. Commanders should be
faithful, valiant, prudent, skillful in Martial affairs, careful of their
Soldiers.

The Duties of higher powers are,

The Sins of Subjects are, loyal Subjects, for the profession, and practice of
the true Religion instituted from Heaven. Besides these, there be many Sins of
inferior Officers, and Magistrates, in their several places. And here I might
take occasion to enquire what power the civil Governors have (circa Sacra) in
matters of Religion:

1. They cannot justly establish any false Religion contrary to the Word of God
contained in the Scriptures: neither can they, or ought they, to tolerate any
Errors, Heresies, Blasphemies, Idolatries, or Corruptions in Religion.

2. They may make civil Laws concerning Religion, and execute the same by
their coactive power, and by these Laws they may and ought to bind and command
their Subjects to worship the true God in Christ, and protect them in the same.
This is that which they call Jus Religionis ordinanda: an undoubted right of
all higher powers. Yet they must be sure they establish nothing in Religion
which is not clearly agreeable to the Gospel. For, as it is unlawful for any
civil powers to establish by Law, any thing in Religion contrary to the
Gospel; so it is no ways tolerable to bind the Subjects, upon civil
penalties, to profess things doubtful, and needless. If all the Subjects in
a State profess themselves Christians, they cannot have any just cause to
complain of their Rulers, if by a Law they be commanded to make that Christian
faith, which is truly and plainly Christian. They are bound unto it by the
Laws of Christ, by their own profession, by the Laws of their Country. Yet
Christian Religion is not to be propagated by the sword, but by the Word
clearly taught, so that their Consciences may be convinced: But this
presupposes the Subjects no Christians. Yet if they be such, the higher
powers, Christians, are bound to use all lawful means, appointed by Christ, to
make them Christians. The first care of King David was to settle the true
worship of God: The first care of Solomon, to build a Temple unto God; and the
first care of the good Princes of Judah, to reform Religion, and to destroy the
Monuments of Idolatry; and all this by their civil power: And there is great
reason, why all Princes and Governors should do thus; Because the
establishment of their power, and the welfare of their Subjects depends
principally upon Religion. Yet this power of the Magistrate is clearly
distinct, and different, from the power of the Church, as a Church, which can
have no sword, nor exercise any civil coactive power. This spiritual and
ecclesiastical power looks upon every one within their precincts, as Subjects
of Christ, and Members of their spiritual Society (and such Princes and
Governors should be); and they proceed against them in the name of Christ, if
they do offend, and if they continue obstinate, they cast them not out of the
State but the Church. As for liberty of Conscience, it is limited to things
indifferent: For Christ did never purchase, never grant to any liberty to
believe Errors, false Doctrine, or their own Fancyes, no ways grounded on the
Word of God, much less to profess them, and least of all upon this belief and
profession, to associate, and continue, themselves in several Societyes,
separate from Orthodox Christians, raise Schisms in the Church, and Factions in
the State, to the disturbance of both. If we look upon the persons, who in
reformed Churches, cry so much for liberty of Conscience; upon due examination
we shall find the most of them to be factious; to have little of the power,
though they may have much of the form, of godliness; and that which they call
liberty of Conscience, to be a liberty to profess their Errors: and if they
had power in their own hands, they would give liberty only to their own Sect,
and would prove the most bloody persecutors of all others. What toleration,
Princes may grant, of different proffessions, when they cannot reduce their
Subjects to the Unity of profession of the same saving Truth, is another case,
and clothed with other Circumstances, and must be judged of accordingly. The
truth is, when a State is once corrupted, and that deeply in Religion, it is an
hard thing to reform. Public Confessions are too large, and few of them
without the mixture of something, either superstitious, or erroneous, or
doubtful, and such as weak Christians of tender Consciences cannot well digest.

After this digression, These. 5. 13. To obey them, and submit unto them: Obey
them (says the Apostle) who have rule over you, and submit unto them: for they
watch over your Souls, Heb. 13. 17. They must atttend unto their Doctrine, and
follow their good example, Heb. 13. 7. They must maintain them, and provide for
them: For Christ has ordained that they who preach the Gospel should live of
the Gospel, 1 Cor. 9. 14. And let him that is taught in the Word communicate to
him that teaches in all his goods, Gal. 6. 6. The Duty of Ministers and
Pastors, amongst others, are these: To be rightly qualified, and also called
to their places, binding themselves to do Christ service in that Office. They
must plant, and water, preach, catechize, and edify the people wholly in the
saving Doctrine of the Gospel: and though they cannot confirm their Doctrine by
Miracles; yet let them do it by good example. They must administer the
Sacraments according to Christ's institution, pray for the People, perform all
public services of Religion, and do all things that tend to the conversion,
confirmation, and Salvation of the People.

The Sins of the People, are ambitious, and insolent domineering over men's
Consciences.

Christians may associate for Discipline, Associations: and, for this end,
declare, and constitute Canons, and Orders, choose and ordain Officers, erect
several Courts of Jurisdiction, Spiritual. In these Ecclesiastical States, the
Supreme Power of the Keys, or Church Government, is in the whole Combination:
the delegated Power is in their Officers, and in their Representatives. This
Constitution finished, the Superiors and Governors, are the Officers, and
Representatives, whereby the whole Church does exercise her Power: and every
particular member, whether Officer, or any other, is subject: This Constitution
should be agreeable to Christ's Institution: and it is no ways safe, that the
Association should be of too little, or too great extent: And most certain it
is, that Christ did never ordain, that there should be one Universal Supreme
Court in any part of the World, to which all Christian, of all Nations, should
submit, or make Appeals. The Duty of the People, and Members of this Spiritual
Commonwealth, and every particular Person, Officer, or any other, is to submit
to this Order, once established, according to the Laws and Rules of Christ,
obey the Canons, acknowledge the Officers, receive their Jurisdiction. The Duty
of the Governors, is, to consider, whether the Constitution be according to
the Gospel, to have a special care to make good Canons, and to constitute able,
prudent, pious, and sit Officers; to inform the Ignorant, reform the
Scandalous, reprove, admonish, suspend, or excommunicate absolve; and in such a
manner, that Doctrine and Discipline may be preserved pure, the People
reformed, the Church edifyed, and Christ glorified. And the Civil Magistrate
should countenance, protect, assist them so far, as his Civil Power, in this
particular, may be useful. The Discipline is easily corrupted, hardly reformed,
the Primitive and Apostolical Order little known. And, in this point, many are
our Divisions. Men have their several conceits of it: Every Party fancy their
own way to be the Pattern in the Mount, and few are impartial, and
unprejudiced; and though a good Discipline may be proposed, yet the greatest
part cannot endure it.

Schools, Colleges, Universities, are a kind of little Commonwealth, wherein
we have Ordinem Imperii and Subjectionis; wherein the Governors have power,
the governed are subject according to their Charters and Statutes: and as there
be Duties, so there are contrary Offenses in both.

There be also Superiors and Inferiors, in respect of excellency and age, yet
without any power. Those, who for Wisdom, Parts. Experience, rare Exploits, do
excel others, should according to their eminency benefit others, and others
should honor them. Yet Pride is the usual sin of the one, and Envy of the
other. Age, and the gray-head, if accompanied with Wisdom, and Virtue, should
be reverenced, and it is a bad sign of a declining State, when the Child shall
behave himself proudly against the Ancient, and the Base against the
Honorable, Esa. 3. 5.

CHAP. XII.
The Sixth Commandment.
GOD, Persons, and in this He begins to define man's right in things, which He
commands to be observed. The first and principal thing, which a man has right
unto, is his life; and therefore, after the duty to be performed to our Parents
by whom we receive life from Him, he takes care, and provides for the safety of
man's person, and the preservation of his life, by prohibiting Murder. This
Commandment presupposes, that God alone, according to his absolute propriety,
has the absolute power to dispose of man's life, and can take it away, and
that justly at will and pleasure: and that no man can do without Warrant
extraordinary, or ordinary, from him. Man has no absolute right to dispose of
his own life, whereof he has only the possession and use, but not the
propriety: and therefore he must not so much as hazard it, without Divine
Warrant.

The subject therefore of this Commandment, Math. 10. 28. The malice and
violence of man may make the Body an unfit Habitation for the Soul to dwell in,
and no fit Instrument for the Soul to act by; and then the Soul no ways able to
animate the same, is gone, and stays no longer. As this life is the subject of
this Commandment, so the end of it is to preserve the same, and not to break
the Bands of Union, till it be God's time, Soul and Body must part.

It is Negative,

1. In general, is to take away the life of any living Creature, and this is
not the sin.

2. It Is to take away the life of man; neither is this absolutely and simply
the Crime: For the life of man may be taken away, and yet justly. Now God does
never forbid any thing that is just: yet this may be so just, that it would be
injustice not to do it.

3. Murder, here forbidden, is to take away the life of man unjustly, and
without Warrant from God. To understand this sin of Murder, we must observe
certain distinctions: For,

1. It Is Negative, or Positive. 2. It Is total, or partial. 3. It Is inchoat, or
consummate.
Negative Murder, is when we deny to give, or do something, when it is our
Duty, without which life cannot subsist, or continue, as shall appear hereafter.

Positive, when we by some violence, or some other way, do that which is
destructive, or tends to the destruction of life: So the life of many a man is
taken away by Poison, and other secret Plots, devised by cursed Wretches, and
put in execution by bloody Villains.

It Is total, when life is wholly taken away immediately, or the body receives
some mortal harm, so that life is irrecoverable.

Partial Murder, is committed by wounds, blows, stripes, or other violence
which destroys a limb, or limbs; for all these hazard life, and take away the
perfection of it, and tend to destruction.

It Is inchoate in the mind, and heart first, and then in words. In the mind, as
by violent passions of anger, wrath, fury, and rage, or by malice and hatred.
For all murder is begun in the heart, and, the more of Will, consent, and
resolution there is, is the more heinous. Therefore Wilful Murder is
accounted most heinous; and Manslaughter is a grievous sin, though not so
grievous as the former: Both issue out of the heart: for out of the heart
proceed evil thoughts, Murders, etc: Luke 15. 19. Chance-medly (as we call it
in our law) indeed takes away life; but the party thus killing his Neighbor,
whom he formerly loved, or did not hate, is rather unhappy, then wicked;
because there is nothing of Will in it. God therefore assigned Cities of
Refuge, for the protection of such. Yet these, if when they did this, they were
either vainly, or ill employed, have much cause to be deeply humbled: For no
such unhappy event can fall out without the Will of our Heavenly Father, who
could easily have prevented that sad accident. The most bloody disposition of
the mind, which is most directly contrary to this Commandment, is that of
hatred, and deliberate malice. Therefore it is said, that he that hates his
Brother is a Murderer, 1 John 3. 15. Yet Anger, and Wrath, if rash, and unjust
are transgressions of this Law in the judgment of our Blessed Savior, Math.
5. 20. If anger be continued, it becomes malice: and that malice is most
accursed, which deliberates, and resolves of Murder, and proves implacable,
though it commit not the fact, only because of want of power, and opportunity,
or for fear of some mischief, which may befall the party himself, if he put
the bloody design in execution. Yet to hate, and actually Murder is more; then
to hate, and not to Murder, absolutely considered. There is another degree of
this sin, in bitter, spiteful, reviling, contumelious words. For whosoever
shall say unto his Brother (Racha) shall be in danger of the Council: But
whosoever shall say (Thou Fool) shall be in danger of Hell fire, Mat. 5. 21.
The former word seems to be a term, or expression of passion; the other of
contempt. There be also treacherous words, which tend to the taking away of
life, and there be whisperings, backbiting, standering, and tales, all tending
to shed blood, Ezekiel. 22. 9. There be words, which are softer then oil, and yet
are drawn Swords, Psalm. 55. 21. There are persons, who whet their tongues like
a sword, and bend their bow, to shoot their arrows even bitter words, Psalm.
64. 3. Doeg's words did cut like a sharp Razour, and cut off the lives of the
innocent Priests, Psalm. 52. 2. Thus this bloody sin is begun in the heart, and
tongue of man. Yet it cannot be consummate without the Hand, which is the
instrument to execute and accomplish what Thoughts, and Words have begun.

Again in this sin, Luke 10. 30. For if we should do our diligence to save the
life of a beast, much more the precious life of man. Let Us hear what God says
in this particular. If thou forbear to deliver them, who are drawn to death,
and those that are ready to be slain. If thou say, Behold we know it not:
Does not he that pondereth the heart consider it, and he that keeps the Soul,
does not He know it? and shall he not render to every man according to his
Works? Prove. 24. 11. 12. We read that a Galatian Shepherd refusing when it was
in his power, to save a man torn with dogs, was three years after slain by
Wild Beasts himself. This was a just judgment from God. The Rich man refusing
to relieve Poor, miserable, and hungry Lazarus, lying at his gates could not be
innocent: neither can any such unmercifull, and inhumane wretches. For not
only such, as cruelly oppress, afflict, and grind the faces of poor people,
but such as are devoyd of mercy, and the bowels of compassion are guilty. Si
non pavisti, occidisti: Ambros. In this kind, unskilful or careless
Physicians cannot be excused. Some of these do not value the life of man, and
are easily persuaded for favor or gain, to murder such, as they pretend to
cure.

As there are private; Exodus 21. 14. No satisfaction must be taken for his
life, but he must surely be put to death, Numb. 35. 31. And a man that does
violence to the blood of any person, must fly to the pit; Let no man stay him,
Prove. 28. 17. He that endeavors to save a bloody person, must needs be guilty
of blood himself. Some make bloody laws to take away most unjustly the lives
of their innocent Subjects: Some wrest the laws just in themselves, and by
unjust Judgment condemn the guiltless to death: and this is done in time of
peace. All such as wage unjust wars, or manage just wars cruelly, and unjustly,
are great transgressors. Such also are all seditious, and tumultuous persons,
and also the Authors of civil Wars, and enemies to the administration of
justice. Some are too remiss in just wars to revenge that blood, which was
cruelly and causelessly shed by the enemy. This was the sin of King Saul, in
that he destroyed not the Amalekites from under Heaven.

Besides the former differences, Wilful Murders, those are most heinous,

1. Which are committed out of pure malice, or a contempt of the precious life
of man: Some are so bloody, as they make no more account of the life of man
then of a beast, nor so much: Others are so cruel, as that they delight in the
torment which others suffer, and therefore take away the lives of others so, as
to put them to lingering and extreme pain.

2. To Murder Father, Mother, Children: as the Canaanites; and, after, some
cursed Israelites did sacrifice their Children to the Devil, is most
unnatural, grievous, and abominable.

3. To Murder Magistrates, Judges, public Officers, and especially Kings, and
Princes, upon whom the public peace and safety does much depend, is a far more
heinous transgression then to slay a private person.

4. To Murder innocent persons, and such as have done no wrong, nor given any
cause, is far more then to Murder injurious and abusive provoking persons.

5. The blood of Abel, and the Saints, and faithful Servants of God do cry
most loud, because the cursed Caines, and Perfecutours slay them, because their
works were good, and their own evil: and out of an hatred of the power of
Godliness in them: For the more of God is in them, the more they hate them.
The most heinous Murder in respect of the person, the injustice, the malice,
the reproach, was the crucifying of Christ the Son of God.

It Is difficult,

The Preceptive,

1. We must be humble, meek, patient, peaceable, placable, and ready to
forgive, and be reconciled, upon reasonable terms, unto our Enemies.

2. We must be pitiful kind, liberal, and ready to give, or do what shall be
necessary for the preservation of the lives of others, and not suffer them,
through out own default, to perish.

3. We must be bold, resolute, courageous, and ready to hazard our goods,
credit, liberty, and sometimes our own lives, to save innocent persons, and
especially the servants of God, and rescue them out of the hands and jaws of
wicked and cruel men. Open thy mouth (says God, by the Wise-woman) for the
Dumb, in the cause of all such as are appointed to destruction, Prove. 31. 8.

4. We must, in a just War, be willing to lay down our lives for our Country,
that by the Death of few, many may be preserved.

5. As our hearts must be well affected, so our words must be words of
meekness, patience, love, humility, peace, kindness, comfort. And as we must
avoid the causes and occasions of doing hurt; so all our inward affections,
outward carriage, words, deeds, must be so ordered, as shall most tend to the
safety of the life of others. Neither must our Prayers and Endeavors be
wanting, to prevent the death of innocent persons. Thus Reuben sought to save
the life of his Brother Joseph. Esther adventured her life to prevent the ruin
of her people, Esth. 4. 11, 12, etc. Thus Ebedmeleck delivered the Prophet out
of the Dungeon, Jer. 38. 7. 8. And God remembered the Work of Mercy to reward
it, Jerem. 39. 15, 16. Besides all this we must not conceal, but discover, and
that betimes, all Plots, Designs, Intentions of Murder, known unto us; do what
we can to prevent the effusion of innocent blood; severely, and carefully
prosecute all Bloody Murderers. And herein all Judges, Magistrates,
Higher-Powers, who are trusted with the Sword, must, by the Sword, cut off
bloody men, and not suffer them to live.

The Reasons why we should abhor,

1. The life of man is precious, and the greatest and chiefest Earthly Treasure
man can have: it is the best thing under Heaven, and in it self the greatest
blessing of God in this World.

2. It was given of God to serve him, and seek a better, and more glorious life
in the World to come. To take it away before the great work be done, and Man
has made his peace with God, and secured his Title to Heavens Kingdom, is a
most horrid crime, and tends to the destruction of Soul and Body at once, and
may be a privation, and prevention of Eternal Life, to be enjoyed in Heaven.
Therefore, it is no wonder, God does so much detest it. And many are so
malicious and revengeful, as that, if it were in their power, they would
destroy and punish both Body and Soul in Hell fire. It Is reported of a bloody
man of Millain in Italy, that when he had suddenly surprised one whom he
hated, overthrowing him, set his Dagger to his Breast, and told him, that he
would kill him, unless he would renounce, and forswear God: which when this
surprised, fearful man had done, that bloody man presently killed him, saying,
This is a noble Revenge, which does not only deprive the Body of Temporal
Life, but brings also the Immortal Soul to endless flames: Bodin. de Rep. Lib.
5. Cap. 6.

3. The Body of Man, as well as his Soul, was redeemed, and bought by the blood
of Christ, is, or should be the Temple of the Holy Ghost, is capable of
immortal glory; and man was made in the Image of God: So that to destroy the
body of Man, and take away this life unjustly, and without Warrant from God,
must needs be an offense against God the Father, in whose Image Man was made;
against the Son, who redeemed him; against the Holy Ghost, whose Temple he is,
and against man himself, his Neighbor, his Brother, his Fellowmember in
Christ. And for Christians, to murder Christians, must needs be heinous, seeing
we profess our selves Christians, and Fellow Members in Christ; and thereby we
engage our selves to the highest degree of love of all other people in the
World. To murder a Christian, is not only a sin against God-Greatour; but
also, and that directly, against God-Redeemer, which is an high aggravation.

4. The life of man once destroyed, cannot be restored: neither can any
satisfaction sufficient be made either to God, or Man, for the same: for life
is inestimable, and cannot be ransomed by all the Gold and Silver in the World.

5. This sin is the most destructive of Humane Society: so that if God should
not forbid it, restrain it, or punish it, no man could live in safety, and the
Earth, in a short time, would be unpeopled, and wholly desolate.

6. God has given a strict charge, that no murderer should live; and woe unto
them that shall protect, or abber, or endeavor to save any man whose hand is
embrued in innocent blood.

7. Murderers are the children of the Devil in a special manner: for he was a
murderer from the beginning.

8. The Judgments of God, upon this sin, are severe, many, signal, and his
detestation there of very great. This appears by the many strange and
supernatural Discoveries of secret murders, by the strange and extraordinary
Judgments upon bloody persons. For sometimes He punishes them by Retaliation
in the same kind, and sometimes by the same persons, that employed them in the
murder of others; sometimes, by some fearful Vengeance executed in the same
place, where they had shed the blood of others; sometimes, in the same time, as
the same Day, and Month, wherein they had murdered others, that man might
take notice, hear, and fear. For this Sin God sometimes punishes not only the
Persons guilty, but Families, whole Nations, and Kingdoms.

God's own people in Covenant with him, must suffer for the innocent blood shed
by Manasses: and neither his Repentance, nor good Josiah's serious and zealous
Reformation could avert the judgment. Blood is a crying Sin, and calls aloud
for Vengeance; and God, the Judge of all the World, must needs hear, and will
make Inquisition, and manifest his indignation. If David, a man after God's own
heart, will slay innocent Uriah, with the Sword of the children of Ammon, the
Sword shall not depart from his own house. One Son shall murder another, and
his own child that came out of his own bowels, shall not only seek his Crown,
but thirst after his Blood. The innocent blood of Christ lies heavy upon the
Jews for these 1600 years. Cain's horror of Conscience was dreadful, and Judas
his torment intollerable^: and why? Both had shed innocent blood. Therefore we
must not murder.

Yet all this must be understood of the effusion of innocent blood, Abraham
could not have been guiltless, in that he purposed to sacrifice his innocent
Son Isaac. David's just wars had been unjust. Joshua's severity against the
Canaanite, to whom he gave no quarter, had been cruelty. Readiness destruction of
Amaleck, in not sparing man, woman, nor child, could not have been warrantable.
Moses, by the Levites, slays 3000 of his Brethr^n in one day; and Phinehas
takes away the life of two guilty Persons, without Formality of Law, and
judicial process: and yet both were innocent, neither chargeable with blood,
because they did it justly. In this respect, the punishment of Blasphemers,
Idolaters, and capital Offenders, is lawful, and warrantable, no ways contrary
to this Law. Some explain and enlarge this Commandment, so as to include the
murder of Souls, as here prohibited. But the Commandment does not extend so
far. It Is true, that we may conclude from hence, that if murder of the Body,
much more the murder of the Soul, must needs be an heinous sin.

The Devil is the murderer of Souls, by tempting men to sin; and so are all his
Agents, who by false Doctrine, evil Example, Persuasions, Commands,
Exhortation, incline men to believe Lies, and disobey their God. And such as
shall not endeavor the Conversion and Salvation of others, cannot be excused.

But these things are not proper to this Commandment, which was given for the
preservation of man's bodily life: Yet we may argue, that if it be so heinous a
crime to kill the Body, it is far more heinous to murder the Soul.

CHAP. XIII.
The Seventh Commandment.
THis Commandment is expressly Negative, Adultery. And this presupposes
Marriage, which was instituted by God, and to be observed by man in the state
of Innocence before any sin entered into the World by man, For God having first
created man the Male, after that, create's the Woman of a Rib of Man, Female.
The man was so made, that he was fit to beget; the Woman was so made as that
she was fit to conceive, bear, bring forth, nurse children. For this was the
reason why God made them Male and Female, because by them thus different in
Sex, he intended to propagate all Mankind of one blood. The Woman being
created, was brought to Man, and given unto him by God, and he took her, with
her consent, as flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone; and they twain became
one flesh. And God commanded this order to be observed unto the end of the
World. This was the first institution of this sacred society: So that the first
and principal efficient of Marriage, was God instituting it; the Subordinate,
is the mutual consent of the parties. For Marriage is a contract, or covenant:
This is the general nature of it; and as the matter is one man, and one Woman,
free from all former obligation that may hinder it, so the form, and chief
essence is in the special nature of the contract, whereby they mutually bind
themselves one unto another so as to become one flesh for term of life of both
the parties. The end is propagation mutual help, and comfort; and upon the
Fall, Per accidens, the avoiding of Fornication. One effect, and that a
principal one is, That the Wife has not power of her own body, but the
Husband: and likewise also the Husband has not power of his own body, but the
Wife: and this is the reason why Adultery is so grievous a sin, and a just
cause of dissolution; because the party committing it, does give that body
which is another, and not their own, unto a third party, contrary to Gods
institution, the Covenant, and the principal end of marriage. Amongst
Christians this Marriage does resemble that spiritual and blessed union of
Christ and the Church, begun on Earth to be consu^mate in Heaven, and should be
entered upon and continued so, and also observed in that holy manner, as that it
may be a furtherance, not an hinderance to that more Heavenly bond, and
society. We should first give our selves to be married to Christ, before we
give our selves to be married one unto another. For Redemption did not abolish,
but perfect Marriage. It Is not made necessary to eternal life; for as we may be
married and not saved, so we may be unmarried, and yet Married to Christ and
Saved. Yet all Christians should marry in the Lord: Though the Marriage of
Heathens, as Marriage, is lawful, and their children born in Marriage are
legitimate.

By these things premised concerning Marriage, Let Marriage be honorable in
all, and let the bed be undefiled, Heb. 13. 4. That the words are a dehortation
appears from the context. The sin dehorted from, is Adultery, which is a
dishonouring of Marriage, and a defiling of the Marriage bed. This Adultery is
opposed to chastity, and fidelity in married persons: The sense is; Let all
that are married preserve the honor of Marriage, and preserve the Marriage Bed
pure. This Adultery is committed three ways,

1. When the Adulterer is single, and the Adulteress Married.

2. When the Woman is single, and the Man, or Adulterer, Ma^ried.

3. When both the parties are Married. When one party only is Married, and the
other single, one bed only is defiled; but when both the parties are Married,
two Marriage-beds are defiled by one act. This Commandment follows the former
in order: For the best, and nearest thing is Man's life; the next is his Wife;
who by Gods institution, and solemn contract, is one Person, and one flesh with
him. And for an Husband, or Wife to commit this sin, is a wrong unto their
bodies, which is of more account then their goods can be. And Adultery is a
wrong more heinous than Theft, and next to that of Murder. Some have observed
that the sixth and seventh Commandment are fitly joined together, because
Adultery and Murder often go together. And we must avoid Adultery the cause,
that we may avoid Murder, which is often committed to conceal Adultery; as in
the example of David, who having committed Adultery with Vriah's Wife, caused
him to be slain, lest his Adultery should be discovered. Others consent to
murder, that they may enjoy one another more freely. Thus Adulterous Wives
conspire with their Paramours, to poison, or secretly murder their Husbands.
Adultery in either Party is a grievous sin, but especially in the Wife, because
it may bring in a Bastard, and a spurious brood to inherit her Husbands estate.

This sin appears to be heinous many ways, For every one should know how to
possess his Vessel in Sanctification, and honor, 1. Th^ss. 4. 4. This Vessel
is the body: the Sanctification and honor is chastity: Which implies that
Adultery, as also fornication is the dishonor, and slain of the body. In this
respect it may be said, that he that commits Fornication, sins against
his own body. It Is a disgrace to the Children, a blot upon the Family, the
cause of woeful discord, the dissolution of the sacred bond, the ruin of
Families, and the ^ource of many miseries. This is farther evident from the
Penalty determined by God against this sin, which was death. The Man that
commits Adultery with another Man's wife, even he that commits Adultery
with his Neighbors Wife, both the Adulterer, and Adulteress shall surely be
put to death. Levit. 20. 10. Judah adjudgeth his daughter in L^w Thamar to the
fire for Adult^ry. Many Heathen States made it Capital. The King of Babylon
condemned Ahab, and Zedechiah to be burnt for this sin, Jer. 29. 22, 23. The
Tribe of Benjamin was almost destroyed for the same, Judge. 19 and 20. Chapters.
David commits Adultery in secret, and his own Concubines are defiled by his own
Son, in the sight of the Sun, and all Israel. And for this sin God was so
incensed with the Men of Judah, that he says, Shall not I visit for these
things? Shall not my Soul be avenged on such a Nation as this? Jer. 5. 8, 9.
Diseases and beggary, with perpepual in^amy, and sometimes death follow by Gods
just Judgments upon the Parties guilty of this Crime. Again, this society of
Marriage being ordained for propagation, is the Seminary of Church and state:
and if it be stained by Adultery, both are stained. And to multiply a Bastard
brood for the beginning of a Civil or Ecclesiastical association, is to be
abhorred by all Wise and honest, much more by Religious Persons. It Is a curse,
and dishonor to any people to be derived from any such spurious spawn.
Therefore all well-ordered states have made strict Laws concerning Marriages;
and most civilized Nations have their Rites, and Customs for the more solemn
Celebration of the same. Christians appointed the Publication of the Banns; and
the solemnization of the Marriage it self, was to be performed in the open
Congregation, with holy instructions, exhortations, and Prayers. All this was
done to prevent Fornication, uncleanness, and Clandestine Marriages. Again,
this Crime amongst Christians is more heinous, because our bodies are the
members of Christ, the Temples of the Holy Ghost, and are bought with the price
of Christ's blood, 1 Cor. 6. 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, ^0. This is a sin that shuts
out of Heavens Kingdom, Chap. 16. verse 9. 10. For this sin, as for others the
wrath of God comes upon the Children of disobedience, Ephesians. 5. 6. And
Whoremongers and Adulterers, God will Judge, Heb. 13. 4. And he will punish
them not only with temporal; but, if they repent not, with eternal
punishments.

Though Adultery, Catechists, Casuists, and Expositors: viz. That where one sin
is forbidden, all of that kind, and such as bea^ Analogy, or have Agreement
with it, are there, by a Synechdoche, forbidden. Where the effect and the end,
there the causes and means, are Prohibited. And where the Principal there the
Accessory are condemned. Where the act, or outward fact, there the thoughts
affections, inclinations, desires, purposes, gestures, Words, are determined to
be unlawful; According to these rules; besides Adultery, many other sins which
have some affinity and agreement therewith are here forbidden: as fornication,
incest, whoredom, rapes, deflowring of Virgins, Sodomy, and Bestiality, which
two lusts are not to be named but with detestation: And all lasciviousness,
uncleanness, and abuse of the body in this kind. The reason hereof is, because
God never gave any ^iberty to use their bodies in this kind out of Marriage.
For so soon as he had created man, and given him a power, and blessing of
propagation, and multiplication, He brings the Woman to the Man, gives her in
marriage unto him; before they had any warrant to have carnal knowledge one of
another. In this respect simple fornication (as they term it) between single
Persons, and the keeping of Concubins, are unlawful.

According to the second Rule (of cause and effect) because intemperance, and
excess in eating, Sodom, one of the filthiest and leudest places in the World,
Ezekiel. 16. 49. Yet intemperance, luxury, and excess in bodily pleasures, may be
reduced to this Commandment, understood in a latitude as prohibiting all
excessive, and inordinate enjoyment of worldly and bodily pleasures. And the
Jews being as sed horses in the morning, neighed after their neighbors wives,
Jer. 5. 8. Lewd company is also another cause. Dinah Jacob's Daughter wanders,
and gads abroad to see the Daughters of the Land, falls into lewd company, and
is deflowred. For which sin the City of Shechem is destroyed. To gaze
unadvisedly upon beauties may kindle the flames of lust. Immodest, and wanton
Apparel, Carriage, Gestures, Words filthy Communication, Lewd Pictures,
filthy books, too much familiarity of Men with Women, or Women with Men, who
have not the gift of continency, and converse with them without any calling,
especially, with the temptations of the Devil, who will take all advantages,
are dangerous. Not to reckon up particulars, which are many; this we must know
for certain, that whatsoever is a cause, or occasion of this sin of
uncleanness; and gives advantage or opportunity to Satan, is forbidden, as
such, in this place. Yet the beginning of this sin, as of all other, is in the
heart: for, as, out of it evil thoughts, and murders; so adultery and
fornication issue, Mat. 15. 19. For whosoever looks on a Woman to lust after
her, has committed Adultery with her already in his heart, Mat. 5. 28. Till
temptations come into the heart, we are safe. But when the heart begins to
entertain unclean suggestions, conceive and continue unclean thoughts, desire
unclean pleasures; the devil has insinuated himself, and is entered already.
But if we yield consent, resolve to fulfill our lusts, and deliberate how to
accomplish our filthy design, then he is fortified, and will hardly be forced
out; we become his captives and slaves, the sin is conceived and formed in us:
And this deliberate consent, and resolution is the principal part of this sin;
and most properly contracts the guilt. For where there is Reluctance within,
and strong temptation without, or a sudden surprizall, the sin is not so
heinous. The inward disposition, and willing inclination of the heart does most
offend God: the outward act, and the use of means to accomplish our desires,
do the greatest hurt to man. Yet as there are degrees of these sins within, so
there be also without, and that not only in respect of the several kinds of
filthiness; for some are more abominable then other in their own nature; some
by complication, because in one act Adultery and Incest may concur; but also
in respect of the act, and habit. For the sins of adultery and murder were not
habitual in David: his constant temper was far different, though some make a
Constant practice of this sin. Besides all these ways of contracting guilt in
this particular, some are guilty, though not as Principalls, yet as Accessory.
For many are no better then Bawdes, and Panders, by being subservient, and
officious unto other in this sin: Thus Jonadab contrives a means, and gives
advice to Amon, how be might fulfill his lust upon his Sister Tamar, 2 Samuel 13.
5. Thus far the negative part, whereby we understand what sins are here
forbidden, and also how hard a thing it is, to be pure and innocent from all
uncleanness: for few are found, who are not in some measure polluted. For the
causes, and occasions are many, and the temptations great, and our frailty
much: and we have continual need of Gods gracious assistance, which without
our own constant Vigilance we cannot expect. As for Polygamy, and the several
cases of conscience, and the distance of degrees in consanguinity, and affinity
to be observed, to avoid incest; I leave them to Casuists.

The affirmative part here implied, Joseph to be followed. Yet we must know
that in respect of persons its twofold.

1. Of single persons.

2. Of married persons. Single persons are such as were never married, or
widows: both these must be chaste, so as not only to have pure, and sanctified
minds, but also to forbear all kind of Carnal copulation. Married persons may
have the use of one another bodies without any sin, but then they must be
faithful one unto another: for only they that have right unto their bodies
must have the use of them. And if they transgress, their sin is adultery, and
greater then that of simple fornication; not only because it is an abuse of the
body, as simple fornication is: but because it is against the
marriage-contract, and they have a remedy, which single persons have not; and
many more mischiefs follow upon it. In this condition of marriage, many may
think themselves safe: yet no persons though married must neglect their watch,
presume upon their own strength, contemn temptations: for they may fail as
well as others, as woeful experience has taught many. Their secret carriage
must be chaste before God; their outward behavior must be modest before men:
the one that they may have a good conscience; the other that they may give good
example. And single persons that have not the gift of continency, must marry,
yet wisely, and in the Lord; lest that estate which was ordained for a comfort,
and help, prove a discomfort, and a snare. They are happy in this respect (and
a great mercy of God it is) who have their education in chaste, and modest
families and fall not into familiarity with lewd persons: For many who in chaste
Company would have been chaste, and would have abhorred this sin, have bin
defiled by lewd, and ungodly persons. Yet if we fear our God, and trust in him,
he can preserve us pure in the most filthy societies, as he did Lot in Sodom;
and deliver them in the strongest temptations, as he did Joseph.

This Commandment certainly requires temperance,

1. Simple fornication, to which they referr whoredom, and the use of
Concubi^s.

2. Incest.

3. Adultery.

4. Deflowring of Virgins in their parents power.

5. Rapes.

6. Uncleanness against nature, as Sodomy, and Bestiality: all which were
mentioned formerly. Yet this temperance, more properly taken, is opposed to
luxury, taken more strictly for excess in diet and apparel, and such things
as tend to the preservation of the body. It Is contrary to drunkenness, and
gluttony, and all excess in that kind, and may include abstinence, and
fasting: for we must keep the body under, and make no provision for the flesh
to fulfill the lusts thereof. The body must not be armed against the soul, lest
the flesh rebel against the spirit. The pampering of it, is like the warming a
frozen Serpent in our bosom to sting us unto death: We are commanded to
abstain from fleshly lusts, which fight against the Soul, 1 Pet. 2. 11. Yet
temperance is properly, and strictly, here commanded as tending unto Chastity;
yet it may come under another notion, as it does dispose us to Heavenly duties,
and prepare us for our last account. There are intemperate persons, who are
lovers of pleasures, more then lovers of God; and surfeiting and drunkenness
indispose us to divine performances, and unprepare us for our latter end. And
in this respect intemperance is a sin against the first table. Drunkenness
absolutely considered is not a sin against this commandment, but as inclining
and disposing to uncleanness; and in other several respects against many
other. For there be diverse sins, and diverse duties, reducible to several parts
of this moral Law.

As there be many disswasives from the sins here forbidden,

1. Because our bodies are the members of Christ,

2. They are the temples of the Holy Ghost.

3. We are bought with a price, and cannot dispose of our selves as we please;
but must so use them as our Savior has Commanded, and we must honor and
glorify him, who has bought them: for his they are.

4. We have consecrated both soul, and body to his service.

5. We are Regenerate, and sanctified; and as in soul, so in body, and have
received a power to perform this duty of Chastity, as well as other duties.

6. We hope, and expect, that these bodies shall rise again unto eternal
glory, and how can we pollute them?

7. One Reason in general to all men Jews, Christians, Gentiles, is, that
Cha^^ity is the honor of these bodies of ours, as uncleanness is their
dishonor. For the bodies of all men being tabernacles of the immortal soul,
and created, and redeemed to immortality; are far more excellent then the
bodies of beasts; and therefore must not be abused, and made like, nay worse,
and more base, then the bodies of brutes. There are besides these common
reasons, others proper to incline married-parties to Conjugall Chastity, and
fidelity: as the honor and Legitimation of our Children, the mutual content
and comfort of man and wife, the peace and welfare of our Families for the
present, and of posterity for time to come; Gods institution, the matrimonial
contract, the con^inuance of the sacred bond, and diverse others which may be
observed our or Scripture. And both the parties must not only be chaste and
faithful, but wi^e in their carriage, so as to give no occasion or just
suspicion of jealously, or be jealous when there is no sufficient cause. We
should know these things, and learn out of Gods word, how excellent a virtue
Chastity is, how pleasing to God, how disposing to heavenly duties. Out of this
knowledge and love to God, we should love this duty, desire and endeavor to
perform it; and labor to be chaste in our hearts, not only before men but
God. We must resist temptations, and suppress the first motions unto
uncleanness; and with Job make a covenant with our eyes, and not think upon a
maid, Job 31. 1, 2, 3. unto the 13th. In this case, if our right eye, right
hand, right ^oot offend us we must cut it off, and rather part with our
choicest, and rarest contents, than sin, and displease our God; and endanger
our poor souls. Many are not Chaste at all, few, and very few perfectly Chaste:
and this Commandment discovers much sin: and manifests an absolute necessity
of Christ's merit, and Gods mercy in this particular. Many are wicked, the best
are frail, and all imperfect; at least in our strange, and unclean thoughts;
which are very hardly prevented in them, who abhor the sin and love the virtue.
I might in this p^ace take occasion to enlarge; but I will not debate either of
the nullity of some marriages, or what does make a nullity; or determine the
several degrees of consanguinity or affinity, and so discover what marriages
are ince^^uous; or enquire into the nature of divorce, and the causes thereof,
and whether divorce for Adultery does totally dissolve the matrimonial bond,
or only separate a mensa, and thoro, the bond continuing still; or declare in
what cases Man and Wife may live asunder. As for living, or not living
together, when the one party is a Believer, the other an Unbeliever, the
Apostle, 1. Cor. 7. has sufficiently determined. These particulars might take
up a Volume. Let the Reader observe, that in this Commandment, God says to
all single Persons, Be Chaste: To all Married Persons, Be Faithful.

CHAP. XIV.
The Eighth Commandment.
THE Sin forbidden in this Commandment, THEFT, Thou shall not steal. Theft, is
the unjust usurpation of another goods; or the taking away, or detaining
another goods unjustly. By unjust Usurpation, I mean, a making that our own,
which is not our own, and to which we have no right. For the better
understanding of Theft, we must consider,

1. The matter of it. 2. The form. 3. The Persons that are guilty; under which,
comes in the several distinctions of Theft. 4. The Causes, and Antecedents,
which make way unto it. 5. The Degrees thereof.
The matter of Theft, are the goods of other men: Therefore, as the former
Commandment presupposed Marriage; so does this, Propriety, and a right to
those things we call goods, which are such things as God has given us, for the
preservation, comfort, and ornament of this bodily life; and, in that respect,
called our livelihood, because they are not only convenient, but necessary in
a competent measure, for the continuance of life. The absolute and highest
degree of Propriery in these Earthly goods, is only in God, because He made
them. For the Earth is the Lords* and the fullness thereof, the World, and they
that dwell therein: for He has founded it upon the Seas, and established it
upon the Floods Psalm. 24. 1, 2. The Earth is the Lords and the fullness thereof;
This is God's Propriety. He has founded, and prepared it; This is the reason
and ground of this absolute Propriety. Yet He was willing, that seeing He made
these things for Man, he should have some right unto them, and an inferior
kind of Propriety in them. Therefore it is written, The Heaven, even the
Heavens are the Lords; but the Earth has He given to the Children of Men,
Psalm. 115. 16. So that Man derives his Right unto them from God, by way of
Donation, and that from the Creation, Genesis 1. 28, 29. This Donation is from
God, not as Redeemer, but Creator and Preserver. Therefore it is true, that
Dominium non fundatur in Gratia; That Man, by Sin, might ^orfeit, there can be
no doubt, yet if God took not the Forfeit, so as to re-enter, the Right remains
unto men, as men, not as sanctified. The sanctified only have a sanctified use
of them, and will be able to make a good account. God renewed his Charter and
Donation, Genesis 9, 3. and this after the Flood. Yet this is but a common and
general Right given unto man in general, and might stand good, though all
things continued as common. This gave neither public Right to many, nor
private to any, yet was a just Foundation of the Division and Appropriation of
things, which was once introduced by the Law of Nations, and of several States,
and by the consent of private persons: and though this Division and
Appropriation le^t some things common, and did only constitute a public or
private Title, yet to make that public, which God and Nature have made common,
as to drink water out of the River, etc. or that private, which is public, is
a breach of this Commandment. Besides the Laws and consent of men, there is a
special Providence of God, both in disposing the several parts of the Earth to
several Nations; as the Land of Canaan to Israel, of Mount-Seir to Esau, etc.
and also making private men, rich or poor, and giving to one more, to another
less. This Donation of God is not absolute and unlimited: for He gives with a
Proviso, to dispossess, and take away at will and pleasure; especially when
whole Nations, States, or private men, by their heinous crimes, do forfeit.
These goods which God gave license to be divided, are either in no man's
possession or propriety, or in some man's possession or propriety. For such as
no man claims any right unto, nor can justly do it, they fall to the first
Inventour and Possessour: and this is a good Title, as also Presciption. For
such goods, as others have a Right unto, whilst that Right continues, we
cannot, in Justice, challenge as ours, except they be given us by the Owners,
or sold, or exchanged or left by Inheritance, or deserved by some Service, or
be made Lords thereof, upon Conquest, in a just War. There be other just ways
of acquiring, but I remember them not. These goods are corporeal, or
incorporeal: corporeal, are immovable as Lands, or moveable as other goods:
incorporeal, as usages to pass, to drive, to carry through another man's ground,
and other such like. There be degrees of this propriety: Some have only the
use of another man's goods, but not the profit; some, the use and profit, but no
right of alienation; some, have right of alienation; some, have only Dominium
Eminens, as chief Lords, and can only demand a chief Rent, which the Vassal in
alienation must always except. A man may be wronged in all, or any of these;
and to deprive a man of the least right, he has in these things, by the Laws
of God, and just Laws of men, is Theft.

So that the Form is in the injustice of the Possession of these goods;
Possession is unjust, we must

1. Distinguish betwixt things common things public, things private, that we
may understand, and that distinctly, the common, the public, the private
Propriety and Right,

2. We must consider that some Propriety and Right is grounded upon the Laws of
God* some upon the Laws of Men; whether the Law of Nations, or Laws of
particular States; some upon both.

3. We must observe, that some things may be proper and due, by the Laws of
men, which are not due by the Laws of God, and on the contrary; and some things
are due, both by the Laws of God and Men, agreeing with the Laws of God: and so
far as the Laws of Men are contrary, and, in this particular, in determining
man's right, they are of no force, neither can they bind any man.

4. Seeing Justice commutative, as some call it, does give, Suum Cuique to
every one his due; Theft must needs be a not giving of every one that which is
his own, and due unto him by the Laws of God, and the just Laws of men. Not to
give, must be understood in a Latitude, as to include unjust acquiring, unjust
detaining and keeping, unjust disposing and wasting, etc. of that which is not
our own. And here the Question may be put, Whether the Laws of that God, who
gave the Earth, and the fullness thereof unto the Sons of Men, has made any
goods so proper, as that the use of them should not be common in cases of
Necessity. The Resolve seems to be made by our Savior's words, justifying
the Disciples plucking the Ears of other men's corn; and, by the Example of
David, eating the Shewbread, sacred and proper to the Priests. Whereas some
put, in the definition of Theft, Invito Proprio Domino, a taking away goods,
without the consent of the Owner, this is not accurate. For though, Volenti non
fit injuria, and if the Owner be willing, it is no Injustice, therefore no
Theft; yet goods may be justly taken away in diverse cases, without the Owners
consent. This word, Stealing, or Theft, must be extended so far, as to signify
not only Furtum, which is a secret and fraudulent Usurpation; but also
Rapinam, which is a manifest and violent taking away another man's right. And
this Injustice is opposed not only to Justice, determined by the Laws of men;
but unto Mercy and Liberality, required by the Laws of God. For men cannot
detain, or dispose of their goods, but according to the Laws of the chief Lord,
and Proprietary, who is God. And we are here forbidden to wrong men, not only
in their Propriety, but their Possession, Profit, Use, and Servitude.

Distinctions of Theft, Thieves, are many, both in regard of the matter, and
the manner:

1. The matter may be sacred, and given to God, and for pious uses; and to
usurp these, is called Sacrilege. It may be common; and so to usurp it, is
Engrossing: It may be public, and so the sin is Peculiatus, a robbing or
defrauding of the Commonwealth: If the thing be of the Herd, or Flock, it is
Abigeatus, driving away of Cattle. If it be any person of man, woman, or child,
it is Plagium, Man-stealing. If it be Use or Servitude, it may be called
Trespass. If it be in time of War by Land, and the War unjust, or the Goods
taken away, or consumed, without Commission, or if they belong to such as are
no Enemies, it is Plundring. If it be in the time of War, or Peace, by Sea, it is
Pyracie. According to these several distinctions of the matter, there be
several kinds of Thieves, and Persons guilty of Theft.

2. Again, they are distinguished for the manner; As,

1. The Causes conjoined, when several persons concur in the same Theft,
whereof some are principal; others, accessory: and that by receiving,
concealing, counsailing helping, sharing, or any other way consenting in this
sin. For as we are forbidden by God, to concur actively with others, to other
sins, so here to this. We must do what we can to hinder and prevent this sin,
detect and use all lawful means to have the Offenders punished; and so do our
best, not only to maintain our own, but preserve our Neighbors goods. 2. They
are such as are gross and palpable Thieves, and condemned generally: as those
who are guilty of Burglary, robbing by the Highway, cutting Purses, and of any
kind of filching and stealing, and of cogging and cheating. Under this head,
come such as use Vivere ex Rapto, as Borderers, and Moss-Troopers. To these, we
may add such as refuse to deliver goods found, unto the right Owners, when they
are certainly known.
Thieves,

1. Such as make unjust Laws, concerning new Estates to enrich themselves and
oppress, impoverish, and undo their Subjects.

2. Such as (without Law) by an Ariytrary Power, lay heavy Taxes upon their
Subjects, sequest^r, confiscate, or charge their Estates without just cause.

3. All covetous Judges, who judge for Rewards, and do wrong to such, as being
wronged by others, seek to them for remedy. And many times we find it true,
that Princes are Revolters, and Judges are companions of Thieves, love Gifts,
and follow after Rewards.

4. All public Auditors, Treasurers, Commissaries, Collectors, Publicans, and
other Officers, trusted in the gathering, keeping, dispensing the Public
Revenue, and yet give in false Accounts, divert the Public Treasure, enhaunce
Fees, extort more then their due, and oppress the People, and rob the
Commonwealth, either in Peace or War, by Sea or Land.

Private Thieves, Common stock, Tutors, and Guardians trusted with the estate
of Orphans, and whosoever are any ways trusted with other men's goods, and yet
prove unfaithful. Unjust, and unfaithful in their Contracts are many, according
to the several kinds of Contracts; whereof some are made without writing, some
are written. Some of these Contracts I will mention, to discover the several
sorts of Thefts, whereof men are guilty; and give some Directions to reduce
many places of Scripture to this Commandment.

1. In lending and borrowing, there is Injustice,

1. In Lending; some lend when they should give, and to those who are in need,
and should be freely relieved. Some will not lend at all, when they might do it
without any prejudice, and are bound to it by the Laws of God. Some will lend,
but not freely, or upon reasonable, but unreasonable hard terms; as upon more
than ordinary Security by Pledges, Morgages, and such like, to the great
damage or danger of the Borrowers. These are contrary to that of our Savior,
who best understood this Commandment, Give to him that asks thee, and from
him that would borrow of thee, turn thou not away, Math. 5. 42. Amongst other
kinds of Lending that of Usury is most to be considered, as admitting of much
debate, and a subject of many Cases. It Is lending of Money upon condition, to
receive the Principal with Interest, for the use of it. In respect of the
Interest to be received over and above the Principal, for the mere use, it is
called Usury. Yet, it is to be observed, that it is not always a lending of money
actually, but sometimes virtually, or, as some Casuists use to speak,
Interpretative, Some contract all this in these few words, Pactum ex mutuo
Lucrum. This Usury thus defined, is not absolutely unlawful. For, in diverse
^ases, a man may receive from some men gain for money, or other things lent: in
which respect, as Lucrum ex mutuo, is no^ unjust: neither is Lucrum pactum ex
mutuo. For the Covenant, or Contract added, cannot make it unlawful: Because
there are diverse Contracts for Gain of the same nature, which are generally
allowed as lawful. But to covenant and bind the Borrower to Interest for the
Use, when he is poor, and such as by the Laws of God we are bound to help
freely; or when we shall bind any to unreasonable or excessive Interest. For
this does argue the Lender to be either covetous, or unmerciful, or both. And
indeed common U^urers, and such as make a constant trade of it are covetous,
cruel, unjust, unmerciful, unchristian, and cannot be excu^ed. For their end is
gain, and they will stand upon hard and strict terms, even with those whom
they should relieve. Many of them are very cursed Wretches, and not to be
suffered in a well-ordered State, much less in a Christian Church: As for
Justice, Equity, Mercy, Charity, they know them not. The Israelites were
forbidden to lend upon Usury to their poor Brother, or to keep his pledge Exodus
22. 25 -- 6. 7. Levit. 25. 36, 37. When a Brother is poor, not by his own
default, but the hand of God upon him, and he willing to labor, and some thing
freely lent would help him, he is an object of mercy. As there is Injustice,
and The^t in lending; so there is in borrowing,

1. When we borrow a thing only to use, and are bound to return the same
again, as good as we received; or if we cannot, yet give satisfaction. For to
delay too long, or neglect, or refuse altogether to restore it, or deny it; or
if i^ be made worse, not to make satisfaction, is Injustice.

2. So it is a Degree of Theft, when we borrow, to restore in the same kind so
much, and so good; and yet either deny to return any thing at all, or return
less in quantity, or worse in quality, or both.

There is another kind of Contract in Selling and Buying, full Measure, or to
sell by unjust Weights, is Theft, and much spoken against, and condemned in
many places of the Word of God. Monopolies, engrossing of Commodities,
corrupting of vendible Wares, and all other means used to enhaunse the price of
things, are here forbidden. To sell, and give no good Security; to conceal
Forfeitures, former Sales, Statutes, Mortgages, and to defraud the Buyers; or
to deny, or delay to give possession, can in no wise be just. To set too high
Rates upon Commodities, and by Lying, and sometimes Swearing, and
Equivocations, to extort from the Buyer a greater price; or cheat and defraud
the simple and ignorant Chapman; to sell that which is not our own, without
warrant from the true Owners* can in no wise be just. To buy under the value,
and so defraud the simple and plain man; to oppress such, as sell for need; to
buy by greater, and sell by less Measures or Weights; to buy things plundered,
stolen, and known to be other men's, all come in to the Catalogue of Theft. So it
is, to buy when we have no need; to raise the Market, and enrich our selves.
There is Theft also in the Contract of setting and taking Houses or Lands, when
Landlords oppress their Tenants, make not good their Bargain, raise the Rents
without cause: In taking, when the Taker observes not his Covenants, delays
payment, or pays not at all, but runs in arrear, making no conscience of his
dealing, uses not the Lands and Houses as his own, so that the Owners suffer
damage. There is also a Theft in the hiring of Servants and Workmen, when
they pay them not their Wages at all, or not their full Wages, or not in due
time. The hired are guilty, when they are lazy, false, unfaithful. To these
may be added, as Thieves, all such as remove Landmarks, encroach upon others
Right, acquire Possession upon an unjust Title; all such as deny just Usages,
and Services, upon their Lands or Houses; all Litigious Persons, and so all
Officers of State, especially such as have to do with the Public Revenue, as
you heard before; all such as are employed in Judgment, and deal not fairly,
and justly, as negligent, covetous, or perfidious Lawyers, Attorneys,
Sollicitors, etc. All Officers for Execution; as Sheriffs, Bailiffs, etc. whose
Design is to enrich themselves; all such as trespass upon their Neighbors, and
are unwilling to make satisfaction; all such as refuse to restore Pledges, or
things deposited, or deny to make restitution, when they are bound thereunto.
If we should put in this Black Bill, all Alienation of Tithes, Impropriations,
Prescriptions Customs, Compositions, whereby they are impaired; all
Defraudations of Ministers, or denying them their Due, few would believe us.
Yet the sad Effects of these, is, the starving of the Ministers Bodies, and the
Peoples Souls, and the taking away the Churches Right, contrary to the pious
intentions of the Donours.

These are the several Distinctions of Theft,

1. This Sin begins in the Heart. 2. Goes on in Words. 3. Proceeds further in
Writing. 4. Is consummate in Actions and Deeds.
1. It Is conceived in the Heart: For, as out of it, Murders and Adulteries, s^
Thefts proceed, Math. 15. 19. For, after Suggestion, follow Consent,
Deliberations, and Resolutions; and all these within the Soul.

2. The Tongue is abused to lie, flatter, swear, equivocate, accuse falsely,
partly to deceive, part^y to make the Party, whose Estate is coveted, liable to
Forfeiture, or Confiscation. So Naboth's Vineyard and Estate became confiscate
to the King. Swearing and forswearing, sometimes tend to this end, to defraud
others of their goods.

3. In Writing; Evidences, Deeds, Obligations, Covenants, are antedated, or
post-dated, forged, falsified, concealed, embezelle^, burnt, made away, or
falsely, and insufficiently drawn, or unjustly interpreted, or advantage taken
from imperf^ct or inconvenient Expressions, contrary to the true intention of
the first Agreement. There is in this particular great abuse of Wills and
Inventories, to defraud others.

4. The Consummation is, when we put in execution our Thievish and unjust
Desires.

The Sins inclining, Theft, are,

1. Idleness, unnecessary Begging, neglect of some honest Calling: for such as
are guilty of these, are like Drones, which live upon other men's labors.

2. Imprudent, and improvident managing of that Estate which God has given us.

3. Prodigality, and unthri^tiness; especially when we spend that we have in
proud and sumptuous Apparel, Building, Furniture, vain Arts, Recreations,
Sports, Gaming. For if any man take such a course of life, as that his Expenses
shall exceed his Estate, he must either reform his ways, or if he continue his
expensive course, he must be a Beggar in time, or fall upon some inordinate
way, or unjust means of acquiring that which is not his own. Pride and Ambition
are costly, and will not be maintained with a little: and most men spend their
Estates, either in Vanity, or Iniquity. Both these are grievous sins, and the
latter the rearer.

4. Covetousness is a great cause of Theft, and Injustice, and it is very
unmerciful, will pity no man, do right to none, wrong to any, use the basest
and most sordid, yea, the most horrid means, to gain. It will not only
oppress, but murder the Fatherless and Widow or any other, to gain their
Estates.

5. Fear of want, weakness of Faith, whereby we should trust in God, and cast
our care upon him, is a temptation to this sin; as also discontentedness, with
that Estate God has given us, and too much love of our selves.

Lastly, if we do not seriously consider, and certainly believe* that we are
but Stewards of our goods, and must dispose of them, according to God's Will,
so as not only to be just, but also merciful, and both just and merciful in
th^^ degree, not that the Laws of men, but of God, require, we must needs be
Transgressors of this Law.

The affirmative part follows: Psalm. 15. 4.

The means to the Observation of Justice,

1. We must consider, that these Earthly Goods are given us to preserve our
lives in this time of our Pilgrimage, and a little will do it: and when we come
unto our abiding City, which God has prepared, we shall not have any need of
these things.

2. We are but Stewards of our goods, and are bound to give an account both how
we get them, and how we spend them, to our God.

3. They are given us to be used so, as to seek God's Kingdom, and lay up
Treasure in Heaven, where we must expect a glorious Inheritance, and an Eternal
Estate: in comparison of which, all the Treasurers of the World are but trash.

4. We were not redeemed with corruptible things, as Silver and Gold, which
cannot deliver us from Death, much less from sin, and the Eternal Punishments
of Hell.

5. Seeing we were redeemed by the precious blood of Christ, we must give our
selves, and goods, wholly to him, to be disposed of, according to his Will.
Without the consideration of these things, we cannot Evangelically, as
Christians, obey this Commandment. These are general means. The particulars
are,

1. Contentedness with our estate which God has given us, be it more or less.
The Apostle tells us (and we may believe him) That godliness, with contentment,
is great gain; and he gives a reason to persuade us: for we brought nothing
into this World, and it is certain, we can carry nothing out. And having Food
and Raiment, let us therewith be content, 1 Timothy 6. 6, 7, 8. And Experience
will tell us, that all the rest, though never so much, besides these, are
needless.

2. We must not be idle, but painful and laborious, and use some honest
Profession to maintain our selves, and relieve others.

3. We must be provident and wise, in using and ordering that which we have.

4. We must be frugal, and sparing in an honest way, not sordid; and we must
take heed of all expensive courses, in things that are vain and sinful, and
keep within our compass.

5. We must know, that the way to thrive, is to be honest, and merciful; and if
we first of all seek God's Kingdom, and His Righteousness, trusting in our God,
we may be sure we shall be provided for.

To persuade us to the observation of this Law, Creator, but Redeemer; the
Eternal Punishments threatened, and Rewards promised, our own Vows and Promises
to our God, and the power of Grace given us for obedience; There are many
particular Disswasives from Theft and Injustice, and Swasives to just Dealing,
Equity, and Mercy.

1. This is directly contrary to the peace and welfare of Humane Society, which
cannot be continued, if Theft, Rapine, Injustice, unmercifulness, oppression,
be suffered. For, how many Dissentions, Quarrels, Miseries, arise from this Sin?

2. The folly of Injustice, Oppression, and Covetousness, appears to be great,
if we consult the Scriptures: For they inform us, that whilst men seek to
gain, they lose; whilst they enrich themselves unjustly, they become poor. For
Goods and Estates acquired unjustly, waste away, the Curse of God consumes
them; their Lands, Houses, Treasures, fall into the hands of others.

They ^^ave them in the midst of their days, and find little or no comfort in
them. And the more uncertain they are in themselves, and corruptible, the more
uncertain the Possession and Enjoyment: the more frail and mortal the Owners
be, the greater the ^olly is. They do but load themselves with thick Clay, and
lay snares for their own lives, and bring upon themselves Destruction.

3. The Punishments threatened, and executed by God, and recorded in the
Scripture, are very fearful: For not only private Persons, but great and noble
Families, and whole Nations have suffered for this sin. And God has many ways
signified his detestation of Covetousness, and indignation against Oppression,
has promised to hear the Cries of the Oppressed, and to revenge their cause
and wrongs.

4. It Is contrary, and that directly, unto Christianity, insomuch, as that
Christ will punish with Eternal Fire, not only such as have been Thieves,
covetous Oppressors; but even such as refused to relieve His poor Saints and
Members, in their wants and distresses.

5. Justice and Mercy, in this kind, are great Preservatives of Peace and
Prosperity, in Humane Societies; and therefore God so often calls for the
observation of them.

6. A little Estate, justly gotten, wisely used, is always accompanied with
God's Blessing, and transmitted to Posterity, without any curse or guilt. In
this respect, a little which the Righteous has, is better then the Riches of
many Wicked, Psalm. 37. 16.

7. Works of Mercy, and Benevolence to them who are in want and misery, are
highly commended, and to them a rich Reward is promised. For what is given to
the Poor, God takes as lent unto himself, and He engages to re-pay with
Interest. And if these be showed to the Saints, in the Name of Christ, the
least of them, to a cup of cold Water, shall not lose the Reward, or be
forgotten, either in this life, or in the life to come, when Christ shall give
possession of an Everlasting Kingdom to merciful men.

8. Justice and Mercy, render men like unto God, and are Duties most agreeable
to Christians, who have believed in Christ, and must love their Brethren, with
a dying-giving love, seeing Christ dyed, and gave Himself for them, and they
have so deeply tasted of God's love in Him.

CHAP. XV.
The Ninth Commandment.
AFter that God had determined the right of persons,

1. Jus.

2. Judicium, as the parts, and members of the same, and means to observe
justice: So it is here. That which they call (Jus Civil) is nothing else but
the law, determining the right of persons, things, actions both public, and
private. And that which they call Judicium is nothing else but certain rules
regulating judgment, which determines whether the law has been obeyed, or
disobeyed, and the right determined by law observed, or violated, and proceeds
accordingly. So that as the former four Commandments determine the right of
persons, and things to be observed by man, so this prescribes a rule for the
better ordering of Judgment. The end therefore of this law is to regulate
Judgment, and to prevent unjust, and stablish just Judgment amongst men. This
therefore is the original of all humane jurisdiction, and civil Courts. For
the better understanding thereof you must observe, that all civil power is
threefold legislative, judicial, executive: and all governments once
constituted begin to act, in making laws; goes on in judgment, according to
these laws; and end in execution, according to this judgment. For execution is
the last act, and consummation of civil power. The former Commandments give
certain rules for the enacting of humane laws; this, of ordering humane
judgment. That some understand this Commandment so, as though all sins of the
tongue were here forbidden, is not true: Because Perjury, and Blasphemy are
forbidden in the first Table, reviling words against our betters in the 5th;
Racha, and thou Fool, in the 6th; Bawdry in the 7th; lying for gain in the
8th, Commandment, Others think that the end of this is to provide for our
Neighbors fame, and good name: Yet this does not reach the true scope of this
law, which is, as you heard before, to establish just judgment.

These things observed,

1. A party litigant, whose cause is brought before a judge. 2. Witness to
give-in evidence in the cause. 3. The testimony, 4. The quality of it.
1. The party litigant is our Neighbor, whether friend, Kinsman, stranger,
enemy, considered as litigant: and in this place it may signify either the
Plaintiff or Defendant. For all causes are brought into Courts of judgment by
information, and complaint. And here I need not distinguish of causes which are
according to some, civil, criminal, capital; nor of Courts whereof some are
supreme receiving last appeals, and are not bound to formalities; or
subordinate and inferior Courts which have a limited jurisdiction, and are
bound to a certain form of proceeding.

2. The witness is one that is or should be indifferent to the cause, and in
no wise inclined to the parties; and has, or is supposed to have some certain
knowledge in the matter complained of, and controverted, and so is able to give
some evidence to the judge, who is bound not only to know the law, but the
thing controverted before he give judgment. For no man can justly judge of that
which he knows not.

3. The testimony is an act of a Witness, as a Witness, whereby he declares,
or pretends to declare, especially to the Judge, his knowledge in the cause
controverted: The end of it is, to give evidence, that so the merit, or demerit
of the cause may be known. And because this testimony is given upon
examination, and interrogation, therefore in the original, Not to bear false
Witness, is, Not to answer false Witness. The Testimony in this respect puts
on the nature of an Answer, which is given especially in doubtful causes upon
Oath: and the Oath is taken to make the testimony credible, because it is
supposed no man will hazard his soul and interest in God. And because it is the
highest degree of confirmation, in such causes; it is therefore said to be an
end of all strife, Heb. 6. 16.

4. The quality of the Testimony is the last thing in the Commandment, and it
may be either true or false, and so either promote or hinder justice, do right
or wrong unto our Neighbor litigant. Truth and Falsehood are not only
essential, but accidental qualityes to a testimony: and because men are not
infallible, therefore their testimony may be false, as well as true. And the
quality forbidden is falsehood, the quality commended is truth: for God says,
Thou shall not bear false Witness. In this Commandment, as in several
others, there is a Synechdoche. For hereby witness giving evidence, we must
understand all parties that any ways actively concur to judgment; Whether
they be the parties litigant, Plaintiff or Defendant, as the Judge, or the
parties assistant, as Sollicitours, Atturnyes, Advocates, Notaries, and Clarks,
or such as are trusted with the execution, either of Writs or Judgment. The
reason why Witness is only named, is because judgment does so much, yea
necessarily depend upon Evidence; and one kind, and the same most usual, is by
Witnesses: Yet by testimony must be meant all other kind of evidence, and in
this Word is also a Synechdoche; for by it we must understand all judicial
acts, as Complaints, Apologies, convention, plea, sentence, execution. The
meaning therefore of the Commandment must be this; Thou shall not any ways
concur to unjust judgment, neither shall thou hinder, but thou must do thy
best to promote justice in all causes, and trials. So that injustice, in
judicial proceedings, whether from Lawgivers, or Judges, or Witnesses, or
Advocate, or any person acting in judgment is prohibited, and justice
Distributive is commanded. For the Judges of the Earth should be like unto God,
whose Deputyes they are, and render to every one according to their Works. This
justice is necessary to the preservation of humane society, and all civil
states: which may subsist without this or that form of government, so that they
have a government; but cannot continue long without the administration of
justice, which is in all Polities like the Sun in Heaven, and the World cannot
be withit. And as Laws are in vain without judgment and execution; so
judgment is not only vain, but a mischief, if it be not just. Though the
Commandment has special reference to civil judgment in a Commonwealth
constituted; yet it may extend to all private families, and societies,
Schools, and Colleges of Discipline, and Corporations, yea and to all
Ecclesiastical Courts. And by ^alse Witness analogically may be understood
all private, rash, and uncharitable censures, whisperings, false reports, and
too much Readiness to Believe them.

This sin of false Witness, hinder just proceedings, and promote injustice
must needs be unlawful. And in this sin we must neither be principal, nor
accessory. If in this particular our Neighbor suffer, either by our silence,
or neglect, or imprudency, we cannot be excused. By all which we learn that
here we are commanded to desire and love justice in our hearts, and endeavor
by words writings and actions to promote the same. And herein we must not be
cold, and careless spectators with Gallio not caring for such things, when we
see injustice done; but we must be zealous and diligent to prevent it, if we
have power.

The sins here forbidden,

1. Plaintiff and Defendant, which are the parties litigant; in the civil law
called Actor, et Reus. 2. Sollicitours. 3. Atturneys. 4. Advocates, and
Lawyers, who give Counsel or plead. 5. Clarks, and Notaries. 6. Judges. 7. Such
as are trusted with the execution as Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Constables, who are
employed in serving Writs, Summoning, Arresting, Attaching, Imprisoning, and
Executing of the sentence. 8. Witnesses. 9. With us, Jurors. They may be
reduced to three sorts. 1. The parties. 2. The Judge. 3. The assistants.

But before this Commandment can be obeyed, the foundation must be well laid
in the enacting of just laws. Therefore the Lawgivers, and Supreme governors
have two things to do;

1. To enact good, wise, just laws, and such as tend to the public weal,
peace, and prosperity of the subjects.

2. To appoint good Judges, and Officers: and if this be not done, and so sin
prevented, no justice can be expected. And it is a sad thing when these fail,
and neglect their duty, rebel against God, neglect the public good; and they
which should reform others, have need to be reformed themselves, and there is
none can reform them. This foundation of just Laws, and good Officers, and
Judges being laid, and a right course taken for a true and faithful
information of public crimes, and private offenses, just Judgment will very
much depend upon the Judges, whose duty is after they are commissioned as
inferior, or as supreme, to be well skilled in the laws, make diligent search
into the cause, pass sentence impartially, according to the merit or demerit
thereof, and see the same faithfully, and fully executed. But if they be
insufficient, negligent in the discussion of the cause, corrupt, covetous,
partial, devoyd of the fear of God, love gifts, favor friends, hate enemies,
fear great ones, or despise the poor Fatherless and Widows, their sin against
this Commandment will be very great.

Before I proceed to other particulars, without scandalous persons; the duty of
Informers, and Plaintiffs comes in first to be observed. And as public
informers should accuse no man falsely, either for gains, or out of spite, and
for revenge; so their duty is to give-in true information, and be able to make
it good: and they ought to spare no offenders, whom they certainly know to be
such. What is to be done in the Church in this particular, our Savior has
informed us fully, Math. 18. As for Plaintiffs, and Prosecutors in Criminal
causes against the public, we should aim principally, at reformation; and in
capital at the public good, that others may hear and fear. But in private
wrongs whether they concern our credit, or persons, or goods, it is our duty
first to seek satisfaction in private, between our selves, or upon a reference
to others. But if in this way we cannot prevayl, and there is a necessity (for
in that case suits in law are lawful, though sometimes it will be better to
sit down and suffer wrong, pray, and refer our cause to God) then we must not
be so unconscionable as to charge our adversary with any thing, whereof he is
not guilty, nor so imprudent as to undertake the charge against him, and not be
able to make it good. If after the suit is commenced, and before it receive a
final determination, the adversary be willing of transaction, and there be any
hope of good, and it be not likely to prove prejudicial, the Plaintiff ought
to accept it, and all the time of the controversy, and the duration of the
trial, he ought to be in Charity. As for the Defendant, if he be wrongfully
charged, he may justly defend himself, so that he do it not unjustly, nor use
any unlawful means to free himself. In this particular we find many guilty,
litigious, delighting in suits, and loving to vex their Neighbors; and many
Defendants, who have done wrong, and are questioned, yet will deny it, and that
upon Oath, and will use the most cursed means to put the Plaintiff to the
greater charge, to suborne or corrupt Witnesses, and delay the final decision:
which also is the sin of both parties sometimes. And few men continue
charitable whilst they contend in law. The many sins of the parties litigant
are so well known, that I need not give any further account of them.

As for Sollicitours and Atturneys; grift unto the Lawyers mill, delay
Judgment, protract Suits, give advantage to their Client's adversary, either
ignorantly, or negligently, or perfidiously: They make large accounts, exact
immoderate fees, and pick poor men's purses, and so prove not only Thieves
against the former Commandment, but enemies to just Judgment, against this.

The duty of Witnesses is to remember, or favor, or hatred, or any other
inordinate passion and affection; these directly transgress against the
express Words of the Commandment. And further let every one know that as he
is forbidden here to be a false Witness, so he is commanded to testify the
truth certainly known unto him in any cause, when he is called thereunto, and
the case of his Neighbor shall require it. Nay in some cases we must willingly
offer our selves, when we understand that by our true and faithful testimony
we may prevent in justice, either in clearing and righting the innocent, or
punishing the guilty.

The duty of Counselors in Law,

In our judicial proceedings, Sacramentales. These are either Delatory, or
Judicial. Delatory are for information, and their business is to enquire
after Delinquents, and to certify their names, and their offenses. And they
are either superior or inferior. Superiors for a whole County, at Assizes,
or Sessions of the peace: and this Jury is called the Grand-Inquest. Inferior
are such as present, and indite in inferior Courts. Judicial are such as for
the substance of the cause determine it for matter of fact, before the Judges
give the sentence for Law. Their judgment is called a Veredict. And these,
according to the causes, are such as give their Veredict in civil, or Criminal,
and capital causes. In civil causes belonging to the Common pleas, the Judge
between subject and subject, in criminal, betwixt King and subject. And
because some criminal causes are capi^al, therefore such as are empa^eld, and
sworn for these, are called the Jury for life and death. All this makes it
evident, that amongst us judgment depends much upon these Jurours. Their duty
in this respect is, that according to law they be Boni et legales homines, and
no ways chargeable with such crimes, as they accuse or judge: which words
according to the first institution did reach further then we ordinarily
conceive. It was the wisdom of our Ancestors to appoint these Juryes, that
every one might be judged, per Pares, by his Peers, and such as were likely to
know men best, and their quality, causes, and offenses. The intention was the
preservation ofliberty, to prevent the impunity of offenders, and to do every
one righ^. These must be men of understanding, and integrity, and must
endeavor to be fully informed, make just, and impartial presentiments, and
give just, and impartial Verdicts. Yet many of these are either unskilful, or
unconscionable, pact up of such persons, as are for the person not the cause,
wranglers, rash, careless, or soul corrupt, and so are a great cause, why
innocent persons are condemned, or (...) in their cause; and the guilty, and
sometimes such as are polluted with blood are acquitted.

In judgment also we have Notaries, Eccles. 3. 16. And in many States we may
observe such corruption in all Courts of judgment, that the foundations of
Laws, and justice are overthrown, and the righteous have no place of sanctuary
on earth, but must appeal to God, who is in his holy Temple, whose Throne is
in Heaven, Psalm. 11. 3. 4. There be many Cases of Conscience reducible to this
Commandment, wherein such as desire to be satisfied, must either consult with
the Casuists, or with such as are well studied in that kind of learning.

There be many and weighty reasons given in Scripture, Prohibitions, Reproofs,
Threatenings against this kind of injustice. And we have many examples of Gods
judgments, severely executed upon Delinquents in this kind. Paul condemns it
as a sin in Christians to go to Law one with another, especially before Heathen
Judges, and signifies that they should rather suffer themselves to be
defrauded, 1 Cor. 6. 7. By which words he implies that Christians should give
no cause, and that if cause be given, we should rather suffer them sin, and
contend in Law; because it gives offense, and opens the mouths of profane
persons against our profession of piety, and purity in practice. And because a
false Witness perverts judgment, leads the Judge aside, and wrongs our
Neighbor, and disappoints him of that right he expected, God commanded that a
false witness should be punished with that punishment, the party litigant if
condemned should have suffered. The Judges must make diligent inquisition, and
behold if the Witness be a false witness, and has testified falsely against
his Brother, then they must do unto him, as he had thought to have done unto
his Brother, so they should put evil from amongst them. And those which
remain should hear, and fear, and from henceforth commit no more any such
evil amongst them. And their eye shall not pity, but life must go for life,
eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, and foot for foot, Deuteronomy. 19. 18,
19, 20, 21, For a false-witnesse forsweares himself, and so dishonours God,
wrongs his innocent Neighbor, blinds the Judge, and so perverts judgment: and
there is a complication of sins in this one, of false witness. All persons
that concur any ways, especially willingly, make themselves guilty, either of
dishonor of superiors, or Murder, or Adultery, or Theft as the cause unjustly
determined shall be. To justify the Wicked, and condemn the innocent are most
heyno^s crimes, and most fearful woes are denounced against such persons, as
shall either out of covetousness, or fear, or favor, or hatred, judge
unjustly. If either false witness, or perverting of law, or unjust judgment,
may be suffered, no man can be safe or secure of his credit; his life, his
Wife, or estate. When the administration of justice is neglected, much more,
when Tribunals, and Courts of judgment which should be sacred, are corrupted
with partiality, bribery, or any other way, there must needs follow a liberty
to sin, impunity in wickedness, the ruin or oppression of the weak, the
poor, the just, and innocent; and a great confusion thereupon: This kind of
injustice is contrary to Gods institution of all government, and the commission
whereby he has derived jurisdiction unto men, and trusted the sword of justice
in their hand: For it was given unto man to protect the innocent, and take
vengance on evil doers. The effects of it are sad, and the event, through Gods
just judgment, is the ruin of many, and great familyes, the alienation and
consumption of many goodly estates, the desolation of whole Nations and
Kingdoms. By receiving false accusations, and passing unjust sentence, Jesus
Christ the Son of God was put to death, Steven stoned, James slain with the
sword, and many thousand Saints cut off, and others of Gods just ones cruelly
persecuted. This is reckoned amongst others, as a crying sin, which brought
famine, pestilence, sword, Captivity upon the Jews, and the desolation of their
goodly City, Temple, and Kingdom. How heavy was the hand of God upon the Jews,
who so earnestly pressed Pilate to condemn Christ unjustly? Neither did Pilate
who hearkened unto them, escape the hand of God, for he murdered himself. Rash,
and unjust censures, and judgment extrajudiciall, shall not go unpunished. All
these things briefly mentioned may be sufficient to cause any man to hate this
sin, and detest to be a false witness, or an unjust Judge, or any ways concur
to pervert judgment.

If the fear of Gods judgments, Snow; though they be red as Crimson, they shall
be as Wool. If ye be willing and obedient, ye shall eat the good of the land:
But if ye refuse and rebel, the sword shall devour you: For the mouth of the
Lord has spoken it, Esa. 1. 17, 18, 19, 20* Where we may observe that this
justice in judgment, prevents or averts judgments, and renders men capable of
mercy, peace, and plenty. It Is a protection to innocence and piety, the scourge
of sin, the purity, and honor of a Nation, the love and joy of all good
people, a means to preserve peace and safety; the terror of wicked men, the
support and pillar of Thrones and Kingdoms.

CHAP. XVI.
The Tenth Commandment.
THis is the last, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thine heart with
all thy soul, and with all thy mind: This is the first and great Commandment:
And the Second is like to this, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self. To
love our Neighbor, as our selves is the last Commandment, as shall appear
anon. These two are the Epitome of the whole Law, and virtually contain all the
Precepts of it: The first, All of the first Table; the last, All of the Second
Table. Therefore, they are general Commandments: the one, of the first part of
the Law: this other, of the Second. For after that God had in the four first
Precepts of the Second Table determined, the right of persons, and things out
of judgment; and, in the Ninth, given a Rule of judgment: In this last, He
prescribes a general Duty, which is the measure and Rule of the rest; both out
of Judgment, and also in Judgment.

This Commandment is Negative; wherein we must consider,

1. The Act, 2. The Object,
That so we may understand what the Sin prohibited is. The Act is, to covet;
the Object, something that is our Neighbors. To covet, is to desire. It
presupposes some knowledge, at least of apprehension of the thing desired as
good, and, in some respect, good to us. It Is an Act of the Will, and
presupposes the good desired, as absent, and not possessed or enjoyed: and
there are degrees of this Act, according as we conceive the good desired, less
or greater. That which is best (if we be rightly informed) is to be desired
most, and other things in a certain order and measure, as they are nearer unto,
or further distant from the greatest good. We may mistake, and conceive many
things to be better then they are, and so deceive our selves, and desire that
which is not good at all, or that which is least good, as though it were the
greatest. So most men are deluded, when they covet Earthly Things, more then
Heavenly; and imagine, that in them there is a virtue and power to make them
happy: and so we prefer the World and love it more then God. This is a sin
against the first Commandment, and it is Idolatry. Thus ambitious, covetous,
voluptuous men do. We covet things, as good to us, that we may have them, and
enjoy them: and this coveting, may be upon a simple apprehension, and before a
deliberate consent, or it may follow it, and then the Soul begins to move, and
use means to compass it.

Yet Coveting in it self, Coveting is here forbidden, when it is said, Thou
shall not covet; and what the things are, which we cannot lawfully desire to be
our own: and that is easily understood by the Object, the second thing here
determined by God.

The things not to be coveted, are here expressed.

1. By a particular Enumeration. 2. By a general and comprehensive Term.
In this particular Enumeration, we have, House, Wife, Manservant,
Maidservant, Ox, Ass, Field, Deuteronomy. 5. 21. Some reduce this to Utile, and
Jucundum, things pleasant, or unprofitable.

The general and comprehensive Word is, ANY THING, Thou shall not covet any
thing. This was added, to include all things, and to leave nothing excluded.
Yet these things may be considered materially, and so Wife, House, Field,
Cattle, may be desired; or formally, as our Neighbors: and so we must not
covet them. We must not covet his House his Wife, his Field, etc. nor any thing
that is his; that is, our Neighbors. That which is not ours, but his, both by
the Laws of God, and Men, must not be the Object of our Desires. We may like
them, but not covet them, as his: For, if we do, it is an evident sign, that we
love our Selves too much, our Neighbor too little: Nay, we love his, and not
him, or his, more than him. And this is a want of that love God requires: He
requires a love of his Person, as of our Selves, it forbids a love of his. So
this Commandment was given to regulate the very motions of the Heart, with the
Affections and Inclinations of it, in respect of our Neighbor.

This is the plain and genuine sense of the words,

1. That the Law of God, prescribing the Duty of Man to Man, does reach the
Heart, binds the Conscience, and requires a conformity and obedience in the
Inner-man.

2. That God, in Judgment, will take Cognizance, not only of men's words and
actions, but of the motions, inclinations, and dispositions of the Soul:

3. That both God's Laws, and also his Judgments, are far above the Laws and
Judgments of men.

4. That this Commandment is the Rule and Measure; of the five former
Commandments, according to which, we must understand them.

5. It reaches them all, and is the principal, and they the conclusions, which
derive their Morality from it; so that in obeying it, or disobeying it, we
obey, or disobey the rest. Therefore, says the Apostle, It Is the fulfilling of
the Law, Romans 13. 10. And all the Law (that is, which requires the Duty of Man
unto Man) is fulfilled in one word, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self,
Gal. 5. 14.

6. That whatsoever Duty we perform to Man, is not agreeable to the Will of
God, if it be not done out of love to our Neighbor; as our love to our
Neighbor is not regular, if it issue not from, and be subordinate to, the love
of God.

7. That this, with the first, of the First Table, do more clearly discover
Original Corruption, and the Root of all Sin in us, than any of the rest.

8. That if we could perfectly obey these two (as we never shall in this life)
we might perfectly obey all the other, and might pluck up by the very Roots all
other sins.

9. That by this, we easily understand* what necessity we have of Christ, and
his sanctifying Spirit; without both which, we can neither hope for remission
of sin past, or power to avoid sin and transgressions of this Law for time to
come. For if our hearts be not renewed, they will be ever coveting; and
coveting will be a continual Spring of dishonor of Superiors, Murder,
Adultery, Theft, False-Witness, as our Savior teaches us. For out of the
Heart proceed evil Thoughts, Murders, Adulteries, Fornications, Thefts,
False-Witness, Blasphemies, Math. 15. 19. Wars and Fightings are from our
Lusts, Jam. 4. 1. Achan covets, and commits Sacrilege. Ahab covets, and
commits Murder. Therefore we must not covet.

In these words is forbidden all discontentedness with that Estate God has
given us, Commandment, is, the love of our Neighbors, as our selves; So to
do, as we would be done unto. For the more full understanding of this, we must
observe and consider some things concerning

1. Love in general. 2. Our Neighbor, as the Object of this Love here
required. 3. The measure and quality of it. 4. The end whereat it aims.
1. Love, is of persons, or of things: This is a love of persons. And it
presupposes a Knowledge antecedent, to direct it. The act of it is, to wish
well, desire, intend the good of the person beloved; and therefore is called,
Amor Benevolentiae, the love of good will. There is, indeed, a love of others,
for our own ends, advantage, interest; but this is either Lust, and not Love;
or love of our selves, not of our Neighbors. As this Love wishes, and
desires the good of another, so the good is either Temporal, or Spiritual, and
Eternal. For the good desired by this Love here commanded, is any kind of good,
whereof he is capable, which may conduce unto his happiness. Therefore, the
principal thing desired, is Eternal Life, as it is an Estate of perfect
Holiness and Happiness. And it is such a love, and so vigorous, as it will stir
us up effectually, to use all means to procure this good.

2. As the Object of the highest degree of our love is God, Commandment, is
our Neighbor. This our Neighbor, is,

1. All Mankind, so far as capable of our love.

2. Some part of Mankind: and so our Neighbor is either public, or private.
Public, is either Civil, or Ecclesiastical: the State, or Church, whereof we
are members; and, in both, first the Superiors, and public, and most eminent
persons. Our private Neighbors, are not only Father, and Mother, Wife,
Children, Friends, Servants, Benefactors, but also strangers; yea, and Enemies,
as God in his Divine Providence shall make them immediate Subjects, in
particular, of our love.

3. The quality and measure of our love, [As thy self] It Is not said, as God;
for that is too high: Nor before, or more than, our selves; for that is too much.
So that in these words we have both the quality, and the quantity, or measure
of this love determined. For the quality, it must be real, hearty, and sincere:
for so we love our selves. It must be real; for in some Cases we must hazard,
yea, lay down our lives, and give our goods, for to save, relieve, and help our
Brethren, in their miseries, wants, extremities. We must lay down the lives of
our Bodies, for the Salvation of their Souls; and, with the Widow, cast in all
that we have into the Treasury. This love must be without dissimulation, Romans
12. 9. And we must not love in word, neither in tongue, but in deed, and in
truth, 1 John 3. 18. Yet this love of our selves, cannot be a Rule of the love
of our Neighbors, except it be regular. For it may be fond, foolish, vain,
irregular, and inordinate. Therefore, it must be regulated by the Word of God,
issue from Faith in Christ, and our love of God in Christ, and we must love in
obedience to his Commandment, and aim at His Glory, and seek the true,
especially the spiritual, and eternal good of our brethren. And if we thus
love our selves, then we may make this love of our selves the measure of our
love to others. The measure and quantity of this love is also here implied in
the foresaid words. For we must love God more then any thing, more then any
person, more then our selves: and the more we love God, the more we love our
selves in God. Therefore, because we must love our selves less then God, we
must love our Neighbors less then him: otherwise our love will prove
inordinate. In loving others we may love our selves first, and in that respect
more then our neighbors. And in this love of our neighbors, there be degrees
to be observed: For we must love our Country, under what form of Government so
ever it be, before any particular person; the Whole more then the Part; the
public more then the private: and because we our selves are but private
Persons, and a part, therefore we must love the whole State in some cases more
then our selves. And in the State, we must love and seek the good of such
persons, upon whom the safety, and peace public much depends more then
others. We must also love the Church more then the State, and our brethren in
Christ more then any particular persons in the world.

In the fourth place,

Though I have delivered many things concerning this Law,

1. Obedience to this Law, pre-requires the knowledge of the excellency and
power of the Lawgiver, the matter of the Law it ^elf, the binding force of it,
and the measure of this Obligation.

2. These things, first known, we must consider the Wisdom of the Lawgiver,
who, knowing the Nature of Man, and his very inward frame, and so much the more
perfectly, because He made us, He chiefly, in this, looked at the Immortal
Soul; and, in the Soul, at the Heart and Will, which is the Queen, and has an
Imperial Power over the whole Man, and is resident in the Throne of the Soul,
and in the Heart, at Love, which is the principal Act of the Heart, and is
called Pondus Animae, the Poise of the Soul, inclining and carrying it whither
it pleases.

3. This love He directs by this Law upon the right Objects, and gives it a
right measure, in respect of every Object, whether God, or our selves, or our
Neighbor.

4. When we consider the right Objects, and the right measure of love, required
in this Law, and how far we observe both, we shall find our obedience, either
to be disobedience, or to be far short of what is required.

5. By this we easily understand, that by the obedience to this Law, no man
living can be justified, and that after the Fall of Man, it was never given, or
renewed for that end: for if it had, it must needs have proved ineffectual, and
such as could never reach that end.

6. Yet it was an excellent means to discover unto man his sin, let him see his
misery, and the necessity of a Savior. And when we make use of it to that end,
we must not only examine whether we be Worshippers of Images, perjured
persons, Prophaners of the Sabbath, disobedient to Superiors, Murderers,
Adulterers, Fornicators, Thieves, False-Witnesses, but how our very Hearts
stand affected, and in what measure we love God, and our Neighbors: Whether
our love be rightly qualifyed, fully extended, and intended. And by this, we
shall easily find the best imperfect; the most, abominably corrupted, and few
sincere, and all of us, by Nature, before we be in Christ, to be base and
cursed Caitiffs. And till by the first and last Commandments, we see the
inward depravation, and the deep stain of our Souls, we cannot thoroughly be
humbled, no^ sincerely penitent, nor truly reformed, nor vehemently, and
effectually desirous of Christ for pardon of sin past, and grace of
Sanctification for time to come.

7. It Is an excellent Rule of Obedience; yet except we have a special care in
the first place, to observe the first and last Commandments, all our
performances are greatly defective, and no ways acceptable.

8. Though Faith, as fixed in Christ, dying for our sins, and rising again for
our Justification, and Repentance, as a return to God Redeemer, be not
commanded in this Law, as given to Adam innocent; yet, both Faith, and
Repentance, in their general Nature, abstracted from their proper and formal
notions in the Gospel are required in this Law. For Faith as an assent to God's
infallible truth revealed, or, as a reliance on God for his Blessings and
Happiness, is commanded in the first Precept.

Repentance, as it is an hatred of sin and an obedience to God in general, is
required in all the Commandments. But Faith, as presupposing the Party
believing, a sinner and guilty; and as fixed upon Christ saving from sin; and
Repentance, as a return to obedience, after disobedience, and an hatred of that
sin which is in us; they cannot any ways belong to this Law, as given at first,
or so understood.

8. When we fell in Adam, we lost our power to believe, and return to God
again: otherwise, what need is there to be born again of the Spirit? And why
are Faith, Hope, and Charity, Gifts of the Spirit, merited by Christ, and given
freely of God. Actual Faith in God-Redeemer, by the Word, made Flesh, they
never had, and therefore could never lose it.

9. This Faith considered in general, is a Moral Duty, required in the Moral
Law; otherwise it could have no aptitude to be a condition of Justifycation,
and Eternal Life.

10. Yet we by this Faith could not obtain either Justifycation, or Eternal
Life, except Christ had merited, and God had promised, and ordained, and that
freely, that upon Faith both should follow; and Faith, as a Moral Duty, or a
part of inherent Righteousness is not that whereby we are justified, but as
fixed on Christ, and uniting us unto him.

11. This Faith, as a practical assent to the Truths of the Gospel, which
reveal the love of God in Christ, suffering for our sins, is a most excellent
principle of obedience, and love in the highest degree: as it is a confidence in
God, saving us only for Christ's sake, it tends most effectually to God's
Glory, and empties man wholly of all power and merit in himself, as a base and
miserable Wretch.

CHAP. XVII.
Of Positive and Ceremonial Laws, ordained by God.
HItherto of the moral Laws of God,

The general nature of these, is

1. That they are Laws of God, have a binding force, and that upon the
conscience. The special nature, and difference of them, whereby they are
distinguished from moral Laws, is,

1. In the matter, which in it self is neither good nor evil, morally.

2. They differ in this also, that they are religions rites, which are
compounded of outward and inward, visible and invisible, corporeal or
sensible, and spiritual, sacred, hidden parts. In respect of the invisible,
and spiritual part, and as instituted by God; They are called Sacred, and
Religious Rites: and if Ceremonia come of the Hetruscan word, Cerus, Sanctus,
then in the same respect they are called Ceremonial too. They are called
Positive, that is, Arbitrary, because they principally depend upon the
arbitrary institution, and position of the Lawgiver. The outward part may be
performed without any respect to the inward, and so ignorant and wicked men may
observe them. Yet the performance of them is never acceptable without the moral
qualification, of the party performing them in obedience to the institution,
and also joining the practice of Moral duties with them. This is evident out
of many places of Scripture, where men are reproved,

1. For performing them with impure hearts, and polluted hands.

2. For neglecting the weighty and substantial, that is, the moral duties of
the Law. And to be zealous in Ceremonials, and careless in moralls, was always
either hypocrisy, or impiety, or both. These positive Laws, which always
received their binding force from the institution commanding, not from the
excellency or goodness of the thing commanded, are a rule of obedience, as
well as the moral: and the neglect of them is a contempt of the Lawgiver.
There is an Analogy, and proportion between the outward, sensible, and the
sacred part; and in that respect they might by the outward senses help the
memory, inform the understanding, stir up devotion, and affection, set forth
Gods worship with greater Solemnity, and are an outward testification of inward
submission, says, obedience unto God, and the approbation of Religion which
was professed. And for these ends, and such like they seem to be added to
Morals: and so much the rather because man has a body, as well as a Soul, and
is not all Spirit but in part flesh, and must serve God in both.

These kind of Laws are either such as were enacted before the Fall of man,
Eden. Yet because these were not Laws of God as Redeemer by Christ, they ^o not
belong to this government whereof I now en^reat. The positives which followed
^^e fall of man, and the first promise of Christ, were either such as God
instituted before, or which he instituted after that Christ was exhibited.
Those before the Incarnation were either extraordinary, or ordinary; and the
principal were either Sacrifices or Sacraments so called, as now we understand
them. Again, those which constantly continued from the times of Adam, till the
glorification of Christ, were sacrifices, and offerings. For Adam taught his
Children Cain, and Abel to offer gifts, and sacrifices, and no doubt by
Warrant, and Commission from God: otherwise the offering of Abel had not bin
accepted of God, nor offered in faith. Yet afterward to these were added the
Circumcision; the Passover, and many other Ceremonies mentioned in the books of
Moses. The waters of the flood bearing up the Ark, and saving Noah, and his
family is made a kind of Baptism, or baptismall Rite. Whether the Rainbow
signifying a temporal blessing, could be a Religious Rite may be doubted, and
so much the rather because the benefit promised was general to all men, and
living Creatures. Yet, if the not destroying by the flood, did ^ignifie a
spiritual blessing, then it had the full nature and essence of a Religious
Rite. The passing through the Red Sea, and under the Cloud, the Manna, the
water out of the Rock, all these were extraordinary, and rather Sacraments then
any otherwise. That they were Sacraments both Paul, 1 Cor. 10. 1, 2, 3. and
Peter, 1 Pet. 3, 20. 21. do teach us. The ordinary Sacraments before the times
of the Gospel, were Circumcision and the Passover. The rest of the Mosaicall
Ceremonies, except some few were Religious and Mystical; whether things,
persons, actions, times. The Priests did serve unto the example, and shadow of
heavenly things, Heb. 8. 4. The Tabernacle was a figure for the time then
present, Chap. 9. 9. The services and purification, shadows of things in
Heaven, Chap. 10. 1. The person, and especially the high Priests were types of
Christ: Their great sacrifice of expiation, and other sin offerings, of the
Sacrifice of Christ. The tabernacle typified either heaven, or the humanity of
Christ, wherein the Godhead dwelt bodily. So that persons, things, and actions,
signified better persons, things, and actions. All their Consecrations,
Expiations, Dedications, Purifications, and Seperations, had some reference to
spiritual duties, or promises, or judgments; And this was the sin, the usual
sin of that people, that they neglected moral duties, were zealous in
Ceremonials, expected justification, and salvation by them, made the redemption
of Christ vain, and needless? forgate the promise made to Abraham, and so
looked not after the better Covenant established upon better promises. Yet all
these Ceremonies were Laws binding to obedience: and it was their misery to
want either tabernacle, temple, solemn services, or holy times; and their sin,
if, when they enjoyed these, they did not observe them. They were laws of God
Redeemer, had special reference to Christ to come, and the times of the
Gospel, and were enacted for several ends, as has bin showed in the Chapter
of the administration of the Kingdom of God Redeemer, and the Jews were bound
by the Mosaicall Ceremonials in a Special manner. But when Christ had finished
the great work of Redemption, and the more glorious light of the Gospel did
begin to shine, these shadows must vanish and fly away. The standing Sacraments
of former times must be changed, not only because they did signify some
temporal mercy past, and had some temporal promise annexed, but also chiefly
because they were Sacraments of Christ to come; or did imply o^ presuppose,
that he was not exhibited.

Because these are abolished,

1. Sacraments, are Ceremonies, and holy Rites to be used in Gods worship, and
are parts of that worship: and thus they differ from Ceremonialls in general.

2. These Sacraments presuppose the Redeemer, the work of Redemption, the Laws
of God Redeemer; as they require obedience, and duty, and as they promise
mercies, and benefits merited by the Redemption. Others do express it thus,
That Sacraments presuppose the Redemption, and the Covenant.

3. The Spiritual and heavenly part of the Sacraments of the old, and new
testament were always for substance, and the principal thing in them, the same.

4. That the Sacraments of former and these latter times agree in many things,
and differ, and that much, in some things.

5. That Christ contracted all the principal Ceremonials of the old into a
few, these few are Sacraments; for number two; for signification clear; for
observation easy: and for man, if observed aright, very beneficial.

These things understood,

1. Christ. 2. The Covenant of grace in Christ. 3. The confirmation of it by a
Sacrament, or sacred Rite.
1. Christ is the foundation of all Sacraments, in that he finished the work of
Redemption, and thereby established the promises of the Covenant for ever. For
if he had not suffered, all promises in him had not bin Yea, and Amen, but had
bin all void. By his Sacrifice he satisfied Gods justice, and merited both the
promises, and all the mercies promised, upon condition of faith, and power to
perform the conditions as you heard before; when I spoke of the immediate
effects of his death.

2. Yet these benefits, and mercies are not conveyed without a Covenant, which
promises them unto sinful man; yet so, as the promises require some
conditions and duties to be performed by man; yet by the power of the spirit
enabling us. And because the Laws of God are so made, as that they contain not
only promises, whereby God binds himself voluntarily to man, but also duties
to be performed freely by man, they are called a Covenant: Yet because there
was a Covenant of works requiring perfect, and perpetual obedience, as the
condition and duty upon which alone performed, life would follow; and a
Covenant made with Israel, when they came out of Egypt; and this Covenant
requires neither that perfect obedience, as a condition of life, nor the
Ceremonies of the Law; but faith in Christ: and promises not only life, but
power to believe in Christ meriting remission, and life, therefore it is called
the Covenant of grace, and free mercy in Christ; for whose sake he is willing
to save man, whom he might have condemned.

3. This Covenant is confirmed by a Sacrament; This confirmation of this
Covenant is the specificall difference. For in this very act of confirmation, a
Sacrament differs from all other Ceremonies; which might signify Christ, or
his work of Redemption, or the Sanctification of the spirit, or some duties of
man; yet not confirm the Covenant either in respect of Gods promises, or man's
duty.

This Covenant may be said to be confirmed three ways;

1. By the death, and blood of Christ. 2. By the Spirit. 3. By a Sacrament.
1. It was confirmed as a Covenant by the death of Christ, so as a Will is
confirmed by the death of a Testatour, Heb. 9. 15, 16, 17. The issue of this
confirmation is, that upon the death of Christ, both the promises, and duties,
and the whole Substance of the Covenant were made unalterable; so that now we
can expect no other promises, nor any other conditions, though the former
Covenant of works, both with the promises and conditions, was altered.

2. It Is confirmed by the Holy Ghost, being given unto true believers; to
assure them, that as they have received the title to glory, and the first
fruits thereof: so they shall receive the principal reward promised; and fully
enjoy it. In this respect the Spirit is called an earnest, and a Seal: yet it is
rather a Seal in respect of glory promised, then of the promise it self. The

3d. Confirmation is by a Sacrament; and this is a confirmation rather of the
Covenant in respect of man, then in respect of it self as a Covenant. This
confirmation is expressed by the Metaphorical word SEAL: as when Circumcision
is said to be not only a Sign, (as all Ceremonies are) but a Seal, Romans 4. 11.
There be many kinds of Seals, and many uses, and ends of them; but one usual
Seal is a confirming Seal, and the end and use of it is to confirm Covenants,
Deeds, Grants. For whether the Deed be Indenture, or Will, or a Patent, and
free-grant, whether absolute or conditional, we first express, and signify
our minds consent, and approbation by Words and Writings, and then we add our
Hands and Seal: which sealing is the highest, and most Solemn testification of
our consent, and the greatest confirmation that we can give; and being produced
is the most perfect evidence, and proof of our title, being as an Authentical
record. And in this respect a Sacrament is a Seal for confirmation. And it is a
Seal in respect of God and man.

1. In respect of God, who by his very institution of it intended to confirm
his consent unto, and approbation of the promises upon the conditions
expressed, and acknowledges his engagement to performance of the promise.

2. In respect of man, who by Receiving, and Celebrating the Sacrament Solemnly
testifies his approbation of the conditions, and does further engage himself
unto the performance of them. The thing confirmed by a Sacrament, is

1. The Covenant it self, both in respect of God and Man: for it confirms Gods
promise of mercy, and Man's engagement to duty.

2. If the mutual promises and engagements be confirmed, a conditional right
to the mercies promised is made sure to man, and the conditional performance
of duty in man is confirmed to God.

3. When man performs his duty, he receives an actual right; and in due time
possession: but this cannot be immediately made sure, as may appear hereafter.
Whereas some say that Sacraments exhibit, and confer grace, and the Schoolmen
say, that a Sacrament is SIGNUM EFFICAX GRATIAE; yet, if we speak properly, a
Sacrament as a Sacrament, does no such thing; except we understand it thus,
that as an Instrument sealed conveyes and gives a right upon a consideration;
so this upon a condition may conferr a right: and so all other Laws of God
Redeemer, do by virtue of the promises annexed to them, without which men
cannot have so much as a conditional, and remote right. Reformed Divines do
generally deny that Sacraments conferr grace (ex opere operato) as the
Schoolmen speak; and require a due qualification in the party to whom they are
administered, according to divine institution. As for the actual exhibition of
saving grace, it depends upon this divine ordination, that when man does his
duty, and performs the condition, saving grace shall follow; according to His
promise. And this is to be understood most properly of such as are at age: The
principal condition is faith, without which no Sacrament (in adultis) can be
effectual, so as that upon the receiving thereof, grace should actually
follow: And no man ever received benefit by Celebration of Sacraments, without
a moral qualification in the very receiving of them. By all this we may
understand, how Sacraments are said to signify, seal, and exhibit grace: They
signify as Ceremonies and Rites, seal as Sacraments, exhibit and convey as
other Laws and instruments which have a promise annexed, and that by virtue of
the promise, and Gods ordination. I will not here assert that either the word
SACRAMENTUM Latin, or (...) Greek, does properly signify any such thing, o^
that the word is so used in Scripture: Let it suffice that in this sense the
words have bin used, both by Latin and Greek writers, and if any can find a
better word, I shall willingly accept it, when I know it. If any make question
whether this definition does agree to the Sacraments of the old testament as
well as of the new, as we use to speak, it is plain it does. For Circumcision
was a sign, and Seal of the righteousness of faith, Romans 4. 11. where we have
Righteousness promised by God; faith required from man, which is the substance
of the Covenant; and Circumcision as a Ceremony was a sign to signify, and
represent the righteousness by faith, and a Seal to confirm it. Yet this
faith then required was in Christ to come: And Abraham had this faith before he
was Circumcised, which made the confirmation stronger; yet it confirmed no
righteousness but by faith.

The Celebration of the Sacraments is a profession of our Religion, For he that
believes, and is baptized shall be saved, Mark 16. 16. It Is not said, He that
is baptized, but he that believes, and is baptized shall be saved. A man by
faith without Baptism, not by Baptism without faith may be saved. Yet the
contempt of these Sacraments may damn a man, and deprive him of salvation,
because that contempt is inconsistent with faith. For true faith, and salvation
have a necessary, and inseparable connection by the Divine ordination: in so
much, as that He who believes not shall be damned. The efficacy of these
Sacraments for the actual enjoyment of grace, requires a right qualification
in the party, and depends upon the power of the holy Spirit: For Baptism is the
Laver of Regeneration, by the renewing of the Holy Ghost, Tit. 3. 5. As all
other Laws have their promises, and threats, so these sacramental ceremonialls
likewise have. From hence it follows, that not only they who neglect, and
omit, the celebration of them; but also the unworthy receivers are guilty, and
make themselves liable to punishment: And they who observe them, and observe
them aright; in God's good time, though not always at, or in, the time of the
observation, receive the benefit promised. For though the benefit, and the
actual enjoyment be from Christ, and the Spirit, yet it is sometimes attributed
to the observation of the Sacraments, because they in some sort concur in an
inferior manner to the collation of the same. Therefore we are said to be
ingraffed into Christ, and saved by Baptism; yet not by Baptism alone.

After these generals, Circumcision and the Passover, and come to the
Sacraments of the Gospel, which continue in full force and power unto this day,
and shall so continue unto the end of the World. The Sacraments of the Gospel
are two:

1. Baptism. 2. The Lord's Supper.
The first is the Sacrament of Regeneration, and Admission into Christ's
Kingdom, and our ingrafting into Christ: The second is the Sacrament of our
continuance in this Kingdom, and growing up in Christ. Baptism may be briefly
therefore defined to be a Sacrament of our Regeneration: But more particularly,
It is a Sacrament of the Gospel, wherein, by washing with Water in the name of
the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, Regeneration is confirmed to the party
baptized. As it is a Ceremony, so it agrees with all the ceremonies of God
Redeemer; as a Sacrament, with all other Sacraments thereof: as a Sacrament of
the Gospel it differs from all Sacraments annexed to the Promise. For though
they were instituted by God; yet this with the Eucharist was instituted by God
Redeemer exhibited: The former presupposed Christ to come, these, Christ
already come. And also though it agree with Circumcision, as being a Sacrament
of initiation; yet it differs both in the sign, and in the thing signified in
some respects. The name of it is Baptism, which comes of (...), which, though
it signifies to dip or dive, yet, often signifies to wash. In the Gospel, we
read of John's Baptism which was from Heaven; and Christ's Baptism, as
instituted by Christ after his Resurrection, in a certain form different from
that of John's.

In the special Nature,

1. The Rite. 2. The Effect. In the Rite, we have 1. The Element, or the thing.
2. The Action. 3. The Words.

The Element, or outward thing considered in it self, is Water, which has many
virtues, or power to produce many Effects; as to quench Thirst, to cool, to
moisten, to mollify, to heal, to fructify, and also to cleanse. In respect of
this cleansing power, which is most ordinary, God singled it as common to be
had, and commonly used for that end in all Nations to whom the Apostles were
sent, to preach and baptize. And in respect of this cleansing, it was fit to
signify the cleansing and regenerating virtue of the Spirit. This
signification was not natural, but it was determined to it by divine
institution. For it was made a sign of this supernatural Grace, by a
supernatural power of Christ, not only exhibited, but raised again, and ready
to ascend into Heaven. For this was one difference between the Sacraments of
the Law and the Gospel, that these latter were instituted immediately by the
Son of God in^arnate: Besides, there was another; that the former were
alterable; these never shall be altered.

The Action is Washing, Ephe. 5. 26. The putting away of the fi^th of the
flesh, 1 Pet. 3. 21. The washing of Regeneration, Tit. 3. 5. The washing of our
bodies with pure water, Heb. 10. 22. It cannot be denied, but that the whole
body descending into the water, and plunged wholly, and after that ascending
out of the water again, might resemble Christ's Death, and Resurrection more
perfectly; Yet neither was this the principal signification, nor the immediate
end of Baptism. But how will it be proved, that in Baptism, the whole body,
with the head, and all parts were plunged under the waters? And suppose some
were Baptized so, it does not follow, that all ought to be so by virtue of any
command. All the washings, lustrations, purifications mystical, and sacred in
the Law, were contracted in this washing of Baptism.

The words added to washing with water do complete the Rite, I Baptize thee in
the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. In which words
we have,

1. The name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

2. The Baptizing into this name.

These words contain the Doctrine of One most Glorious God, the Father, the
Son, and Holy Ghost, with the great, and stupendous works of creation,
redemption, sanctification. For that Great, Almighty, and ever Blessed God
created the world; by the Word, made flesh dying and rising again, redeemed
mankind; and by the Holy Ghost sanctifies his people: And by the Redemption of
Christ, and sanctification of the Spirit, he is the Fountain, and cause of
man's eternal happiness, and glorification. This Doctrine must be preached,
heard, received, believed, professed by the party to be baptized (if at age) by
himself; if not at age, by some other representing him. And he must further
promise to renounce the Devil, and all other Lords, to subject himself unto
this God, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, to obey his Commandments. By virtue
of this profession and promise, when nothing to the contrary is manifest, the
party is baptizable according to Christ's commission. But besides these words,
there must be baptizing in this Name, which is understood several ways.

1. With some in the Name is in, and by the authority, and power of the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost. With other, its in this name invocated, and called upon:
And the truth is, that Baptism ought to be administered by commission, and
command from God, and with solemn invocation of, and prayer unto, God. With
others, it is to be by baptizing devoted, and subjected to God the Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost, as their only Lord and King, in whom the party baptized must
believe, whom he must worship, and obey, as his only supreme Lord, and
Savior, expecting eternal life from him, and him alone. With this sense
agrees that of such as understand it of baptizing in, or unto, the Faith which
was professed; and unto the worship, and service of the true God which was
promised. These words do contain both the duty of man, and the promise of God.
The duty of man is to believe, and obey God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost;
and the promise of God is to accept him as such, and admit him as a subject of
his Kingdom, to receive the benefits of protection, regeneration, and eternal
life.

After the Rite consummate,

1. What is confirmed. 2. How it is confirmed.
1. The thing confirmed is, Regeneration. By regeneration is meant our first
ins^ti^ into Christ, dying and rising again for us, and our first receiving of
the remission, and the Spirit for sanctification, that we may dye unto sin, and
live unto God; and of adoption, whereby we are made Sons of God, and heirs of
glory. For we are saved by the washing of regeneration, and renewing of the
holy Ghost, which he shed on us abundantly through Jesus Christ our Savior;
that being justified by his grace, we should be made heirs according to the
hope of eternal life, Titus 3. 5, 6, 7. Where we have,

1. Washing which is the baptismall rite.

2. Regeneration, the thing signified, sealed or confirmed.

3. This regeneration is, by the renewing of the Holy Ghost.

4. We have justification by grace.

5. Adoption, whereby we are made heirs of Glory. It Is our first ingrafting
into Christ, for mortification of sin and newness of life, Romans 6. 4, 5, 6.
Col. 2. 12. You must take notice that Regeneration, Adoption, and the state of
Justification, are only begun upon our first faith, and admission, and not
finished till the Resurrection. And John's Baptism was for remission upon
Repentance, and confession of sin, Mark 1. 4. with Mat. 3. 6. The manner how
this is confirmed, is this:

1. The party to be baptized by receiving Baptism does solemnly testify, and
as it were Seal, and confirm that Faith which he had professed, and that
promise of submission, and obedience he made.

2. God, by the party baptizing him, does solemnly testify his admission of
the party Baptized into his Kingdom as a Subject thereof, to enjoy the
privileges thereof. So that the administering on the one side, and receiving of
Baptism on the other, is a deep, and mutual engagement, and makes the
obligation strong on man's side, to do his duty; on Gods side, to perform his
promise. This is an immediate confirmation of the covenant and promises, as a
covenant and promises, and does engage to mutual performance for time to come.
For if there be a performance on both sides, there must needs be an actual
possession, which needs no confirmation. If it be said, that the performance on
man's side is only begun, and so is the performance on Gods side but in part:
for it is only full when we fully enjoy eternal glory. It Is true, that it is
so: and therefore it is a confirmation of man's promise, of faith and obedience
to the end, and of Gods promise, that when man's performance is perfect, His
performance shall follow, and, in due time, be full and perfect. For the more
full and clear understanding of the point, we must observe.

1. That the Covenant between God and man differs from other ordinary
covenants. In other covenants, the parties covenanting are equally free from
any antecedent obligation in respect of the thing covenanted; and the
obligation of both parties arises from their voluntary consent expressed, and
no ways else, so that they may be properly called (Cor-rei). In this there is
a great inequality between the parties covenanting: For the one is the Lord,
and King, and the other Subjects: and they as Subjects are not only under his
power, but bound by his laws before they voluntarily oblige themselves, and if
they never promised obedience, yet they are bound to do it, and must be judged
by the Laws given them.

2. That Gods word, and promise is firm, and inviolable for ever, without any
solemn rite added to confirm it: yet because man's weakness is great, God was
willing, not only by promise to oblige himself to man, but also by solemn
rites, yea, and an Oath, wherein he pledged his eternal Diety, to confirm his
promise; and all this to strengthen his weak says, and give him full
assurance: For God being willing more abundantly to show unto the heirs of
promise, the immutability of his Counsel confirmed it by an Oath, Heb. 6. 27.

3. That the thing that is confirmed, both by solemn rites, and his Oath, is
his promise.

4. That because; as man's infirmity, and inconstancy was great, therefore God
thought it good to require of him a voluntary engagement, and a solemn
confirmation to subject himself to his power, and to obey his Laws; that the
more freely, and deeply he had engaged himself, the more careful he might be
to be faithful, and obedient to his everlasting good: and the thing confirmed
by man is his voluntary engagement of subjection, and obedience.

5. That the thing whereunto man engages himself in Baptism, is, that he will
be a Loyal, and obedient subject, unto God his redeemer in Christ; The thing
whereunto God obliges himself is to be his God, and admit him a Subject of his
blessed Kingdom.

6. That though the engagement be distinct from the performance, yet if it be
sincere there is a beginning of performance, though that performance is not the
thing confirmed, but the thing for which the confirmation is made.

7. There is a great difference, as between the making and confirming of a
covenant, and the keeping of it; so likewise between the solemn admission into
the visible Church, and the mystical, which consists of real Saints, and loyal
Subjects. What kind of profession, and promise is required in the party to be
baptized, may be considered afterward. By all this we may easily understand,
that it we will expect any benefit by our Baptism, we must have a special care
to perform our promise confirmed by this solemn rite: For these Sacraments are
special, and distinct laws added to all the rest, for this end to engage man
more strongly to observe them; And Baptism is a kind of naturalizing of such as
are baptized.

The Second Sacrament, Eucharist, or that which we call the Communion, or
Supper of the Lord. It Is called the Eucharist, because a Sacrament of
thanksgiving, for the great benefit of Redemption by Christ; The Communion,
because in it we being many partake of one sacred bread, and the same cup: It Is
called the Lords Supper, because it was instituted at the last Supper, that
Christ as moral did eat with his Disciples. Yet there may be other reasons of
these names given, and are given by others. This Sacrament has many other
names, a Catalogue, or enumeration of the greatest part of them, you may read
in Casaubo^s exercitation, 16. of his Apparatus. This Eucharist is a Sacrament
of the Gospel, wherein, by the use of Bread and Wine, according to our Saviors
institution in remembrance of his death and passion, the continuance, in the
covenant is confirmed. This Sacrament was instituted immediately by Christ in
the night, wherein he was betrayed; and succeeded the Passover which was to
cease. For then Christ the true Paschal Lamb was exhibited, and ready to be
slain. The Passover did signify Christ to come; and after Christ's
resurrection this Sacrament did signify him not only come, but slain already,
and it is to continue to the end of the World for the perpetual memory of his
sacrifice. For as often as we eat this bread, and drink this cup, we show forth
Christ's death until his coming again, 1 Cor. 11. 26. This death of Christ
represented in this Sacrament, was the accomplishment of the Passover, and of
all propitiatory Sacrifices, and sin offerings. And this Sacrament is the
abridgment of all Sacrificial feasts, and especially such as were used for the
confirmation of leagues, and covenants. It was resembled in a more lively
manner by that Sacrifice mentioned, Exodus 24. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Where,

1. Moses informs the people of all the words of the Lord, and all his
judgments.

2. The people promise obedience. This was the league, and Covenant.

3. Moses builds an Altar, and 12. Pillars according to the 12. Tribes, to
signify that they were all engaged in it.

4. There were offered by 12, young men, representing the 12 Tribes, burnt
offerings, and peace offerings of Oxen to the Lord.

5. Moses took half the blood, and put it in basins and half the blood he
sprinkled upon the Altar, which signified God one, and the principal party
covenanting.

6. He takes the book of the Covenant, and reads the precepts, and promises of
God in the audience of the people, and they again engage to observe the Law.

7. Moses took the blood of the Covenant, and sprinkled it on the people,
saying, Behold the blood of the Covenant, which the Lord has made with you
concerning these Words. In all this, somethings are remarkable,

1. That the thing that was confirmed was the covenant it self.

2. That this Covenant was not only made, but solemnly confirmed on Gods side
by half the blood sprinkled upon the Altar; by the other half of the blood
sprinkled upon the people, it was established on their part.

3. That to the Rite were added words, and the words are taken up by our
blessed Savior in this Sacrament.

4. That though a Sanction of a law be taken for the confirmation of it by
promises of reward, and threatenings of punishments which are indeed essential
parts of Gods laws; yet this was a true, and proper sanction, not only of the
precepts, but the promises, and the threats of God, and the promises of the
parties covenanting with God, and it was by blood, and a solemn rite with words.

In the definition we may observe.

1. The rite. 2. The confirmation.
In the rite three things.

1. The Elements or things sensible. 2. The actions. 3. The words.
For I take rite in a large sense to include the words. The Elements (as they
use to call them) are Bread and Wine, which were then ready on the Passover
Table. These were very fit both to signify the body and blood of Christ; and
the eating and drinking of them, a spiritual Sacrificiall feast. Yet this they
did not by nature, but by the divine institution, though by nature they were
apt to resemble such things. These as consecrated unto God, were apt to
represent Christ sanctified, and set apart to be our Savior, and deliverer:
The bread was fit to signify his body, and the Wine his blood; the bread
broken, his body crucified; and the Wine powered, out his blood shed; and both
separated and given a part, did resemble his death: the virtue of both to
preserve life, the virtue and power of Christ dying to give us eternal life.

The eating of the one, and drinking of the other, our participation of Christ,
for remission of our sins, and our Eternal Salvation.

The actions, in the use of these Elements, are, either common to both jointly,
or, 1. Blessing. 2. Giving. 3. Taking.


1. Blessing; which some call Consecration, was, by Word and Prayer, For, as
other Meats are sanctified by Word and Prayer, 1 Timothy 4. 5. so these were
blessed and sanctified in a peculiar manner by Word and Prayer. The Prayer was,
1. A Thanksgiving. 2. A Petition.


A Thanksgiving, for the Bread and Wine, as Blessings of God, given us for the
preservation of our bodily life, and, for Christ, the Bread of Life, that came
down from Heaven.

The Petition was, for a Blessing upon our use of these Elements, in this
Sacrament, for our Spiritual Comfort and Happiness. It Is written, that our
Savior gave thanks, and blessed: But what form of words He used, is not
related by any of the Evangelists: Therefore, we are not bound in this act of
Consecration, to any set-form of words; yet our words must be such, as are
agreeable to the Scriptures, and proper to this Sacrament. The Prayers used in
most Liturgies are such; and agree not only with the Scriptures, but are
suitable to the Sacrament. The next common act, is, Giving: and that some make
to be twofold:

1. A giving to God; as Grenaeus, and some others, at least, seem to intimate
an offering of the Bread and Cup to God, though it is certain, that the whole
Service taken together, and being a part of Divine Worship, is an Offering made
to God.

2. A giving of both unto the People, who are called Communicants. The

3d Action, is, the taking the Elements given.

The Actions proper, are, 1. The Breaking of the Bread, and the Pouring out the
Wine. 2. The Eating of the Bread, and Drinking of the Cup.


The first, is fit to signify the Death and Sacrifice of Christ.

The second, the participation of the benefit thereof by Faith.

These Actions may be orderly distinguished into 1. The Acts of the Party
Administering, which are 1. The Blessing. 2. The Breaking. 3. The Giving, And,
2. The Acts of the Communicants, which are, 1. Taking, 2. Eating, 3. Drinking.




They are reducible to Three, 1. Consecration, 2. Distribution, 3.
Participation.


The words are the last: Participation; as, Take, Eat, Drink; or the things
participated: and they are concerning 1. The Bread, 2. The Cup.


In both, we may observe, 1. The great Work of Redemption. 2. The Covenant;
both which, are represented by the Elements, and the use of them.


The Redemption is signified by the words, My Body broken, and, My Blood shed.
For these inform us, that Christ dyed, and offered Himself a Sacrifice unto
God, offended by the sin of Man, to propitiate Him, by satisfying His Justice,
and meriting His Favor. This was the Foundation of the Covenant, and Man's
Salvation: For it made Sin Pardonable, and Man Save-able. That His Body was
broken; and being broken, was given; it informs us, that He suffered Death, and
offered Himself dying. That this Offering was propitiatory, it is employed, in
that Blood was shed for Remission. In the words of the Covenant we have, 1. The
Promise, 2. The Precept.


1. The Promise in the words; This is my Body, broken, and given for you; and,
This is the New Covenant in my Blood, which was shed for the Remission of Sin.
For, though remission of sins, and Salvation, were merited, and purchased by
Christ's Death, and Sacrifice, and so trusted in his hands; yet they are
conveyed in the Covenant by a Promise, or Grant. Yet the Word is turned, A
Testament; and if we follow that metaphor, that which is called a Promise, is a
Bequest. Yet though the Expressions may be different, yet the thing is the
same; and informs us, That it is the Purpose, and Will of God, for, and in
consideration of the Death of Christ, suffered for our sins, to give man
remission, and eternal life. And this His Will He has signified in His
Promise, whereby He has bound Himself, upon certain terms, unto sinful Man:
Upon which terms, Man may challenge them, as due unto him. And whereas we read
in Luke, and Paul; This is the New Testament, or Covenant, in my Blood; and in
Matthew, and Mark, This is my Blood of the New Testament. You must understand,

1. That the words are taken out of Exodus 24. 8.

2. That Matthew, and Mark, follow the Hebrew and Septuagint, more expressly,
then Luke, and Paul.

3. That the Sense of both is the same: For to be a Covenant in the Blood of
Christ, is, to be a Covenant confirmed by the Blood of Christ; and to be the
Blood of the Covenant, is to be the Blood, whereby the Covenant is made firm;
and so both teach us, that by the Death of Christ, the Covenant of Grace was
made for ever unalterable; as you heard before, out of Heb. 9. 15, 16, 17. And
the Covenant was sounded upon Christ's Death.

4. That this Covenant is called the New Covenant, to distinguish it from the
Covenant of Works, and that Covenant that was made, and confirmed with Israel,
Exodus 24. 8.

5. That as Christ's Blood did merit, so the New Covenant did convey the
Benefits merited by the Death of Christ. This is the Promise. The Precept is in
these words, Do this in remembrance of me. That is, As I dyed for thee, gave my
Body for thee shed my Blood for thee; So eat thou this Bread, drink thou this
Cup in remembrance of my Death suffered willingly out of the greatest love for
thee. This Remembrance must be practical; And as the thing remembered is
Christ's Death for our Sins, it requires

1. A Confession of our sins, a Sense of them, an Hatred, a Desire to be
pardoned, and Purpose to forsake them.

2. A Belief that Christ dyed for the expiation of those sins, and that His
Sacrifice was accepted of God, as a sufficient Satisfaction.

3. An acknowledgment of God's wonderful Love, and the great benefit of
Redemption; and desire to be for ever Thankful.

Thus far the Rites:

The second thing that follows, is, the confirmation of the continuance of this
Covenant; and that is in these words: This is my Body, etc. This is the New
Covenant, or Testament, in my Blood etc. The thing confirmed is, the
continuance of the Covenant of Grace, in the Blood of Christ. The Confirmation,
and so the Solemn Engagement, is twofold:

1. On God's part. 2. On Man's part.
1. On God's part, by giving the Blessed Bread and Cup to be eaten, and drunken.

2. On Man's part, by taking, and eating the Blessed Bread, and drinking the
Blessed Cup.

By Giving, God does testify, and assure man, that He continues the same, firm
in the Covenant, and is ready to give a further increase of Graces, and a
greater measure of Mercy, for the merit of Christ dying; and, upon the same
terms, the Covenant was made, and confirmed at first. For the Condition then
was, not only to begin but continue Faith and Obedience; and God, by this
Sacrament, does renew His Promise, that man may renew his Faith. Man,
presupposed to continue in this Covenant, does solemnly, by receiving and
eating this Bread, in remembrance of the Body of Christ, broken and offered;
and, by receiving, and drinking the Cup, in remembrance of the blood of Christ,
testify and engage himself, to continue in thta Covenant, expecting Remission,
and Eternal Life, upon no other terms, but Faith in Christ dying for him. Yet
because a Mist is cast upon these words, This is my Body; This is my Blood. I
must clear them, that this Confirmation may be the more evident. To this end, I
must show.

1. What is meant by, THIS.

2. How THIS, Whatsoever it be, may be said, to be the Body of Christ; And how
the second THIS, may be affirmed to be the Blood of Christ.

By THIS, in the former place is meant Bread, the blessed and consecrated
Bread. For,

1. It was Bread that Christ took. 2. It was Bread Christ blessed. 3. It was
Bread Christ broke. 4. It was Bread Christ gave. 5. It was Bread which Christ
cmomanded them to take, and eat* 6. The Apostle calls this, Bread, three
several times, 1 Cor. 11. 26, 27, 28.
But How, is this Bread Christ's Body? It Is not the Body of Christ by
Transsub^antiation, nor Consubstantiation. For both these are contrary to
Reason, to Sense, to the Nature of all Religious Rites, and Sacraments, to all
Miracles: For there never was Miracle, that did delude the Senses: For the
Water, turned miraculously into Wine, appeared to be Wine, and tasted as Wine,
and was Wine indeed, as it appeared. That many of the Fathers seem to affirm it
to be the Body of Christ, is nothing; for, as many call it Bread, and a Sign
and Figure of Christ's Body. To this purpose, you may read the Learned Dr.
Crakenthorpe, against Spalatensis, in the Controversy of Transubstantiation,
where ye shall find a multitude of Councels and Fathers, exactly quoted to this
purpose. The word, Transubstantiation, was not known till latter times: The
thing signified by it, cannot be certainly defined: For the greatest
Schoolmen, and subtilest Wits, differ amongst themselves, both in the
Definitions, and the Explication of their Definitions. Besides, there is some
reason to think many of them do not believe it: For some of them, amongst us,
have refused to take it upon their Salvation, that, after a due Consecration,
according to their Rules, any such change of the Elements is made. But suppose
the change, and that it is certain; to what end does it serve? For it is
confessed, that wicked men may receive the Body of Christ in the Eucharist, and
yet be damned: neither does it profit any man, who receives it without Faith.
THIS, therefore, that is said to be Christ's Body, is Bread; and, at the first
Institution, it must needs be so: for then Christ's Body was not broken,
neither did Christ then give it.

The second Question, therefore, is, How Bread may be said to be Christ's Body,
if not really, and by Transubstantiation, or Consubstantiation, or some such
way.

The Answer is, That it is His Body,

1. By Representation, because it is a Sign and Figure of his Body, as many of
the Ancients expressly affirm: and if any of these say, it is Christ's Body in
proper sense, as they of the Church of Rome would make us believe they do, then
they must needs contradict themselves. And this is proper to all Religious
Rites, to signify something invisible: and many times the name of the thing
signified, is given to the Sign it self. As Circumcision is said to be a token
of the Covenant, Genesis 17. 2. and afterward, it is called the Covenant: My
Covenant shall be in your flesh, ver. 13. whereas it was the token of the
Covenant, that was in their flesh.

The reason of this expression, is the similitude and agreement between the
sign and the thing signified. In this respect, Christ calls His Flesh, Bread;
not that it was Bread, but because it was like to Bread. And that place of John
the 6th, where He calls Himself, and His Flesh, Bread, is alleged, to prove^t
is change: yet, if the Expression, and Predication were proper, that place
might prove, that Christ's Body was changed into Bread, and not Bread into His
Body, as will easily appear to any Intelligent, and impartial Reader. Yet to be
a bare Sign is not all; but to be a Sign so by Divine Institution, as to
confirm the Promise of the Covenant, and assure the worthy Receiver, that as
certainly, as He gives him that Bread; so certainly will God give him the
benefits merited by the Death of Christ. By this time, we may understand, what
is signified by these words, This is my Body.

But what is meant by the latter words; This is the Covenant in my Blood; and,
This is my Blood of the Covenant? For the sense of these, there can be no
doubt, but by THIS, is meant,

1. The Cup: For, 1. Christ took the Cup. 2. Said, This Cup is the New
Testament, or Covenant. 3. It Is called three times by St. Paul, the Cup.
2. By cup is meant the Wine in the Cup. 3. This Wine, blessed and consecrated
according to Christ's institution.
This Cup is said to be the new testament; that is, the sign, whereby it is
confirmed in this Sacrament, and as it were a pledge given by God, and received
by man, of remission of sin, merited by the blood of Christ, and for his sake
promised to us. Whereas Matthew and Mark relate that Christ said; This is my
blood, it is meant that the Wine in the Cup was a token and sign of his blood,
given and received to confirm the new Testament or Covenant. Thus Circumcision
was a Sign, and Seal of the Righteousness of faith to Abraham: as this Cup is
a sign to signify; and a Seal to confirm the righteousness of faith, and
remission of sins in the blood of Christ. As for the real presence of Christ in
this Sacrament, it is certain that his glorified body is in Heaven; Yet he is
here Virtually, and Really present by his Spirit in this Sacrament, as in all
other his Ordinances, and in a special manner, and the same powerful and
comfortable to the worthy receiver.

The Papists have put a difference between the Sacrifice of the Mass,
ilasticall, or propitiatory is essentially bloody: as wherein the thing
Sacrificed is first slain, then offered. But the Sacrifice of the Cross as
they themselves confess is (INCRUENTUM) unbloody, and therein is no death of
the thing Sacrificed. Neither can it be the same with that which Christ offered
upon the Cross: For to that it was essential, that Christ's body should be
broken, and the blood shed, and offered unto God, without spot by the eternal
Spirit; and without this Death, and offering, it could not have bin this
Sacrifice at all: and this Sacrifice was but offered once, and once offered was
never to be offered again. For once in the end of the World has he appeared to
put away sin by the Sacrifice of himself, Heb. 10. 14. So that we have here but
one Sacrifice, and the same once offered; yet of eternal virtue. If this
Sacrifice of the Mass were the same (which they affirm) with the Sacrifice
upon the Cross, it must needs be granted that it is propitiatory: But they
confess,

1. That it is, incruentum. 2. That it is not, Expiatorium, and Redemptorium.
3. That it is only, Commemoratorium, and Applicatorium.
By the First they grant, that it is not essentially the same.

By the Second, that it is not effectively the same.

By the Third that it is only a Commemoration, and a means of the Application
of the same.

And if they would lay aside the Sacrifice of the Mass, and acknowledge the
Sacrifice of the Cross, and celebrate the Sacrament as it was instituted by
Christ; We should easily grant, that therein there is a Commemoration of
Christ's death, and Sacrifice once offered; and that this Sacrament is a
means. whereby that Sacrifice is applied.

Before I conclude this Doctrine of the Sacraments,

1. Who have power and right to administer them? 2. To whom they may lawfully
be administered? 3. Whether they are to be administered according to humane
judgment, which is fallible, or divine judgment which is infallible?
For the first of these; Who have power to administer? That Is easily and
briefly determined: For they who are trusted with the word, and have
Commmission to preach the Gospel, they have power to administer these
Sacraments. This, in respect of Baptism, appears in the mission of the Apostles
into all Nations. For, by that Commission, they who must teach must baptize:
And we never read of any Commission given to any others either to baptize, or
administer the Lords supper. And the constant practice of the universal
Church, so far as known to us, has bin conformable to this Commission. What
may be done in case of necessity, which God, not man, has brought us unto, is
another thing: For in such cases God dispenses with many things, required in
his own Institution.

As for the second question,

1. They may be administered to such as have a right unto them, who are Christ's
disciples, and may be judged fit to be members of the Church visible, and in
the number of Christians.

2. We must distinguish between the subjects, who have a right to the actual
participation of Baptism, and such as have aright to the actual participation
of the Lords supper.

3. Of such as may be subjects capable of Baptism, some are Adulti; and these,
if they be disciples, and manifest themselves to be such, they no doubt may be
baptized. But all the controversy in our unhappy days, is; Whether Infants of
Christians, and believing Parents may be baptized, or no? In this controversy,
I shall deliver my knowledge and judgment, as briefly as may be.

1. Infants, as Infants and Children of Turks, Pagans, unbelieving Jews, are
not capable of Baptism; neither as Infants, nor Infants of such Parents.

2. Infants as Infants, and considered Physically as distinct persons from
their Parents, are not capable of, or have any right to Baptism.

3. The Infants of Christian Parents, so considered as distinct persons, from
their Christian Parents, as Christians, have no right unto it.

4. The Infants of Christian, and believ^ng Parents* considered as one person
with them as Christians and believers, have right to Baptism. For if they be
one person with them as Christians, they must needs have some kind of right to
Baptism, as their Parents have.

5. They have not this right from them by Nature, nor humane Laws: for so they
only receive their humane nature from them, as their Parents have humane
nature, and this naturally: and if their Parents be free, or noble by humane
Laws, they derive freedom, or nobility.

6. That they derive this right from their Parents, as Christians, it is from
Gods free mercy, and gracious ordination, which includes the Children in
Covenant with the Parents.

7. Children are one person with their parents, both by the Law of God, and the
Laws of Men: and that in many things, and especially in Obligations in
Privileges, in rewards, and punishments. By the Laws of men, in civil
matters, we know that, SUI HEREDES, as the Civilians call them derive a right
unto their Parents estate, though there be no Testament; or, if a Testament,
and the same they be excluded; because the Law grounded upon nature, considers
them as one person with their Parents or next kindred deceased. If the Father
be a subject of a free State, and so bound to subjection, unto the Laws, the
Son born of him, as a subject of that State is bound to the Laws, and derives
that obligation from his Father, as one person with him; neither is it
material, whether the Father was a subject natural, or naturalized. If the
Father dye indebted, and the Heir enter upon the estate by virtue of that Will:
He by the civil Law falls under the same obligation, as one with the Father,
and is bound to discharge the debts. Paul was born a Roman, Act. 22. 28. and
all the Privileges of a Roman he had by birth from his Father, because his
Father was a Roman. If a man for his merits be invested with a Fee, or estate
of honor and juridiction adherent, and the same investiture include him, and
his Heirs; then his Heir after his decease from that first investiture of his
Father, or his father first invested, the estate with the honor, and
jurisdiction is one person with him. If a Peer be convicted, and condemned for
high treason, his estate is confiscate, and the blood tainted, and the
Children, and Family suffer as one with the person guilty. These instances,
though others more clear, and fit may be given, may suffice to manifest in
things civil, and by humane Laws, the Father, or the Parents, and Children to
be one person. I might further show that in many cases Prince, and People, and
also the whole State may be considered as one person, and are so taken both by
God, and Men. Let Us inquire whether it be so in matters of Religion, and by the
Laws of Gods Kingdom. That it is so, I have made it evident out of the second
Commandment of the Law moral, both in punishments and blessings: For not
only temporal but spiritual judgments, lie upon the Children for their
Fathers sins, which could not be just, except they be some ways one person with
their Parents. And all true believers derive their right unto spiritual, and
eternal rewards as one person with Christ, and in some sort from Abraham,
since his time, as the Father of Believers. But the principal thing to be
cleared, is, that Parents and Children are one person in religious obligations
and spiritual privileges, and favors. For obligation unto obedience to Gods
Laws, all Orthodox and understanding Christians will grant that Adam and all
mankind were one person as Father and Children; insomuch, that in Adam sinning
we all sinned; and in him dying we all dye. This could never have bin so, if
God both in his Laws, and Judgments had not considered, and accounted, that in
Adam bound, all his were bound: But this was under the government of God
Creator, not Redeemer. Yet Abraham was under the government of Redemption, and
the Kingdom of grace. And in him God binds his seed, and Posterity, yea his
bought, and born-servants male. For thus it is written; And God said unto
Abraham, Thou shall keep my Covenant; Thou, and thy seed after thee in their
generations, Genesis 17. 9. Where we must note,

1. That this was the first institution of Circumcision.

2. That this was immediately, and personally given as a Law, at this time only
to Abraham.

3. That it did not only bind Abraham himself, but his posterity to many
generations.

4. That the obligation in respect of the Children was so strict, that the
uncircumcised man-child, whose flesh of his fore-kin was not Circumcised, that
soul should be cut off from his people: He had broken the Covenant, ibid. verse.
14.

5. That this Sacrament was a Sign, and Seal of the righteousness by faith,
Romans 4. 2. And was to continue till the time of the Gospel, when the Sign of
the Covenant was to be changed into that of washing with water: and the faith
confirmed, then, was in Christ to come, and by that Abraham was justified; but
after that time, the Gospel-justification was by faith in Christ already come.

From all this it is evident, that the obligation of the Father, was the
obligation of the Child. And it is further remarkable, that

1. That Covenant did expressly include the Children with the Parents.

2. That it was the Covenant of Righteousness by faith in Christ.

3. That there is no exception, or exclusion, nor clause to that purpose in all
the Gospel, as that God should contract his mercy, and not extend it so far
even to Christian Children, in the times of the Gospel, as he did in the times
of the Old Testament. No man that shall seriously consider this matter, but
will confess that Parents are bound not only for themselves, but also for
their Children too. And therefore they are so often, not only under the Law, but
under the Gospel, to teach their Children so soon as they are capable, and the
Children are bound to receive their instruction, and to observe the condition
of the Covenant, into which their Parents entered for them and theirs. Therefore
God says that Abraham would command his Children, and household after him. Genesis
18. 19. Which command of Abraham had been of little force, except his Children,
and household had been bound by that command, which was given to him, and in him
to them. God considering both as one person. God has so far subjected Children
to their Parents, Servants to their Masters, and the household or family to the
Master or Mistress of a family, that neither Servants nor Children are (Sui
juris) or in their own power, but in the power of Parents, and Masters so, that
they may command them, and not only in matters of this life, but especially in
religion. And if they were not so much in their power, and bound in them, it
was strange that when the Centution believed, his whole household became
believers, John 4. 53. and that Lydia, and her household, the Jaylour, and all
his, or all his house should be baptized at one time, Acts 16. 15. 33, 34. And
surely the Child of Christian Parents is bound in his Christian Parents, unto
the conditions of the Covenant; so as no Child of any Mahumetan, Pagan, or
unbelieving Jew, is.

But the principal point to be cleared in this particular is, Romans 11. 16.
Where we may observe.

1. That the root are the Parents, and the branches are the Children.

2. That the root, and branches make but one tree; So parents, and Children
make but one body one person Politic.

3. That if the root be holy, the branches are holy, and to be holy is a
Spiritual privilege.

4. That as the branches derive their natural Being from the root, so the
Children derive their spiritual privileges to be holy, from their holy
Parents. Yet this holiness is not either justification, or inherent,
righteousness, and immediate sanctification of the Spirit. For when the
unbelieving Husband is sanctified by the believing Wife, and the unbelieving
Wife is sanctified by the Husband, it cannot be meant of any such
sanctification, neither is the holiness of the Children of such sanctified
parents, any such thing. It Is something whereby they are nearer the Kingdom of
God, then the Children of Apostate heathens, Mahumetans, or unbelieving Jews
are. The distance from God, and Salvation of the one is not such, or so great
as the distance of the other. The Apostle puts the Ephesians in mind, That
before their conversion, they were Gentiles in the slesh, who were called
uncircumcision by that which was called circumcision in the slesh, made by
hands; That at that time they were without Christ, being aliens from the
Commonwealth of Israel, and strangers from the Covenant of promise, having no
hope, without God in the world, Ephesians. 2. 11, 12. It Is not to be understood
that they were without God as Creator or Preserver, but without God promising
to save them. For God did not promise to save them, or their Children upon any
terms. They were excommunicate, and banished out of his Kingdom, and were
denied the very means of conversion: Therefore they must needs be without
Christ, and without hope: For where there is no Christ, nor promise in Christ,
there could be no hope. But after their conversion they were Subjects of Gods
Kingdom, fellow-Citizens with the Saints, and of the household of God: and if
the Parents being the root were holy, then their Children, the branches were
holy, and within the Verges of Gods spiritual Kingdom. And as the promise in
Christ to come, was to the Jews, and their Children; so the promise in Christ
already come, is to Christians, and their Children. For the Covenant made to
Abraham, and his seed is essentially (though not accidentally) the same with
the promise of the Gospel, and must necessarily include the Children with the
Parents, as that did, except any man can produce a clause of exclusion, which
no man to this day ever could. When Peter said, The promise is to you, and to
your Children, and to all that are afar off, even as many as the Lord our God
should call, Acts 2. 3. He spoke not to the Jews merely as Jews, but as
Christians believing in Christ already come, and the promise was not personal
to them alone excluding their Children, but to them as such, and their
Children. For their conversion did no ways limit, or straiten the promise made
to Abraham, but continued it in the same extent it was before. And the words
imply that if he called the Gentiles, who were afar off, both they, and their
Children, as he did call them afterward, even they should enjoy the promise in
the same extent, so as to include the Children with the Parents. To understand
it otherwise, is to offer violence to the Text. For the Gentiles once called
must enjoy the privileges for them, and theirs, in as large, and ample manner
as the Jew did: this only was the proper, and special privilege of the Jew,
he must first be called. Yet this we must know, that Children are in the lowest
form of Christ's Kingdom, whilst they are Children, and after they are at age by
their actual disobedience, may loose the benefit, and by Apostasy, they may
forfeit all their privileges and their hope. These privileges which these
Children enjoy, are not, ordinarily, immediate conversion, or justification,
and the Spirit of Adoption, and regeneration, and the actual enjoyment of
those blessings; but that which they have immediate right unto, is the means
of conversion, which he denies to such as are not of the Church. For this was
the privilege which the Jew enjoyed, though he did not believe, he was trusted
with the Oracles of God, wherein were precepts of duty, promises for mercy, and
also of power to keep the precepts, and the outward confirmation, both of
precepts and promises. This was the Childrens bread, which was not given to
dogs of the Gentiles, and such as were strangers to the Commonwealth of
Israel. These Children born in the Church, and of believing Parents, who are
Christians, are members of the Church, subjects of Christ's Kingdom, and have a
special relation to God, to Christ, to the Church; and the same, such as no
Infants in the world born of Parents out of the Church have, or as such can
have. The sum of this discourse is, That as all Children are part of their
parents, make but one person by the Laws of God and men, so Christian Infants
are one person with their Christian parents, and make but one body with them,
as the root, and branches are but one Tree, and this by divine ordination, and
especially in obligations to duties, and right unto favors and privileges
spiritual so far, as they are capable. So that the question so much vexed in
our days rightly stated is this: Whether Christian infants, as part of their
parents, and one person with them have right to Baptism, or are subjects
immediately capable of baptism, according to Divine ordination? To this thus
stated, the Antipaedo-baptists have said nothing to this hour. And whereas they
allege that there is no example or precept in the Gospel for Infant Baptism;
it has been answered; that there is no express precept, or example for women
to receive the Lords Supper, and yet they themselves administer it to women:
But this is but very little, if not the least, that may be said for
infant baptism. For so many precepts, and examples, as they can find in the
New Testament; for the Baptism of such as are at age, so many precepts, and
examples they give us for Baptizing Infants. For if the parents, or one of the
parents may be baptized, then the Infant may be baptized: For they are one
person in respect of Baptism, and therefore what right the one has, the other
must have. Neither can it be upon any sufficient ground alleged that Children
are incapable of Baptism, either as it is a Sacrament, or as a Sacrament of
initiation, or as a seal of the righteousness by faith: For circumcision was

1. A Sacrament.

2. A Sacrament of initiation,

3. A Seal of the righteousness by faith. Yet this was administered to Infants,
and that by Gods Institution, which never would have been done by Divine
Warrant, if they had been incapable. The difference between Baptism, and
Circumcision was,

1. That the signs are different.

2. That there was a different modification in the object of faith required in
both. The sign of the former was the cutting off the foreskin of the ^lesh; in
the second washing with water, in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.
The different modification of the object of faith, was Christ to come, and
Christ already come.

The spiritual thing sealed and signified in both, was the same, that is,
righteousness by faith in Christ. And as there is no place of Scripture
alleged, so I think there can be no reason sufficient given, why the covenant
being essentially the same, the Children included then, should be excluded now.
If the faith, profession, and promise of the Parents then was sufficient to
obtain the sealing of the covenant by the initiating Sacrament, why should they
not be now? For Children are as much one person now with their parents, as they
were then. Neither should any wonder that the Faith of one may benefit another,
if the Faith of a Father could obtain the deliverance of the Child, Mark. 9.
23. And the Faith of a Mother, the freedom of the Daughter from the power of
the Devil, Mark. 7. 29, 30. and the faith of those that carried the sick, and
Paralytical wretch, obtained the remission of his sins, and recovery, Mark. 2.
5.

To show,

1. What it is morally or politically to be one person with another, or Persona
conjuncta, (as the Civilians speak).

2. How many ways several persons, physically distinct, may be one.

3. For how many ends or causes it may be so.

4. To reduce the places of Scripture, which teach us how God does take not
only parents, and Children, but many others as one, into order, would take up
a large discourse, and it might be very useful, and profitable, and give great
light to many places. But for the present I intend it not; it would be too
great a digression. Only in matters of religion, Parents and Children, Prince
and People, Husband and Wife, Master and Servants, and such relations in
several societies, are only so far one, as God would have them to be; and
Children are so far one with their Parents, as to derive by divine ordination
something from them, whereof they are capable.

Otherwise we might argue, that, because their Parents have actual faith,
immediate right to the actual participation of the Eucharist, are justified,
and sanctified, etc: therefore the Children are so, have faith, and a right
unto the actual participation of the Lords Supper. And this is the next thing
to be considered, who they are, who may be admitted to the actual participation
of the Lords Supper.

Infants baptized have a remote right unto that Sacrament; and so also have
Christians of age, formerly baptized, a nearer right. But the question is not
of a remote right, but of an immediate right according to divine institution,
to the actual participation of this Sacrament! Justine Martyr informs us of the
practice of the Church, and the rules observed in those times. The sum, and
substance of his words, is this: That they baptized persons at age, who
professed the Christian faith, and promised to live accordingly. And the
qualification of Communicants at the Lords Table, was this,

1. They must be baptized persons.

2. Continue in the profession of the Christian faith; for so he must be
understood.

3. Live according to the Commandments of Christ. Those that desire to know
his mind in this particular may read his words in his second Apology. And here
it is to be noted,

1. That this very qualification is required in the words of the Institution of
this Sacrament, and the Apostles doctrine thereupon, 1 Cor. 11. 23, 24, 25. unto
the 33. verse. For in that place the Apostle does imply,

1. That the communicant should have the use of reason, which infants have not.
2. That he must be a Disciple, or Christian Baptized. 3. That he have the
knowledge of the mystery of Redemption, and a belief of the same. 4. That this
knowledge must be and ought to be practical: How else can he celebrate, and
receive the Sacrament in remembrance of his Saviors death, passion, sacrifice,
so as not to be guilty of the body, and blood of Christ? And hence it follows,
1. That an ignorant person, who has no competent knowledge of the mystery of
Redemption, and that Sacrament or professes not the Christian says, or i^
guilty of scandal certainly known can have no right unto the immediate
receiving of the Eucharist: if known to be such.

2. That there is required more in a communicant at this blessed Table, then in
a person at age to be baptized: For unto the one is required only a profession
of his faith, and a promise of a new life, but in the other not only
profession, and a promise, but baptism antecedent, and a performance of the
promise in living according to Christ's Commandments. And whereas some tell us,
that this Sacrament is a converting ordinance; I must tell such, that as it
presupposes Baptism, which is the laver of regeneration, so it presupposes
conversion if we will speak in the Dialect of the Spirit which is safest, and
not according to our own fancies, which is no ways tolerable.

The third,

1. It Is certain, that both the Sacraments are to be administered, and that by
Gods command by man, as by the Minister who is trusted with the dispensation of
the word, and Sacraments.

2. That man's knowledge is but fallible, and he cannot search the heart and
reins.

3. That though the Minister as in Baptism, so in the administration of the
Lords Supper, must keep close to his commission, yet by reason of the
imperfection of his knowledge, he may administer unto persons unworthy, and in
many cases is bound so to do.

4. That though man may administer to the unworthy, yet God does always either
suspend, or excommunicate them, and denies the spiritual benefit unto them: and
this perfect judgment he has reserved to himself. Yet this does no ways
warrant man to give the Eucharist to any man, whom he certainly knows to be
unworthy. And in denying it to such, he need not plead jurisdiction, (in Foro
exteriori) or power of suspension, and excommunication in himself as a Minister
of the Gospel; but only alledg that by his commission from Christ, he has no
power to give it to such a person, and he must not do that, which he has no
power to do. Neither does he in refusing to admit such a person, whom he
certainly knows unfit, either for ignorance or scandal signify, that the party
has no right at all any ways unto the Sacrament; but only signifies, that
according to the rules of Christ, for that time, and whilst he is such, he
cannot have any actual possession, or enjoyment of that right: As the Leper had
right unto his rent, or house, but could not possess, and enjoy it, till he
was clean^ed. Yet one thing seems strange, that such as grant unto the
Minister, or Presbyter the power of absolution (in Foro interiori) as they call
it, yet should deny him the power of suspension, of that party whom he
certainly knows to be scandalous. Why may he not positively declare him to be
unworthy and, according to his certain knowledge, so judge him according to the
laws of Christ? Yet if he do thus, this act is far different, from the acts of
judgment exercised (in Foro exteriori) where a Discipline is established. We
need not here debate what kind or degree of Faith in such as are at age do give
them right to Baptism. For its not the Faith, but the profession of the Faith,
and promise of New life, we must look at in this particular. For if they
profess the true faith, and promise a new life, and that seriously, and we
know nothing to the contrary, we must judge them to have a right, and we must
give it them. If a Simon Magus, who is still in the gall of bitterness, do
thus, we must baptize him, we have warrant for it; and if we refuse, then we
offend. Though all those things be true, yet it is certain, God requires of such
parties sincere faith, sincere profession, and sincere promise, and such as
shall afterward be followed with sincere practice: and if they be not such, he
will not Baptize them with the Holy Ghost; and though he allow them to be
members of the visible Church, till they show themselves worthy to be cast out,
yet he does not ingraft them into Christ, and give them an immediate title to
the heavenly inheritance. But man having not the knowledge of God, cannot pass
the judgment of God: neither must we presume to do so. Yet if the Church, or
any that has commission, shall upon certain evidence bind, or loose, either in
foro interiori, or exteriori, their judgment shall be made good, and ratified
in Heaven, so far as it shall agree with the infallible judgment of God.

It Is doubted by many, Whether the Children of ignorant, or scandalous parents
or such as are both ignorant, and scandalous may be Baptized. What to determine
in this point is difficult, because it may admit many different circumstances,
and cases. If we consider these Children as born in a visible Church, where
there is a faithful ministry, and a good discipline settled, there is hope of
good education, and the Children may be considered as members of that Church as
a body Politic, and so admitted to Baptism: For the greatest danger is, when
there is little or no hope of Christian education. The defects, or crimes of
the immediate parents in the Church of Israel did not deprive their Children of
the right and privilege of circumcision. But except we know the particular
case, and the circumstances thereof with such parents of such Children in
particular, we cannot exactly define what is to be done.

They who affirm, that only the Children of Parents, really regenerate, have
right to Baptism, presuppose,

1. That these Children derive their right to that Sacrament, from their
immediate Parents only.

2. That they derive it from them, as they are regenerate, and neither from any
other, nor from them any other ways considered. But when they can prove clearly
these things out of Scripture, I may believe them. For outward Privileges
(such Circumcision, and Baptism, be) they may be granted to the Seed, according
to the flesh, if the Parents be not justly cast out of the Church; and so of
Christians, if they be made no Christians before the Children be born. Upon
this account, both Ismael, and Esau, were circumcised. And if they be cast out
before, it is a Question, whether upon Adoption, or some other Grant, they may
not be baptized. But I leave this Controversy to be debated, and determined by
such as are so busy about it, as though they had nothing else to do.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of Prayer.
BEcause Prayer is a principal and eminent part of God's Worship, Prayer is a
Presentation of our Petitions unto God: And this is either directed to the true
God, or to a false suppose God: Such the Prayers of Heathens and Idolaters be.
There is Prayer to the true God.

1. According to the Light of Nature. 2. According to the Scriptures of the Old
Testament. 3. According to the Gospel.
And such is the first, and more particular Definition formerly given. And we
must distinguish between a Prayer, and an effectual Prayer. To an effectual
Prayer is required, not only the right qualification of the person praying,
but of the Prayer it self. And the efficacy depends upon neither, but upon
Christ's Merit, and God's Promise. It Is an excellent part of God's Worship: and
therefore some make it to be the Genus. For it is the general nature of it. It Is
the good pleasure of this Eternal King, that all his Subjects should have
access unto his Throne; with all Humility and Reverence bow before him; adore
his glorious Majesty, seek all mercies by way of Petition. And in the Gospel we
must approach in the Name of Christ: For He is our High Priest, who in his
Golden Censer, must offer all our Prayers, sweetened with his Merits; who, by
his blood, has made the Throne of God, the Throne of Grace, and accessible by
sinful man. And for his merits foreseen, and fore-accepted, the Prayers of the
Saints, from the times of Adam, till his Incarnation and Ascension into Heaven,
were accepted. This Worship of Prayer, does acknowledge his Supreme Majesty,
his Almighty Power, and his endless and infinite Mercy, his Omniscience, and
Omnipresence, and gives the glory of all Deliverances and Blessings unto him.
By it, we confess our selves needy Suppliants, and wholly dependent upon him,
who is the ever-living Fountain of all Mercies. He is of that gracious
disposition, that he admits all his Subjects at any time, even the meanest, to
come before him, pour out their Supplications, and reveal their Hearts unto
him: and, as He is able, so He is willing to accept their persons, and their
prayers, take special notice of their desires, yea, of their cries, sighs,
groans; and writes them in the Book of His Eternal Memory, that, in due time,
He may satisfy their Desires. Things desired, are the matter of our Desires,
and our Desires of our Prayers. Yet Desires are not Prayers, but when they are
by us presented unto Him. The first definition of Prayer, is easy to be
understood in all parts thereof, excepting that of Praying, In the Name of
Christ. For the better understanding whereof, we must have recourse unto our
Savior's words unto His Disciples, a little before He dyed, and offered
Himself. The words are these, Verily, verily, I say unto you, whatsoever ye
shall ask the Father in my Name, He will give it you. Hitherto ye have asked
nothing in my Name, Joh. 16. 23, 24. Where,

1. A new Direction is given them, how they should pray. They must not only
pray, and pray unto His Father, but pray unto Him, In His Name. 2. A Promise,
that if they pray thus, they shall certainly be heard: What they ask thus, the
Father will give them. 3. Hitherunto they had not thus prayed in His Name
though they had often prayed according to His Direction and Pattern given them.
The Fathers and Saints of old had prayed virtually, and implicitly, according
to their implicit Faith in Christ to come, in His Name; but not in this manner.
Thus to pray, presupposes

1. Christ risen from the Dead, ascended into Heaven, confirmed the Universal
and Eternal Priest, Intercessour, and Advocate. 2. The Father sitting in the
Throne of Grace, atoned and propitiated in the Blood of Christ. 3. The party
praying, believing all this, acknowledging His own unworthiness, and desiring
His Prayers, Thanksgiving, and Praise, to be accepted for Christ's Merit, and
relying wholly upon the Intercession of Him, who is our Righteous Advocate with
the Father, and the propitiation for our sins. And whosoever shall now pray,
and not in this manner, though he do it in His words, yet not in His Name, he
does not pray aright, neither can he pray effectually, so as to be heard.
To understand the Nature and Qualities of Prayer more distinctly,

1. The Preface. 2. The Body, and matter of the Prayer. 3. The conclusion, and
all of the Essence of Prayer.
In the Preface we are informed,

1. Who must pray. 2. For whom, 3. To whom Prayer must be made. 4. The
qualities of Prayer employed: or, more briefly, By whom, For whom, To whom, In
what manner Prayer must be made.
1. Who must pray? The parties bound unto this Duty are all men living: The
Command of the Moral Law requiring, it obliges universally. All men have need
to pray, because all men, always, in all things, even for the continuance of
Being, do wholly depend upon the Supreme Sovereign. The very Heathens, though
they worshipped false Gods, did acknowledge some Superior Power, did account
Prayer one part of Worship, and a means to propitiate their supposed Deities,
and to obtain their favor, protection, and all their good success in their
great Enterprises. And, if we may believe Tertullian, these, in their Souls, in
Extremities, would invocate one Supreme God. He Is a cursed Atheist, that will
not pray; a profane Wretch, who neglects to pray; an Idolater, that prays not
to the true God; no Christian, that will not pray in the Name of Christ; an
Hypocrite, who prays not sincerely with his heart; a cold Christian, that prays
not fervently; a miserable man that knows not how to pray, and pray effectually.

The Parties for whom we must pray, are

1. Our selves: for besides our own necessityes, wants, and miseries, our total
and perpetual dependence on God requires it. And this will be our condition
till the time of Glory: Our whole life in the flesh is a time of Praying.

2. We must pray for others so far as they are capable of our prayers: For we
are taught to say not only, My Father but Our Father. And because all men are
our Neighbors, and we must love our Neighbors as our selves, we must pray for
them whom we most love, as we pray for our selves. Our prayers must enlarge
according to our charity, and must take in all, not only Friends and
Acquaintance, but Strangers and Enemies: So our Savior taught us to pray for
them who despightfully use us. And because all Mankind are but one Body, and we
Members of the same; so we can exclude no man, as man, and flesh and blood, as
we be. This Neighbor is public, private; ecclesiastical, civil. In the
first place we must pray for public Neighbors, whole Nations, and States; and
especially for our own dear Country, and the People subject to the same supreme
power that we are. Amongst these we must remember our Governors supreme, and
subordinate, upon whom our safety and peace under God do much depend. The
spiritual public Neighbor, to be commended to God chiefly, is the universal
Church militant; and more particularly that particular Church whereof we are a
part, and, in the same, above others, the Ministers of the Gospel. Our private
Neighbors are not only strangers and Enemies, as before, but such as are
joined unto us by Vicinity of place, Family, Kindred, Alliance, near
Acquaintance, Friends by intimate love. These must be thought upon in our
prayers. But most of all must we put God in mind of his dearest Saints, and
especially such as are in greatest miseries, persecutions, trials, for the
Gospel's sake. We must not forget to supplicate and petition for the Conversion
of Pagans, Mahumetans, unbelieving Jews. Yet, in all this, we must observe
that some are in that happy condition, that they need not out prayers; some in
that desperate condition of sin and misery, that our prayers can do them no
good. Neither are they capable of any benefit to be received by them.

The party to whom our Prayers must be presented, is to God: And in this
particular, we consider how we ought to conceive of God, and what Titles we
should give him in our addresses to him. And they all are either implied, or
expressed in these words, Our Father in Heaven. Father signifies his goodness;
in Heaven, his greatness. These two include all his perfections manifested in
his word and works. For he that will pray to God must conceive of him as
mighty, and merciful, willing and able to hear, and help. Vasquez, and other
Schoolmen said well, that God, as Potens, et Liberalis, was the Object of
Prayer. His Might can do any thing; his Mercy will do what he can. And if we
conceive any, either unable, or, if able, unwilling to help us, we judge it in
vain to solicit them, or tender our Petitions to them. We must not only
conceive of God as mighty, and merciful, but as infinite, and eternal, in
both; and also the supreme Lord, present in all places, at all times, and
knowing all things, even the most secret, and, in particular, with what hearts
we pray. A Father in Heaven is all this. And we may observe in the
Scripture-Prayers that God's servants give him in their particular prayers,
such Titles as are suitable to the matter prayed for. As when they desire God
to take vengeance of cruel Oppressors, and bloody Murderers, they give him the
Title of God to whom vengeance belongs: Psalm. 94. 1, 2, 3. etc. Many such
instances may be given. From these words also, we may observe the qualities
required to an effectual Prayer; especially if we join with the Preface the
Body of the Prayer, wherein we have the things prayed for. And because we can
have little heart to pray, when we have no hope to speed, we must look at our
heavenly Father as promising these mercies. And because we have need of all
kind of Mercies, especially spiritual, and eternal, we must look at him both as
an universal cause of all Mercies, especially of the greatest. Because we have
made our selves unworthy to be heard, unworthy to receive any good thing from
him, we must look at him as propitiated by the blood of Christ, and as moved,
and made willing by his merits to give those things, and by his intercession
ready, not only to hear us, but plenteously to power down from Heaven his
blessings, and Graces, upon us, and to give us all things necessary to our
happiness. So that though he many times prevent us with his blessings, and
gives us more then we ask or can think upon, yet we must pray: and our prayer
must be qualified with knowledge, faith, humility, reverence, hope, charity, a
resolution to do his heavenly will, hearing him that he may hear us, and we
must have the Spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry Abba Father, and may come with
boldness, and confidence, before his throne of grace, and be instant,
constant, importunate.

To pass by the distinctions of Prayers; premeditate; conceived by our selves,
or set forms conceived by others; (...), or in company; which I mentioned in
the exposition of the second Commandment. I proceed unto the body of the
Prayer, wherein we have the matter of our prayers, and the things to be
petitioned for. And, by the way, let us take notice that there was no need to
give a rule, for thanksgiving, distinct from that of petition. For that which
is matter of petition before, and when we pray; is the matter of thanksgiving,
when God has heard our our prayers, and granted our desires. All things which
man can desire of God may be reduced unto one, and that is, Happiness; which
consists in full communion with our God, and blessed Savior Jesus Christ. This
happiness may be said to have two parts.

1. Enjoyment of all good we are, or shall be, capable of.

2. Freedom from all evil we either suffer or are liable to.

The good we are capable of, is either spiritual or temporal: The evil which
we suffer, or are liable unto, is either of Sin or Affliction. The evil of Sin
is either of sin past, whereof we are guilty already: or of sin, whereof we are
in danger for time to come. And according to these heads, our blessed Savior
in this pattern reduces in an excellent order all things to be prayed for. So
that whosoever understands it, may see

1. That in a few words a world of matter is contained. There is nothing in all
the Prayers recorded in Scripture; nothing in all the Prayers of Orthodox
Liturgies or Directories; nothing needful to man's full, and eternal bliss,
but here he may find it.

2. That all these are reduced into a most excellent, and accurate Method. This
Pattern therefore must needs be from Heaven, and it is above the power of men,
and Angels, to compose the like. In it we have

1, Supplication for Blessings.

2. Deprecation of evils.

The Supplication is either for Blessings spiritual, in the three first
Petitions; for temporal, in the fourth. Deprecation of the evil of Sin past,
we have in the fifth; of Sin to come in the sixth; where is added a Deprecation
of the evil of Affliction, which some make a seventh Petition.

Before I proceed to the particular explication of these heads, I desire the
Reader to take notice

1. That a Prayer may be, either simple; as when one of these only is the
Matter of our Petition; or compound, when more, or all these, are the subject
of our prayer. To this purpose, in Books for private devotion, and in public
Liturgies, as also in the Scripture, we have many examples.

2. That the whole Pattern is delivered by the Evangelist St. Luke as a
direction given to Christ's Disciples, to regulate their Prayers: In Matthew
it is expressed as a formal Prayer; so that if we take up the very words, and
address our selves to God, they are properly a Prayer.

3. That some, upon vain and weak grounds, think it unlawful in these words to
pray to God. But certainly they are an excellent Prayer, if offered with
Understanding and Devotion unto God, in the Name of Christ glorified, and made
our Intercessour in Heaven.

4. Yet many do idolize this Prayer, as though there should be some strange
force, and power in the very words: and it is a sad thing to think how it is
abused, both in public, and private, and that by very many, who take upon them
to use it without Understanding, Affection, right disposition of heart, and the
Name of Jesus Christ, in which it should be offered.

Our Blessed Savior taught us first to supplicate,

1. The Hallowing of his Name. 2. The Coming of His Kingdom. 3. The Doing of
His Will.
And though these seem to tend only unto Gods glory, yet they end in man's
benefit, and good.

The first is, Hallowed Be Thy Name; which may be understood so as to be a
D^xologie, or a Petition. In the former sense, they ascribe unto God, all glory
honor, power, and Bliss for evermore. In the latter sense as they are a
Petition, and so usually taken, we must first consider the meaning of the
words; Wherein we have,

1. The Name of our heavenly Father. 2. The Hallowing of it. 3. Our Petition
that it may be Hallowed.
By Name is meant, the Majesty, and the supreme, and universal, and eternal
power of God, whereby he is King of Kings, Lord of Lords, and the only God; to
whom alone all Glory, Honor, Praise, and Worship are for ever due from all
both Men and Angels, and that in the highest degree. For his Name is above all
Names: and there is an infinite distance between him so far above, and all other
things even the most excellent so far below. This Name, and this Power, this
Excellent Majesty, and Supreme Dominion does presuppose his glorious
perfections, and his eminent acts. The Hallowing of this Name is not to make it
more Holy, or excellent then in it self it is; For that cannot be done: There
is no degree above the highest, no addition to that which is infinite. To
Hallow it therefore must be something else: And it is to know, and acknowledge
it to be such as it is. This cannot be done except it be manifested: and it is
manifested in his glorious works, and especially in his blessed word. To know
it thus manifested, and to acknowledge him the only supreme Lord with all
humility and reverence, and to subject our selves as nothing in our selves,
wholly unto him is to hallow, glorify, and magnify the same: For all these
words signify the same thing. For to sanctify is to acknowledge Him to be
excellent; to glorify, is, to acknowledge him as glorious; to magnify, is, to
acknowledge him as great. Yet, it is not sufficient to acknowledge him as
excellent, glorious, great, but he must be acknowledged as most excellent, most
glorious, and the greatest, and we must wholly submit our selves to him as
such, not only as Creator, and Preserver, but Redeemer. To petition for this
Hallowing of his Name, is to request

1. That as he has already, so he would continue to manifest his name more and
more, not only unto us, but unto all others; not only by his word revealed
from Heaven, and by his former works, but by new, and glorious works, so that
his very enemies may acknowledge that he alone is God, and that his name is
most excellent, and that he rules in Heaven, and earth. His name has bin
manifested to others; it has bin manifested to us; and may be manifested to
them that are unborn. It has bin manifested much, it may be manifested more.
It has bin Hallowed by others, and much too; We pray it may be Hallowed by us,
and by us more, and more. It Is manifest to all by the works of Creation, and
preservation, and general government of the World, but not by his Gospel, and
the Work of Redemption, as it is to us. Yet many do not know his name, though
manifested; many know it but imperfectly, and not as they should; and might do;
Many know it more then others, yet do not acknowledge it, as they should do,
and submit unto it. And they who in this life know it most, do not acknowledge
it, and submit unto it perfectly: Therefore there is great need to pray
continually that this Name may be Hallowed by us, by all, and that perfectly;
which duty will not fully be performed by us, till we see him face to face in
glory. Yet in this vale of tears we may cry Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God
Almighty, which was, and is, and is to come; and cast our selves, and lie at
his Throne, giving all Glory, Honor, and Power, to Father, Son, and Holy Ghost
for evermore. In this we pray for the confusion of Atheists, Idolaters, which
either do not acknowledge him at all, or not alone; and of all Men and Devils,
which shall usurp this power and, glory and arrogate it to themselves.

The second petition is, Thy Kingdom Come: wherein, that Gods Name might be
the more Hallowed and Glorified, we pray that he would exercise his supreme and
universal power, especially in the Spiritual government of mankind, that all
his enemies may be subdued, and his Loyal, and obedient subjects may obtain
full, and everlasting peace, and safety. For this is the principal end of the
coming of his Kingdom, and his Kingdom comes when he Reigns. This Kingdom
is not that general providence of God whereby he orders all things to their
ends; nor the civil government of mankind in their several Commonweals,
though both be subordinate unto this; but the special government of
God-Redeemer in Christ, by which man is ordered to his final and eternal
estate. This Kingdom and Reign of God began betimes, even presently upon the
fall of Adam, and was still coming unto that very day, when our Savior did
teach his disciples to pray, Thy Kingdom Come. It was come before, and a great
part of this Reign was past, but for the most eminent, and most excellent
manner it was then to come. John the Baptist, Christ himself, his Apostles, and
Disciples by his direction did preach, that the Kingdom of God was at hand:
which did imply that the more eminent degree, and glorious manner was not yet
come, though not far off. And when he had finished his work of humiliation, was
risen again, ascended into Heaven, and set at the right hand of God, invested
with an Universal Regal power, and confirmed in his everlasting Priesthood,
then this Kingdom was come: and he began to Reign gloriously, and God in and
by him began to order, and administer his spiritual, and eternal kingdom, so
as he never did before. Then the rod of his Scepter went out of Sion, and he
Reigned in the midst of his enemies; he enlarged the borders of his Dominion,
and he made all nations his territory. This is the Kingdom of the Messiah, so
much spoken of, by all the Prophets; so much desired, so much longed for, so
long expected by Kings, and Prophets, who lived not to see it. This is the
Kingdom in a Special, and strict manner, which they were then taught to pray
for, and in such a manner, as that neither we now, not they, after Christ began
to rule at his Father's right hand, could pray for. Yet because Christ did
only then begin to Reign, and He must Reign till his enemies be made his
footstool, and all his adversaries, even death the last be subdued, and
destroyed, and this is not yet done, therefore they might then after Christ's
exaltation, and we must now, pray that he would continue to Rule by his word,
his spirit, his special power till that which was promised be accomplished;
that so that great design of God, which was, the total, and perpetual ruin
of Satan's Kingdom, and the full, and final deliverance of his Saints might
take effect. There be three degrees, and Periods of this Reign. The

Frist, Commenced upon the Fall of man: The

2d. Upon the exaltation of Christ. And the

3d. Shall follow upon the Resurrection, and last Judgment, when God shall be
all in all, and Reign perfectly without any enemy, without any opposition. This
we pray for here, as that special and spiritual Kingdom, which is distinguished
from the civil government of temporal States, opposed to the Kingdom of
darkness, of Sin, Satan, Death. It Is called in Scriptures the Kingdom of
God, the Kingdom of Heaven, the Kingdom of Light, the Kingdom of Christ, the
Kingdom of Grace, the Universal, and Eternal Kingdom.

The King is God,

In this government, he does exercise his severe justice, his greatest power,
his choicest wisdom, and his sweetest mercy in the highest degree. This
Kingdom comes unto a people, when God graciously vouchsafes to give them the
word; Sacraments, Ministers, and all the means of conversion, with a promise
in the word, of his Spirit, to make this (used) effectual. He continues it with
them, whilst he continues these means, and does not take away his spirit; and
deliver them up to a reprobate mind, so that the things that concern their
everlasting peace are not eternally hid from their eyes. It comes close, and
effectually, when God by these means, made efficacious by his spirit,
destroys the dominion of sin, and dispossesseth Satan. It Is then consummate,
when sin is wholly destroyed, and the person made fully subject, and perfectly
obedient to his eternal Sovereign. It Is consummate to the Universal Church,
upon the execution of the final judgment; It Is principally with in us, and
established in our hearts by God, when he there to Reigns, as first to take
away the Dominion, then, in the end, the very existence (as I may so call it)
of sin. For it proceeds by degrees; and sin does first cease to Reign then to
Be in us. This government therefore is an act of God Redeemer in Christ, giving
all things, doing all things necessary, sufficient, effectual, for our
Conversion, confirmation, perseverance, and consummation, as he has promised;
and, by promise bound himself to us. So that in this Petition we pray for, and
humbly seek of God his Word, his Sacraments the Ministry of the Gospel,
Christian Sabbaths, Discipline, pious Magistrates, the gifts and graces of the
spirit, the continuance, and good success of these; the ordering of all things
for the good of the Church; the conversion of the Jews, the reducement of all
Nations to subjection unto Christ, justification the continuance, and
perfection of sanctication, the first fruits of the spirit of joy, and comfort,
the destruction of the Kingdom of Satan and Antichrist, and all enemies of his
truth, and our salvation; for the coming of Christ, the Resurrection of the
last judgment, the execution of it in the eternal glorification of his Saints,
and perdition of their enemies. That God by Christ has thus far reigned in the
World, in this Nation, in our hearts, is a matter of thanksgiving, and a
benefit never to be forgotten.

The next Petition for spiritual blessings, Thy will be done on Earth as it is
done in Heaven. Wherein we have

1. Our Heavenly Father's Will. 2. The doing of it. 3. The manner, and degrees
of doing it.
By Will is not meant the essence of God, nor his Decrees, but the Laws of his
spiritual kingdom, wherein he requires Subjection, and Obedience, Repentance,
Faith, good works, and these to be performed to him as Lord Redeemer by Christ
Jesus. To do this will, is to be really, and sincerely subject and obedient, in
avoiding all sins prohibited; and doing all good Commanded by the Laws of his
Kingdom, having a special eye to the rewards promised, and the punishments
threatened. The manner how this duty is to be performed is set down by
prescribing a Pattern in Heaven. It Is true that the Stars of Heaven do
continually, and constantly in their motion observe their order fixed unto them
in Creation. Yet this is far short, though something it be, and they
continually accuse us of disobedience, and exorbitancy, seeing they have
followed strictly, and precisely, the rule of Creation from the first time of
their Being, but we are exorbitant, and continually wander: The will of God is
done in an higher degree, and more excellently by the Angels, those blessed and
immortal spirits, who never sinned, and are so confirmed that they shall never
sin: For they do his commandments, Hearkening to the voice of his Word, Psalm.
103. 20. They subject themselves wholly unto him, Whose throne is in Heaven,
and his Kingdom rules over all, verse. 19. They acknowledge Jesus Christ at
Gods right hand to be their Lord. They perform an universal obedience to all
his Laws; and that

1. Most freely. 2. Perpetually. 3. In a degree of Perfection.
It must be our design, desire, endeavor to follow their example, till we
reach, and attain their perfection. And because we have no power to do this
will in this manner, we therefore in these words pray for Gods sanctifying,
assisting and confirming power accompanying his Word, and that we may wholly
subject our selves unto his power, and be effectually and continaully inclined
and enabled to do his Will in all things, at all times, with all our hearts.
The reason why this petition follows the former, and is immediately subjoyned,
is manifest: For except we subject our selves unto the power of this King, and
thus observe the Laws of this Heavenly Kingdom: we cannot be capable of, have
any right unto, or enjoy the honor joy, peace, and happiness of the same. It
has very near connection with the former petition, and therefore we may desire
of God some mercies, which in both are the same but in different respects. In
the former we desire them so* as they are such, as, without which, he cannot
Reign, and give us everlasting peace: We desire here the same things as
necessary, and without which we cannot perform our duty in observing his Laws,
which is the condition of the rewards promised: By them we acknowledge our
fall, depravation, inability, the want of Gods divine Spirit to reinstamp his
Image upon us, and we earnestly desire his sanctifying grace to be given and
continued unto us, as without which we can do nothing. Upon this account Austin
made use of these words to prove against the Pelagian, the necessity of grace.

The fourth petition, Give us this Day our Daily Bread; The order is clear: For
we must first seek spiritual, then, temporal blessings; the one as more
excellent, and necessary to eternal life; the other is not necessary, nor so
excellent. The prayer is agreeable to our Saviors doctrine: For He that taught
us to pray first for spiritualls, then for temporalls, taught us first to seek
the Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness; and then Food and Raiment should
be added. These Earthly things were given to preserve this bodily life, that
enjoying health, Peace, Food, Raiment, we might not be distracted in the
service of our God, but cheerfully seek eternal life in Heaven? Earthly things
are given to seek Heavenly; and the seeking of Heavenly blessings, first, is
the right and ready way to obtain Earthly. Therefore to seek temporalls fust,
and more, is preposterous, and a perverting of the order prescribed by our
Savior, both for our practice, and our prayers. By (Bread) which is the staff
of life, is meant all kind of necessa^y food, raiment* lands, houses, Cattle,
seasonable times health, peace, good government Civil, and all things necessary
for a comfortable life, that we may seek a better. It Is opposed to famine,
nakedness, sickness poverty, war, captivity, unreasonable times, and all such
things as make our life uncomfortable, and miserable. And we are taught by this
word, not to desire, or seek riches, daintyes, or superfluities. This bread is
called (Our daily Bread) because we need it every day; it is suitable to, and
agreeable to our bodily nature, and fit to nourish us; and is to be desired in
a competent measure between poverty and abundance: The word is thus understood
by diverse learned Authors. By (This Day) we may understand the present time:
For we must not distract our minds by seeking these earthly things,
immoderately, or inordinately. We seek them immoderately, when we seek
abundance, or seek them too eagerly, or take into our thoughts too much of
future times, which are uncertain* and both beyond our knowledge, and our
power. We seek them inordinately,

1. When we seek them not of God.

2. When we trust not in him.

3. When we use any unjust means to acquire them.

4. When we seek not Gods Kingdom, and spiritual^, first and chiefly. This
daily bread to day, is the thing we must petition for. And by these words
Christ does direct, and limit us. The Petition is in these words (Give us)
which implies that we have all earthly succor, and sustentation from our
^eavenly Father, and that by way of Gi^t. For as you heard in the 8th
Commandment; the absolute, and total propriety of all things is in God: And
though they may come to us by occupation, donation, purchase, inheritance,
labor, or any other way, yet they are from God, who by ^hese means does give
them unto us, and can take them away at Will, and plea^ure, and when he has
given them. Therefore it is he, and he alone that must continue them ours, and
bless, and sanctify them unto us: For otherwise all our labors, cares,
forecast, are in vain. Our daily bread is no bread unto us, without his
blessing it cannot seed us. And these words imply further, that we have a
Father in Heaven, and if we serve him, he will provide for us, and will not see
his Children want bread. This bread must be ours not others, justly acqui^ed,
and given us, so as to be ours, not only by the laws of men, but God. This
does not forbid us to take pains, be prudent, frugal, and use just means to
a^quire and keep them. Yet we must not set our hearts upon them, or abuse them
to drunkenness, pride, gluttony, or any ways mispend them, or in our
abundance forget our God.

After supplication, Adam this kind of petition is needful. The evils which we
deprecate arise from many causes, and are all reduced to the evils of sin, or
affliction. The evil of sin is either of guilt, or of temptation: for it is
either past, and so the guilt lies upon us; or to come, and so we are in danger
of it, may be tempted to it, and so overcome. And first we are taught to
deprecate the guilt of sin past in these words.

Forgive us our Trespasses, as we forgive them that Trespass against us. In
Matthew, Forgive us our Debts. In Luke, Forgive us our Sins.

That we may understand what we in these words are taught to ask of God, we
must know.

1. What the evil is. 2. What it is to forgive. 3. To whom the evil is
forgiven.
The evil is sin, which makes us guilty, in making us such. Sin (as you heard
before) is a disobedience to Gods law; it displeases God, who hates it, and
makes the party sinning, both liable to temporal, spiritual, and eternal
punishments. For he that shall offend God as a Lawgiver, may justly be punished
by him as a Judge. Sins are called Trespasses, because God by them may be said
to suffer damage, and his glory due to him from his subject is impaired;
though not in it self, yet in respect of us, and if satisfaction be not made we
must suffer. The expression is from the Chaldy and Syriack languages, in which
the word (...) Chob signifies to sin, to offend God, to do wickedly, and
sometimes to contract a debt. And whosoever sins, instantly and immediately he
becomes a debtor, and owes a punishment unto God, which he is bound to suffer,
and must suffer when it pleases the supreme Judge to inflict it, if it be not
some ways prevented. The substantive of this verb does sometimes signify
debt, but often sin, and guilt. One Evangelist (as you heard) calls it debt,
another s^n, yet by sin is meant guilt, whereby a man is a debtor, and bound to
punishment. The Socin^an, not digesting and approving Christ's satisfaction
takes occasion from the word (debts) used in Matthew to assert that sins are
debts, and the obligation contracted by them is (obligatio credita): whereas
it is (obligatio criminis) as may easily appear from the whole tenure of the
Scripture, and even from this place. Whether they do this ignorantly or
wilfully, I know not, but if ignorantly, they are grossly ignorant: For though
sins are called debts, and such debts as arise from contracts, and may be
remitted by a free acquittance, yet they are but so called Metaphorically. Yet
no man can prove out of this place that they are so called in that sense, but
rather the contrary, if we thoroughly examine the words. To forgive or remit sin
is to take away the guilt, or obligation to punishment: and this it is
properly, and in strict sense: and the word remit does inform us, and teach us
that it is so: and so far as the obligation is remitted, so far sin is
pardoned, and no further. If it be wholly remitted, the party guilty is wholly
freed; but if the remission of the obligation be but in part, as it may be, the
pardon is not full, and consummate. And it is not to be doubted, but if the
obligation may be remitted in part, and by degrees, and is so many times, and
not wholly at an instant (Simul and Semel). And so far as a guilty person is
freed by the supreme Judge from the guilt, so far he is freed from the
punishment, either present, and lying upon him, by removal; or future, by
prevention. And a judge, or a party offended may pardon either, (ex nuda
voluntate) without requiring any satisfaction, or upon satisfaction given, and
accepted: And the satisfaction may be made, either by the party offending, or
some other substituted, and accepted. The forgiveness or pardon, we here pray
for is granted upon satisfaction made unto divine justice, not by the sinner,
but by Jesus Christ, substituted, and accepted by God. Yet this satisfaction
must be acknowledged, and pleaded in the Court of Heaven, by the sinner
confessing, repenting believing in Christ, not only making satisfaction on
earth by his blood, but pleading his blood as a Propi^iation in Heaven. And
here forgiveness, Pardon, Remission, sparing, not imputing, justifying are all
one. By this discourse we understand what Forgiveness is. The Party that
forgives sin is our Heavenly Father. And it is an act of God, not as Lawgiver
but as Judge, yet not of him as Judge according to the law of works given to
man at his Creation, but according to the law of Redemption. Whereas some
think, that pardon is not the act of a Judge, as a Judge, they surely mean it
of an inferior Judge bound to pass judgment according to the Law in force.

Otherwise, a Judge Supreme, and above Law, may pardon, and as a Judge: for
Pardon, actively considered, is a Sentence. The reason why a subordinate Judge,
by Commission, cannot pardon, is not because he is a Judge; but because he is a
Judge limited by his Commission, which is not essential, but accidental to a
Judge. Yet Absolution, which declares a man to be innocent upon Proof* may be
an Act of an inferior Jurisdiction. But howsoever it be in Humane Courts, yet
it is certain that Justification by Faith in Christ, opposed in the Scripture to
Condemnation, is a Sentence, according to the Law of Redemption in force: Yet
in many things, it differs from all Humane Judgments, and is called Pardon,
because the party pardoned is guilty, and unjust in himself; and it is called
Justification, because the party pardoned, is just in Christ. God only being
the Supreme Lawgiver, and Judge, can forgive sin, in proper sense; yet He may
use the Ministry of others, in doing this, according to that measure of
Jurisdiction, He shall derive unto them: Yet as He never gave either Men or
Angels infallible Knowledge, to know the secrets of men's hearts, not power to
inflict, or remove Spiritual Judgments; so He never gave them Authority,
ab^olutely, to forgive sin, or pronounce Sentence in their own name: For it is
only valid and irrevocable, so far as He shall by His own Name make it such.
Yet this Forgiveness is an Act of God, as merciful, yet just, and as sitting in
the Throne of Grace, p^opitiated by the B^oud of Christ, upon a person
penitent, and believing in Christ, and pleading his satisfaction, or
propitiation, in ^is Prayers.

The Party pardoned, is,

1. Sinful Man.

2. Man confessing his guilt, and desert of punishment.

3. Hating sin and willing to forsake it.

4. Believing.

5. Pleading the propitiation of Christ, as the only meritorious cause, and
the Promise of God in Christ.

6. Ready to forgive others, who have offended and wronged him. This forgiving
others* is an act of private Jurisdiction; for so the power of a private man,
to pass by offenses done unto himself may be truly called. Yet this Pardon
cannot free him from the punishment due unto him, either by the Law of God, or
Men, if God or Man proceed to Judgment against him. By this Petition, when we
say, Forgive us our sins, we acknowledge our selves, and others, for whom we
pray, to be guilty: and, by this Confession, we accuse our selves as guilty;
justify God, if He should condemn us; magnify His Mercy, if He pardon us. It
must be made with a bleeding heart, and godly sorrow, that we have offended so
just, so holy, so good and merciful a Father; with great humility, and
importunity, not only for our selves, but others: and because we daily sin, we
must daily pray, Lord forgive us our trespasses. We must not mention our own
merits, righteousness, good works: for all righteousness and merit in our
selves must be renounced, otherwise we lose the cause. And if we from our
hearts do not forgive others, we plead against our selves, and cannot obtain
pardon. This is the reason why our Savior so much mentions and urges the
Duty of forgiving others, though 77 times a day. And if we pray in this due
manner, Christ will plead, and God will pardon, and we shall depart justified.
For the most merciful God propitiated, and pressed by Christ's Intercession,
cannot hide his face long from penitent and believing sinners. His Promises, to
t^is purpose, are many and firm, and He is faithful, and just; and all of them,
in Christ are Yea, and Amen.

The second Deprecation,

Lead us not into Temptation; For because it is to little purpose to be
pardoned, and freed from the guilt of sin past, if we continually return to sin
again and so contract a new guilt; therefore our Savior taught us daily to
tender this Petition to our Heavenly Father. For if we were in Heaven, all
former sins pardoned; yet if we were not fully freed from the danger of sinning
again, we could not be fully happy, because we could not be fully secured in
that estate of holiness and bliss. God, in his abundant mercy in Christ, does
not pardon sin-past, with any intention to give us liberty to sin again, that
Grace may abound, and that we may make new Work for Mercy. When He has once
healed and restored us, He says unto us, as Christ did to the impotent man,
whom He had healed at the Pool of Bethesda, Behold thou art made whole; Sin no
more, lest a worse thing come unto thee, Joh. 5. 14. For we are delivered out
of the hands of all our Enemies, to serve him without fear in holiness and
righteousness before him, all our days, Luke 1. 74, 75. For as we have engaged
our selves* so it must be our special care to observe, and not transgress the
just and holy Laws of this Spiritual Kingdom. That we may he better understand
the words of this Petition, we must enquire

1. What Temptation is, 2. What it is to be ^ed into Temptation, 3. What we
pray for in these words.
Temptation, morally and strictly taken, may be said to be any thing which
unduceth and moves us to sin, as of it is own Nature tending thereunto. For we
must conceive Temptations, as in themselves, tending directly to p^oduce, or
cause actual sins. Yet because many times they are not only resist^d, but
overcome, they are like Attempts Assaults Endeavors, which aim at sin, yet do
not always take effect. They may be actual causes of sin, yet sometimes are
not, sometimes are essicients thereof. A Temptation may be called not merely a
thing but an act. Binsfield the S^ffragan of Triers, defines it to be,
Assimulatio Boni ad fallendum. His meaning is, that it is a Representation of a
thing, as good, though it be evil, to incline us to it; or of something that is
good, as evil, to restrain us from it. And the end of it is to deceive the
party tempted. For because the Will of Man is so created of God, that it
neither can be forced, or necessitated to sin, not approve, like, choose,
desire, love, consent unto anything represented and apprehended as e^il;
therefore every Tempter goes about to delude the apprehension, pervert the
Judgment, corrupt the Will, and so entice, incline, and incite it freely unto
evil.

The great Tempter is the Devil, Sampson, David, Solomon, Peter, and other
great Worthies, but also against Adam Innocent. He tempts man sometimes
immediately, and that either invisibly, or visibly by some Form or Bodily Shape
assumed; wherein he appears to Man, as once he abused the Serpent, to deceive
Eve. Yet often he does his cursed Works by others mediately; and his most
effectual Instruments are the wicked of the world, who, by their evil example
bad Custom, false Doctrine, pernicious Counsels, impious and unjust Laws,
perverse Judgments, Persuasions, Menaces, Promises, Persecutions, Gifts,
Allurements, and other ways, restraining thousands from doing good, stirring
them up, and inclining them to evil. He also takes advantage from the Sensitive
Part, from the Ignorance of the Understanding the Depravation of the Will, the
Flesh lusting against the Spirit, and rebelling not only against the Dictates
of right Reason, but the Illuminations and Motions of the Spirit; and from the
Violence of our Passions, and Vehemence of our inordinate Affection. The more
of Flesh and Lust is in us, the stronger he is against us; because we carry in
our Bosom, nay, in our Bowels, a treacherous Enemy, ready to confederate with
him, and betray us unto him, and so makes our selves to tempt our selves. For
Man is tempted of himself, when he is drawn away of his own Lust and enticed,
Jam. 1. 14. Thus you understand, in some measure, what Temptation is; and that
the parties tempting us without, are the Devil and the World; and within us,
the Flesh, and Corruption. But what is it, To be led into Temptation? It Is not
merely to be tempted: for so have many been, and have not only resisted, but
overcome the Tempter, and that sometimes with ease. And no Temptation, except
entertained, and, in some measure, consented unto, can do us any hurt. And
whatsoever God, by His Almighty Power, may do; yet neither Man, or Devil, can
necessitate us to sin. To be led, or brought into temptation, therefore, is so
to be tempted, as that there is great danger we shall be overcome. For if we be
surprised, found neither watching, nor armed, nor any way prepared for Defense;
or if we be weak, and the Temptation violent, and above our strength; or if we
be deserted, and left destitute of help, and sufficient assistance; or if
Divine Providence leave us circumvented, so that there is no ways to escape,
then are we led into Temptation, and shall hardly escape.

The thing, Not to be led into Temptation. It Is not, that God would not suffer
us to be tempted at all at any time; but that He would be pleased, when He sees
us weak, and not able to stand, either to divert it, or delay it, and so, for
the time, to prevent it: Or, if that it be His Will, that we must be tempted,
that He would not desert us, and deny His assistance: or not suffer us to
presume, or despair: or that He restrain the violence of the Tempter, and abate
the strength of the Temptation, or proportion it to our strength, and our
strength to it, lest it prove Superior; so that though the Temptation be
continued long, be violent and extraordinary, we may have great, and
extraordinary power and assistance, not only to resist, but conquer: or that
He would make a way to escape; and that He would never suffer us to be secure,
but stir us up, that we may be ever watchful. In a word, we pray for clearness
of Understanding, soundness of Judgment, integrity of Heart, a great measure of
Confidence and Prudence in Heavenly Things, and all the Graces of the Spirit;
strong Resolutions against Sin, constancy in the profession and practice of His
Truth, power over Passions and Affections, Noble and Divine Affections; so that
we may be above the fears and desires of the World, whereby men are entangled
in the snares of Satan, his continual care and assistance, until the very hour
of Death, and that in our hardest and extreme Conflicts, He would stand at our
right hand, perfect, stablish, strengthen, settle us, and shortly tread Satan
under our feet, that so we may obtain a final Victory, and the state of safety
and security, wherein we shall never be in danger of sin, and temptation any
more. We ought to be the more earnest and fervent in this Petition, because we
know our own weakness, the strength and violence of temptation, the sad
condition of such as are foiled the glory, joy, and comfort of the Victory: And
this is our great advantage, that Christ has overcome the World, cast out the
Prince of Darkness; and being tempted, and that violently, himself, He pities
us the more, and has the greater care of us. Yet Importunity will little avail
us, except we stand continually upon our Watch, strongly armed with the
complete Armor of God, use the strength God has given us, take all
opportunity to do good, avoid the causes and occasions of sin; not presume upon
our own power, humbly rely upon God, be patient, and continue fighting, defend
our selves, and resist the Enemy unto Death: and if we be sometimes worsted,
and wounded; presently renew our Repentance and Faith, return unto the Fight
again, with greater Care, and stronger Resolutions, make no Truce with the
Enemy, give him no respight, never faint, nor intermit the War, till Sin be
fully and finally subdued in us.

The words of this Petition do seem to imply, that God does lead us sometimes
into temptation; and the expression seems strange: For God cannot be tempted
with evil, neither tempts He any man, Jam. 1. 13. Therefore we must
understand the words so, As

1. In no wise to think, that God does, or can move, or induce any man to sin:
for this cannot any ways stand with His purest Holiness, nor with His most Holy
Law.

2. Yet because nothing can be done, or come to pass, without His Divine
Providence, either effecting, or permitting, or ordering, therefore, God may be
said to lead into temptation, because He either permits us to be tempted, and
neither restrains the Tempter, nor prevents the Temptation: For if a Sparrow
fall not to the ground, much less is Man tempted without His Will and
Providence.

3. God does put a Man in such a condition, as wherein He shall be tempted, and
the condition it self is such, as no ways in it self tends unto sin; yet
through Man's Negligence, or Corruption, may be a great occasion of Temptation:
And so He may be said to tempt, per accidens. An estate of Peace and Wealth is
good; yet such is the subtilty of Satan, and the corruption of Man, that few
in that condition, but are tempted and overcome.

4. God may be said to lead us into temptation, when He, for some just canses,
denies us deliverance from, and out of the same: For desertions, denial of
assistance strength, and a competent Superior Degree of both, are many times
just Ju^gments of God.

5. God many times brings his own Children into an estate of Temptation on
purpose to try their Faith, and excellent Virtues, and so gives them a glorious
Victory. Yet we must know, that God necessitates no Man to sin; and, if in
temptation we be overcome, it is not His, but our own fault.

The last Petition is, Deliver us from evil: Some understand this as a branch
of the former Petition, as indeed it may be in some sense: For suppose it to be
meant of the evil of afflictions; yet even these are called Trials and
Temptations, Jam. 1. 2. and Satan, from these, takes occasion, and sometimes
advantage from them to tempt us. Job's afflictions, as from Satan, were
temptations.

Some understand by that word, Evil, Satan, that great Enemy, and terrible
Adversary. Some say that, that Evil is the evil of Sin* as though we should say
unto our Heavenly Father, Though thou suffer us to be tempted, yet deliver us
from the evil of temptation, which is Sin. Yet the evil of Affliction,
Tribulation, Persecution, and the Misery of this life is not in it self sin:
though Satan, and wicked men, may seek by these to draw us to sin. And whether
they be punishments (according to the fifth Petition) for former sins; or
chastisements, and corrections for future Reformation, or Trials of our Faith
and Patience; yet we must pray, that God would sanctify us in them, sanctify
them unto us, and wholly, and for ever, deliver us from them, seeing God has
promised to wipe away all tears, and make all things new. For they are not good
in themselves, though He, by His Wisdom, turn them to our good. But we cannot
be fully happy, till wholly freed from them.

After the Preface, and the Body of the Prayer, wherein our Savior teaches us
by whom, for whom, to whom, in what manner, for what things we must pray and
give thanks, follows the Conclusion in these words;

For thine is the Kingdom, Power, and Glory. Concerning these words,

1. That as Grotius, and diverse others have observed, they are not found in the
most ancient Greek Copies in Matthew, as they are not mentioned in Luke.

2. Yet they are found in the Arabic, Syriack, and Vulgar Latin Translations:
whereupon He conceives those Translations to be made after the Liturgies of the
Churches were brought unto a certain Form.

3. Some understand these words, so as to contain certain Reasons whereupon we
ought to press our Petitions before the Throne of Grace, and so move Him to
give them. For His is the Kingdom, which they desire to come; His Power alone,
which can effect these things; and the granting of them tends unto, and will
end in His Glory. We may observe in the Prayers of the Scripture, that God's
Saints did urge and press their Petitions upon God'^ Mercy, His Justice, His
Power and Glory, His place of Universal Judge, His Promise and Covenant, the
Justice of their Cause, the Iniquity and Cruelty of their Enemies, their misery
and sad condition, their joy and comfort, which would follow upon their
Deliverance, their Relation to Him, His former Favors, and such like. And with
these they added Solemn Vows of Reformation, Praise and Thanksgiving.

4. They may be understood as a Doxologie, with which the Apostles, and the
Church did use to conclude their Prayers. And hereof we have many Examples,
especially in the New Testament, and in ancient Liturgies, following the
Scriptures. And as the Preface, and the words thereof spoken unto God, with
humble A^oration, is a fit Salutation of our Heavenly Father, upon our entrance
into His Pre^ence, by it, to make way for our Prayers; so a Doxologie is a very
fit Valediction, when we have ended our Prayers, and depart (as it were) from
His Presence.

5. This Doxologie does agree, in general, with others in the Scripture; but
it is not to distinct and particular, as many of them be, which offer and
ascribe prai^e and glory unto God, either in the Name of, or by Christ; as
Ephesians. 3. 21. or unto Christ, 1 Timothy 6. 16. or to God, and the Lamb Christ
Jesus, Revel. 5. 13. That Doxologie, Glory be to the Father, and to the Son,
and to the Holy Ghost etc. was very agreeable to the Scriptures, very ancient,
the Epitome of all other Doxologies; and so a Doxologie, that it was a
Confession of our Faith, in God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. This seems to
be essential to Prayer, and to be either employed, or expressed in every Prayer.

The word, Amen, is the Epitome of the Prayer, summing up the whole, and
praying it ove^ again, and repeating our desires jointly in one word, and in
public Prayers it is to be uttered by the people, by way of answer, not only
to signify the former act of praying all again in one word, but also their
consent* 1 Cor. 14. 16. And it may be said to be, the confirmation of Prayer.

CHAP. XIX.
Concerning the Laws of God, as a Rule of Judgment in the Promises, and
Comminations.
HItherto of the Law of God Redeemer, God-Redeemer in Christ, as atoned by his
Blood, and so made propitious, may be said to be positive, as the Objects of
both are positive, and above the Law of Nature, as those positives, which are
Ceremonial, are below it. But to return to the Law, as a Rule of Judgment, we
must enquire into

1. The Nature of Promises, and Threats in general. 2. The Order of this part
of Divine Laws. 3. The particular Nature of these Promises and Threats in the
Laws God-Redeemer.
1. For the Nature of Promises, and then of Threats. The Object of the Promises
is, Bonum suturum, For we cannot promise evil, but good; at least, that which
is conceived to be good: neither can we properly be said, to promise good past,
or present. The act of a promise, is a voluntary Obligation, whereby the party
promising, does bind himself unto another, for to do, or give some good unto
the foresaid party. All promises are voluntary, otherwise they are not
promises. The effect of them, in respect of the party promising, is Obligation;
in respect of the party to whom the promise is made, some kind of right unto
the thing promised. To threaten, is to signify to another, that we intend to
do him some hurt, or evil. The Object is

1. Evil: For we cannot properly threaten good. 2. It Is evil to come;
otherwise, it is actual hurt, or punishment. 3. It presupposes some intention,
or resolution, to do hurt, or inflict evil. 4. It signifies by words, or other
signs, this intention; as Promises 1. Presuppose some intention to do good. 2.
A signification of this intention, or purpose.

I will not here spend time, in the enumeration of the Accidents, or Adjuncts
of these Promises, to show how they are private, or public, annexed to the
Precepts of the Law, or not; absolute, or conditional; made by Superiors,
Inferiors, Equals; feigned, or unfeigned; the Promises of such as have power
to make them, and also strength to perform them, or of such as have nor. I also
pass by the accidental distinctions of Threats; which word, some think, comes
of Terreo, to terrify. There are Promises, and Threats of Man, and of God.
These are of God, annexed to His Precepts, and Prohibitions, as a Rule of Man's
Obedience. And, in this respect, they differ from other Promises, and Threats.

The Order of these,

1. They are referred to that part of Government, which is concerning Laws. 2.
In Laws they follow that part, which in Precepts, and Prohibitions, is a Rule
of Obedience.
For, as the Law considered, as a Rule of Judgment, presupposes something
before in it, as a Rule of Obedience: So these Promises relate unto the
Precepts observed; as the Threats consider them as violated, This is the Order
determined by God, to manifest His Justice, in His Retribution of Rewards, and
punishments: and hereby He signifies, that though He be much inclined to
reward, and do good; yet He will judge only the Obedient, a fit Subject of His
Bounty and Rewards. They that are just, and obey His Laws, and they only shall
live, and enjoy His Mercies. And he never threatens, as He never inflicts
punishments, but upon demerit of the Disobedient. For He never punished any,
but such as violated just Laws; neither did ever intend it, or signify His
intention otherwise.

The particular and distinct Nature of these Promises, Israel from God, by
Moses, both in that they are Promises, and Threats of God; and also because
they are annexed to the Precepts, as a Rule of Obedience. These likewise, as
well as those, may be called Sanctions, as added to the Precepts, for to
enforce the Obedience. For the Promises are mighty Motives, and powerfully
persuade, to the Observation, as Threatenings restrain from the violation of the
Precepts. And both these were so much the more effectual, because there is ^n
inward principle in man, whereby he naturally desires his own preservation, and
happiness, and abhors to think of his own destruction or misery. But these are
distinguished from other Promises and Threats even of God.

1. Because the Author of them is God-Redeemer, as Redeemer. 2. The things
promised are merited by Christ, and so promised and given, and to be expected
of Free Grace. 3. The terms upon which the Promises are made, is Faith in
Christ, and sincere obedience to God Redeemer. 4. The parties, who must receive
the mercies promised, are in themselves
1. Unjust and unworthy.

2. Derive their power to perform the Conditions and Precepts of the Law from
the Redeemer, upon the merit of Christ, having satisfied God's Justice; whereas
the Promises of the Law of Works, presupposed man to have power to keep it
given in Creation, and required perfect and perpetual obedience by that power.
And if man once lost that power, there was no promise in that Law of restoring
it again, or giving new power. It Is said, Do this and live: Sin in the least,
and die. And so it bound to perfect and perpetual performance, or unto death,
as unavoidable by that Law: for there was no promi^e of pardon. The Law of
Moses did strictly command universal and constant obedience: for Cursed is he
that continues not, says the Law, in all things written in that Book: it
promised no Spiritual Blessing, no Spiritual power, nor Spiritual pardon.

As for the Threats of this Law, they make Offenders liable punishment; yet
they determine Eternal Death, as unavoidable to none offending, but to final
Impenitents, and Unbelievers. And this was the Imperabundant goodness of (...),
that whereas He had given Man his Being, his Laws, his power, to keep the
(...), and by his absolute power might have required man's Service without any
reward, (...) only his Protection, and Preservation, as Humane Lawgivers
only do, yet He was willing, by Promises, to bind Himself, to reward him
gloriously, and after he had lost his power, to send Christ to redeem him, and
give him a new power and first to promise to give him excellent Rewards, and,
in the end, actually to reward him for Christ's sake, with full, and everlasting
glory, and that upon easy, and fairest terms. For this cause is his Mercy so
often magnified in the Scriptures, and especially in the Gospel. Therefore is
it said, That God who is rich in mercy, for his great love, wherewith He loved
us, even then when we were dead in sins, He quickened us (by Grace we are saved)
and raised us up together, and made us ^it in Heavenly places in Christ Jesus,
that in the Ages to come, He might show the exceeding Riches of His Grace, in
His kindness toward us, through Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 2. 4, 5, 6 7. And it was
His great mercy, that He does threaten no sinners and offenders with
punishments unavoidable, or unremoveable, but final Impenitents, and
Unbelievers as such. From all this His Promises may be described to be, A part
of the Laws of God-Redeemer, whereby He freely bound Himself, and did signify,
that for Christ's sake, He would give all Mercies to Man believing, that may
make him for ever fully blessed. And his Threats are, A signification of His
Will, whereby the party offending should be liable to punishments, removeable,
or unavoible upon certain conditions; and only unremoveable, or unavoidable
upon ^^nal unbelief. There was one great Promise made presently upon the Fall,
to give Christ. And this was fully performed in the fullness of time, and so to
us it is no Promise: and this was not made in consideration of the merit and
satisfaction of Christ, and did at first include a Promise to call and afford
the means of Conversion. The rest of the Promises were grounded upon the
Satisfaction and Merit of Christ, and were better Promises then those of the
Law of Works. And they are better, not only in respect of the things p^omised,
but of the terms, upon which the Promises were to be performed. They are
exceeding great and precious* that by them we might be partakers of the Divine
Nature, having escaped the corruption that is in the World, through Lust, 2
Pet. 1. 4.

Some tell us,

1. That if the Gospel were so strictly taken, as it is by many, as to contain
and consist only in Promises, then it would follow, that no sin, no not final
unbelief, could be threatened with Death by the Laws of God-Redeemer, as
Redeemer.

2. We must know, that in Scripture, by Death, is meant punishment in general,
Whether it be Temporal, or Eternal; Bodily, or Spiritual.

3. That every sin deserves Death; that is, Punishment; whether they be sins
against the Law of Works, or of Grace.

4. That the same sins against the moral Law, which were threatened with Death
by the Law of Works, are threatened with Death by the Law of Grace. For as that
Law bound to obedience, or, upon Disobedience, unto Death; so does this. Yet
observe,

1. That the sins against the Law of grace, are sins formally against
God-Redeemer, as such, and giving Laws unto sinful man.

2. That these sins have not only the nature of sins, as transgressions of a
Law of God, but also the nature of impenitency, and unbelief. For whosoever
continues in sin, or delays (if but an hour) his return to God Redeemer is not
only a sinner against God, but an impenitent Sinner against God-Redeemer in
Christ, requiring repentance and faith instantly, and not granting the liberty
to continue in sin, and to delay repentance for a moment.

3. Though the Law threatened every sin against it with punishment, and death
unremoveable, or unavoydable, yet the Gospel, though it threaten every sin
against it with punishment, yet it threatens none with punishment unremoveable,
or unavoyable, but final unbelief, or such sins, as upon which, by his
ordination, final unbelief is necessarily consequent.

4. This Law of grace threatens not only sins against the moral Law, but
against the very Ceremonialls of the Gospel. How else could the Corinthians
have bin guilty of the body and blood of Christ, and have suffered so grievous
a punishment, as many of them did, for the unworthy receiving the Lords Supper.
The rule of this judgment was neither the Law of works as given to Adam, nor as
given to Israel either in the moralls, or positives. If any say that Christ
died not to satisfy for such sins as final unbe^ief, and ^ins, unto Death, as
Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, or some kind of Apostasy; it may be said that
one immediate effect of Christ's death, was to satisfy Gods justice, and make
sin remissible in general: not that it was God's intention, that all sins or
any sin should be remitted absolutely, but upon certain terms defined by his
wisdom, and justice. In this regard these sins, as sins in general, were made
remissible by Christ's Sacrifice. Yet in respect of Divine ordination, and the
terms defined for remission, they are irremissible. So that as sins, by
Christ's death they are remissible; yet made irremissible, Per accidens* in
another respect. Yet here we must observe, that not only final unbelief, and
impenitency, are sins against the Laws of Redemption, and the precepts of the
Gospel; but every degree of them from the first to the last, from the least to
the greatest, are so too. Neither is final unbelief, merely as final,
unpardonable, but, per accidens: Because, after a certain time granted by God,
for belief, is expired, he will never vouchsafe time, nor means, or power for
it afterward; and belief he has made a necessary condition of pardon; and
has decreed never to pardon, but upon this condition.

These promises, dehort from impenitency, unbelief, blindness, and hardness
of heart; have some threatenings, or commination annexed, either implicitly or
expressly. And as Duty and Promise, so Impenitency, and Threatening go together:
and as the promises many times express the duty; so these the sin, and the
same not repented of. And as the sins not repented of are many, so the
punishments threatened are too. I might give examples, as, If ye be willing, and
obey, ye shall eat the good of the Land; but if you refuse, and rebel, ye shall
be devoured with the Sword, E^ay 1. 19, 20. Where

1. To eat the fruit of the Land, is a mercy promised. 2. To be willing and
obdient, is, the duty, and qualification: and that is Repentance (as does easily
appear from the context). 3. To be devoured with the Sword, is, the punishment
threatened. 4. To Refuse, and Rebel, is the sin threatened, and that is
Impenitencie.
More expressly, He that believes on him is not condemned; He that believes
not is condemned already, etc. Joh. 3. 18, and 36. Yet we must

1. Distinguish betwixt threatening, and peremptory denunciations upon
impenitency continued foreseen. For those Denunciations are rather Sentences of
the Supreme judge, or predictions, then comminations of the Supreme Lawgiver.
Thus God did denounce the universal deluge; the ruin of Jerusalem; the
rejection of the Jews.

2. We must separate from these promises, and threats, those which God
signified to Adam innocent: and to Israel, as a body politic in the Land of
Canaan, till Christ was exhibited. For though these and those might generally,
and materially be the same, yet specifically, and formally they were not.

3. There is a difference between promises, and threatenings; in that promises
bind God to reward the obedient, yet threatenings do not bind him to punish the
disobedient: For by promises God does bind himself to reward; by threatenings he
only binds man to suffer. His promise he cannot deny, because he is faithful
and just: His threatenings signify what man deserves, and how he may justly
punish him, and the effect thereof is this; that the party offending is
instantly liable to punishment, and bound to suffer it, though God be not bound
to inflict it. If he were bound by it in the same manner as he is by promise,
he could have no power to pardon sin; and if he must make the Law the Rule of
his judgment, and were bound so to do in the threatening, as he is in the
promise, he must needs punish every sin, and pardon no sin. But He being slow
to wrath and ready to forgive, and much inclined to mercy, He in his wisdom
thought good in his Law, so to threaten sin, as to reserve a transcendent power
above his threatenings, to show mercy. Some threatenings may be peremptory, but
all are not such. He also so threatens sin, that if man commit it, he is not
bound absolutely to punish it; nor obliged to punish it wholly or in part,
instantly, upon the commission of the sin; but has power to deser his
judgment: And hence his patience, and long-suffering, where by according to the
Law of Redemption, he gives man time, and means of returning, and seeks to draw
him to Repentance. Yet lest any should presume and despise his threatings, he
lets man know, that if he delay his Repentance too long, he shall in no wise
escape the punishment, and there will be a day of the Revelation of his just
judgment: wherein he will power out the treasures of his Wrath in full measure
upon impenitent Wretches; and the more they contemned his patience, the more
they shall suffer. Though God has power to dispense with his Law in respect of
judgment threatened; yet he has bound himself by an eternal decree, not to
spare or pardon, but upon condition of Christ's expiation, and man's repentance;
for which there is a limited time granted, wherein if we repent not, pardon
will become impossible.

These promises in respect of the matter promised,

1. Into promises of blessings, or deliverances: and as both are bodily, or
spiritual, temporal or eternal, so the promises be. The Apostle assures us,
that godliness has the promises of this life, and that which is to come, 1 Timothy 4. 8. And our Savior informs us, That if we first seek the Kingdom of
God, and his Righteousness, then these temporal necessaries shall be added
unto us, Mat. 6. 33. This is evident from Christ's pattern of Prayer, wherein,
as you heard before, he taught us Supplications for good, and the same not
only Spiritual but temporal; and deprecations of evil, and that also both
spiritual and temporal. He promises the Kingdom, that is a promise of a
spiritual and eternal reward, Luke 12. 32. And Food and Raiment, and that is a
promise of bodily and temporal blessings, verse 31. ibid. So he has promised
to deliver us from temporal evils, and also from condemnation, and eternal
death. Yet

1. He binds himself in these promises only to godly men, (as you heard before)
and in them unto godly men for temporal mercies, in subordination to
spiritualls, and so far as his Divine wisdom, shall see them tending to their
eternal good. The spiritual promises are such, as whereby he binds himself
to give blessings, to be received in this life, or in the life to come: in this
life, either blessings antecedent to conversion, or consequent to it:
consequent are either the state of justification upon our union with Christ, or
our continuance of it, according to our continuance in Christ. Mercies promised
for the life to come, are either such as are Suitable to the State of
Separation, or the State of Resurrection. And there may be a distinction in
respect of the subject to whom they are made: For some are made to single
persons; some to familyes; some to whole Nations; some to mankind in general:
And some of these are ordinary; some extraordinary. According to these heads
all the promises in Scripture might be reduced to a certain method, if some
would take pains; and it would be a profitable work.

The threatenings also materially considered, And in the day that thou eatest
thereof, thou shall surely dye, Genesis 2. 17. And this without any Salvo, or
exception. But the Law of Redemption says, Except ye Repent, ye shall all
likewise perish, Luke 13. 3. They give hope of Pardon, upon condition of
Repentance, and do not look at sin, merely as sin, but as sin unrepented of.
The one faith, the sinner shall dye; the other, the sinner not repenting, not
believing, shall dye. They may be distinguished in respect of the end: For some
are for destruction; some for correction and amendment: and the lesser are
threatened, and inflicted to prevent the greater, and the temporal, to turn
away the eternal. Some are exemplary to warn others; some are not. So likewise
in respect of the sins committed, they may be distinguished: for some are for
one sin; some for many sins jointly together. Some are for personal sins,
personal; others for the sins of others, as when Children become liable to
punishment for the sins of the Parents, Subjects for the sins of the Sovereign,
and such like. They may be differenced according to the measure, which is
always proportionable to the sin. Some are threatened to be inflicted in the
same kind by way of re^aliation, as when a man suffers, in that wherein he
sins. They may be distinguished according to the several distinctions of the
Subjects: For some are directed against single Persons, some against Families;
Some against whole Nations; Some against the whole World: Yet this is a good
and true observation made by many, that neither the promises, nor mercies
promised are merited or deserved by sinful man, though he repent and believe;
yet the punishments threatened, are fully deserved by man: and God in punishing
never did exceed, but rather abate: and when he afflicts most severely, yet he
does it rather, ^itra Condignum. For we may justly and fully deserve the
highest degree of punishments threatened, but not the lowest degree of mercies
promised. We must all say with good Jacob I am not worthy of the least of all
the mercies, and the truth which thou have showed thy servant, Genesis 32. 10. I
forbear for the present, further to enlarge in the doctrine of promises and
threats, and to descend to particulars: because I shall have occasion in my
discourse of Gods judgment, to speak more particularly of rewards and
punishments, which are the matter of promises and threats, which fully inform
man of his destiny and doom, and what in judgment he must look for to his own
misery, or happiness.

CHAP. XX.
Of the Judgment of God REDEEMER in Rewards and Punishments, and of the Object,
Obedience, or Disobedienco to the Laws of God Redeemer: and in Particular of
Punishments.
AFter the Laws of God as a rule of man's obedience in the precepts, whereby he
renders to every man according to his works, as agreeable, or disagreeable to
the Laws of Redemption, punishment or rewards. In these words we may observe,

1. The general nature of it.

2. The speci^icall form, and difference. The general nature is this: 1. That
it is not an attribute, but an Act of God. 2. An act of God Redeemer. 3. An act
of Juridiction.


Its not an act of acquiring Power, nor of the constitution of his kingdom,
but of the administration; and its not an act of Legislation but of
jurisdiction. The power of jurisdiction God acquired as you heard by the
humiliation of the word made flesh. It was exercised, first, before the word
incarnate, by God without any Administratour-generall: But after that our
blessed Savior was exalted to the right hand of Majesty, He committed all
judgment to the Son, John 5. 22. To whom he had given all power both in Heaven
and Earth, Mat. 27. 18. Yet in the exercise and execution of this
jurisdiction, both before, and since the exaltation of Christ, there is use
made of Angels, Men, and all Creatures. This jurisdiction is supreme,
Universal, Spiritual, Independent, yet exercised according to Law. The subject
upon which this jurisdiction is exercised, is, man, even all men, and every
person from the first Adam, unto the last Child that shall be born. The act of
it is retribution of something, for nothing; of good for good, of evil for
evil. The Object of this act is the doings or Works of man, as man, endued with
understanding and Free Will: For it considers not the acts of man natural as
he is Vegetative, or Sensitive, which are merely natural, and agreeable to
the acts of Beasts, and other Creatures. These works are not merely deeds of
the executive power, but words of the mouth, and the inward acts of the Soul:
and not only the acts, but the moral habits, and dispositions, whether
natural or acquired; but especially acquired and dependent upon free acts.
These works are an object of this act of jurisdiction, as they are agreeable or
disagreeable to some Law, and especially to the Laws of God Redeemer: and
according to these works Man is the formal object of this retribution, and so
of this judgment. The Retribution is twofold.

1. Of punishments.

2. Of rewards: For as men's works are, so their retribution shall be. If their
works be good, and they found obedient, God will render a most glorious and
excellent reward in the end, and many other inferior besides. If their works
be evil, and they prove disobedient, their Retribution shall be punishment,
according to their disobedience, both in quantity and quality: It shall be,
Malum triste, propter Malum turpe, or Malum incommodi, propter malum
injustitiae. Yet we must know that no reward spiritual, or eternal, is rendered
but as merited by Christ, for such as shall be rightly qualified, and capable
thereof. And because supreme Judges were never bound to formalities, and this
Judge is present in all places, at all times, knows all things, even the most
hidden, both fully and clearly, we need not here in this discourse, bind our
selves particularly, and severally, to declare the acts of convention,
examination, testimonies, conviction, sentence and execution, as though these
were always observed distinctly, and severally, and that actually. Hence we
may easily understand the perfection of this judgment from the perfection of
the Judge: For.

1. There can be no question of the jurisdiction, because the Judge is Creator,
Preserver, and Redeemer: and his title is most clear.

2. His power is universal, and none can be exempted from his jurisdiction: all
are his subjects, and his Vassals.

3. It Is supreme, and there can be no appeal lie from his Tribunal to a
Superior.

4. As he is Omnipresent, so he is Omniscient, and knows all men's works, and
hearts, even the hidden things of Darkness, and every ones Conscience shall
acknowledge every charge to be absolutely true.

5. He is most just, and essential justice, and cannot possibly judge
unjustly. Shall not the Judge of all the World do right? says Abraham, Genesis
18. 25. Where he acknowledges,

1. His Universal jurisdiction: He is Judge of all the World. 2. His absolute
justice; Shall He not do right? That is, certainly he Shall.
6. His power is Almighty, and as he can easily summon all before his judgment
Seat, even the greatest; so he can execute his judgments to the full, whether
in punishments or rewards. So that this Judgment is free from all the
imperfections of humane Courts, whether civil or Ecclesiastical. This judgment
differs from that which he passed upon Men, and Angels at the first: For it
has another rule, and con^iders the persons to be judged, and their works
under another notion, and the Judge also is God as Redeemer. The obedience or
disobedience, which are the proper formal object of this judgment, are to be
measured by the Laws of Redemption: The one is faith, the other unbelief. And
these things must seriously be considered, lest we confound the several
jurisdictions of this supreme Lord.

^ This judgment is twofold.

1. Particular.

2. Universal and final. By Particular, I mean the judgment of God passed and
executed before the Resurrection: By Universal, that which follows, when God
shall keep his last and general Assizes. And both these shall be considered*

1. In the Punishments. 2. In the Rewards.
To begin with the Punishments of the Particular judgment: and they are either
such, as are determined, and inflicted upon Collective bodies, or upon Single
persons: and they are either temporal or spiritual. In the discovery of these
punishments, as likewise of the rewards, I might take a Chronological method,
beginning with the first times of the World, after the promise of Christ was
made, and ^o go through the Scriptures, beginning with Genesis 4. and go on unto
the end of the Revelation. For even in the days of Adam God began to open his
Court* and set himself in the Throne of Justice, and shall continue without any
vacation or intermission unto the Resurrection Universal. And here I might make
use of humane Historyes, which, if true, and wisely composed, will manifest
much of Gods just Judgments, which take up a great part of those Volu^s. But
this to do would make these Divine Politics, and brief Treatise, swell unto a
Vast Volume. Yet if any man of ability would single out this subject, and
enlarge upon it, he might thereby much honor God, and do great service unto
Man. There is another method might be taken, and the same very usefu^l; and
that is, to reduce the several judgments to their proper places, in the Laws
of God Redeemer. For as some sins are general against all the Laws of God:
Some against the Morals; Some against the Positives; Some against some of the
Moral precepts: jointly considered; Some against the several, and particular
precepts accordingly the punishments might be ranked; and the same order might
be observed in the rewards. But lest we should confound the judgments of the
two several Governments; amongst others, two rules may be observed, whereby we
may difference them: and this difference once known, I may go on without
interruption. The

1. Rule is from the judgments themselves. The 2. From the Laws, and works
disagreeable to these Laws.
1. The judgments which fall and lie upon all mankind, indefinitely, as
Mortality the curse of the earth, ejection out of Paradise, the peril and
pain of Women in bearing, and bringing forth Children, and the paenal
subjection of them unto their Husbands: For these are common to all, both
believers, and unbelievers, and are inflicted upon all mankind, without
exception, for the first sin. Yet because some of these, or some part of them
may be in some measure removeable, or abateable, and yet continue, they may
become penaltyes inflicted by God Redeemer.

2. The Laws of God Creator, require perfect obedience, not only in all
things, and degrees, but in all times, and say thus: Do this and live; and if
thou do not this, thus, thou must dye: and there is no remedy but this Law, if
it be ma^e the rule o^ ^udgment, as God might have made it. The Law of God
Redemeer, says, Though thou have sinned, and do sin, yet if thou return by
the power of my grace* and believe, thou shall live, and not dye. Though thou
art guilty, and liable to punishment, and the same lie upon thee in part, yet
upon these conditions, the penalty may be removed or prevented. Some of the
sins forbidden in the Law of work are the same materially with those forbidden
in the Gospel, and so are some of the duties: yet they differ formally (if we
speak after the manner of the Schools.) This you have heard before. For any s^n
after it once put on the notion of impenitency, by delay and neglect to return,
it presently begins to be a sin against the Gospel. And such are all sins
committed, after the first promise of Christ. Such was the Murder of Cain, the
corruption of the old world, the filthiness of Sodom, and all the rest
mentioned in the book of God, from Genesis 4. to the end. So that all the
penaltyes, as that of Cain, the old World, the Builders of Babel, and the rest
were penaltyes as threatened by, so inflicted for the sins against, God
Redeemer. All this is evident from the books of Moses, and all the Prophets,
which speak to men as sinful, promise Christ, forbid impenitency, Preach, and
urge repentance, and make all penaltyes removeable upon that condition, which
could not have been done, if sin and penaltyes had been looked upon according
to the Law of works. Therefore it is in vain to argue that, because, as the Law
of Works commanded love to God, love to Neighbor, did forbid Idolatry,
Perjury, M^rder, Theft, etc: did threaten death, and punishment for these sins,
so the Gospel commands the same duties, forbids the very same things,
threatens the same penaltyes, and promises life, that therefore the Law of
works continues, especially the Moral Law. For the precepts, prohibitions,
promises, threats of the Law of works, and the Law of grace, come under
different notions. For an instance we may amongst many places single out this
one: Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and
let him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him, and to our God,
and he will abundantly pardon, Esa. 55. 7. The Law of works says, Be not
Wicked; Sin not at all: The Law of Grace says, Though thou have sinned, and
art wicked, yet forsake thy wicked way, and return unto the Lord, against whom
thou have sinned. The Law of Works says, Thou have sinned, and must dye: I
have no promise of life or Pardon for thee. The Law of Grace says, though thou
by thy sin have deserved to dye, yet upon condition of repentance, and return,
thou shall be Pardoned and live. I touch more often upon this point, and here
stand more largely upon it, because some will take no notice of it; others, who
are sufficiently informed, are hardly persuaded of this difference, and the
abrogation of the Law of Works, which to a guilty person denies all possibility
of salvation.

To come nearer to the intended Scope,

1. In to those of loss and pain: Because some deprive us of that good we
have, or may have: Some vex us with some evil, which either lies upon us, or
threatens us; Some do both; But this is a general distinction, and agrees to
punishments in general.

2. They may be distinguished in respect of the principal cause, or
isntrumental: For some are from God immediately: Some are inflicted from him
by some of his Creatures, as by fire destroying Sodom, by the water drowning
Pharaoh, by the earth swallowing up Dathan and Abiram, by the Pestilentiall
vapors of the air infecting many thousands, by Wild Beasts, Locusts,
Cater-pillars, Frogs, and other animate, or inanimate Creatures, by Angels good
or bad; and God punishes man by man, and that many ways. For all the just
judgments, and penaltyes inflicted by humane jurisdiction, are punishments of
God, who judges amongst the Gods, and rulers of the earth. Many times the
unjust judgments of man are the just judgments of God. For man may be adjudged
unjustly to death in a cause wherein he is innocent, and yet justly suffer that
death from God for some other Crime, whereof he is guilty.

3. They may be distinguished in respect of the subject, whether single
persons, or societyes; less or greater. A single person may be the subject of
these punishments, in respect of his goods, his body, his person, his Soul. A
society may be considered as one body in respect of it self, for the present,
or jointly with posterity for time to come. There are penaltyes proper to
Familyes, to Cities, to Vi^inityes, to States, and whole nations, wherein they
are involved at one time: There may be penaltyes transmitted, from Parents to
their Familyes, as from Gehezi to his posterity; and so likewise from Joab, and
from Judas; and so from States, and other Societyes* But I spoke before
particularly, though briefly, of the punishments, both of Civil and
Ecclesiastical Polityes.

4. The punishments may be distinguished into ordinary and usual, incident to
the generality of Mankind, or extraordinary. For the punishment of Cain, the
old World, Babel's builders, Sodom, Lots Wife, and such like were
extraordinary and rare; and so will be the burning of the World in the end. But

5. The principal distinction of punishments is that of Temporal and
Spiritual: and by temporal, I mean all such as are different from spiritual:
The one deprives men of the comfort and happiness, which we may enjoy in this
life, and the other touch a man more nearly, and tend more directly to his
eternal misery hereafter. The temporal punishments of single persons are
easily known by the History of the Scriptures, and others Writers, and
especially by Gods threatenings against the Jews for their disobedience, Levit.
26. and Deuteronomy. 28. which, though they had some special reference to the Law,
and the Jews; yet are incident to all, even those that live under the Gospel.

The greatest punishments, Romans 6. 23; By death, is meant not only that death
which is separation of Soul and body for the time, and all the fore-running
miseryes of this life, but all kind of punishments, and especially spiritual:
because death in that place is opposed to eternal life, which is an
aggregation of all spiritual mercyes. If we should follow the order of time,
then all the spiritual penaltyes inflicted by God, and suffered by man since
the first promise of Christ for the sins following, are reducible to this head;
as the rejection of Cains offering, his excommunication, the Rejection of the
greatest part of the World, before the flood, as being the Sons of men, and
separated from the Sons of God. After the flood, seeing all first in Noah's
person, then in his family had the Word, and other means of conversion, yet the
greatest part of them for Apostasy were punished with the loss of these
means, and were left without the Oracles of God, the promise of Christ, and
the power of the restoring Spirit, and this punishment lay many years upon
their posterity, continuing Apostates. After God had singled out the Posterity
of Abraham by Jacob, and renewed the promise unto them, and continued the
means of conversion in that nation, the rest of mankind being rejected, were
called Heathens. Yet to these he left the light of nature, and some remnants of
the truth continued from their first Apostate-Parents and Ancestors, by
tradition; and some, if not very many, had not only a possibility, but
opportunityes to be Proselytes, and so incorporated into the Church of the
Jews. Yet these did generally, not only neglect these opportunities, but held
the truth in unrighteousness, lived contrary to the light of nature left unto
them, and worshipped the creature above the Creator, God blessed for ever. And
for this sin God gave them up to vile affections, delivered them up unto a
reprobate mind, whereby they became full of all unrighteousness: and this was
that fearful judgment, and penalty whereby all hope of Salvation was taken
from them. Their sad condition is described unto us, not only at large, Romans
1. from verse 18. to the end: but briefly, yet fully, Ephesians. 2. 1, 2, 3. 11,
12. The taking away the Word, and the Spirit of grace, and sending upon them
the spirit of slamber, was also the punishment of the Jew, after they refused
their Savior, and rejected the Gospel.

But to proceed to the particular degrees of these punishments, Rebellion, and
they refuse to submit themselves to their Lord and Savior: These say, We will
not have this man reign over us, Luke 19. 14. Their punishment is this for the
present, that they shall be accounted enemies, be devoted and de^^ined to final
and utter destruction, verse 27. Such must be sure, and they must certainly
know this, that the Kingdom of God came nigh unto them; and their Condition
shall be very sad, and woeful. For Christ himself says* that it shall be more
tolerable in the last day for Sodom then for them, Luke 10, 11, 12. Others
receive these means, and proceed to profession, and several degrees thereof,
but do not proceed to perfection and sincerity. Some will hear the word, but
not receive it into their minds, to understand the very principles, and
fundamental Laws of this Kingdom. Their punishment is; that as they will go no
further with God, so God will go no further with them, but denies unto them the
Spirit of illumination, leaves them blind as he found them, and suffers Satan
to take the Word from them, Luke 8. 12. Some receive it so far, as to
understand it, but are not willing to do it: Their punishment is this: that God
will not make it further effectual to promote their spiritual happiness, and
they are left (as the former) to Satan, to take it out of their hearts, lest
they should be ieve, and be saved. And though these may receive the Spirit of
illumination, yet they receive not the Spirit of Conversion. Some receive if
only into their understandings, but not into their hearts, so as to delight in
it; and to do something commanded, and obey it in some degree: but either, for
fear of adversity* or love of the World, and the Cares of this life, they bring
no fruit unto perfection, but either deny the truth, or receive it not into an
honest heart. Their punishment, is this: That the Spirit of conversion,
sanctification, and Adoption is denied unto them, whilst they are such; but
they remain under the Power of Satan, the dominion of sin, and in the state of
Damnation. Some continue for a longer, or a shorter time in this imperfect
condition, and in the confines of these Kingdoms of life and death: and though
God be patient, and calls for an honest and good heart, yet they deny it, and
at length the time of grace allotted by their Savior is expired, and then the
things which belonged to their peace, are hid for ever from them, and the gates
of mercy and eternal life are shut against them, Luke 19. 42. The last sin is
Apostasy of such as have received the knowledge of the truth, have been
convinced of the same, escaped the corruption that is in the World through
lust, have tasted some joy and comfort in their Savior, yet turn back to their
Vomit, and Wallowing in their former sins; or deny the Lord who bought them, or
do not only deny him, but blaspheme him, and persecute him in his Members. The
punishment of these, is; that God suffers the unclean Spirit with seven other
spirits worse then himself, to enter and keep possession; and so the end of
that man is Worse then the first Math. 12. 45.

And it had been better for them never to have known the way of righteousness,
then after they have known it to turn from the holy Commandment delivered to
them, 2 Pet. 2. 21. There remains no more sacrifice for sin, but a certain
fearful looking for of Judgment, and fiery Indignation* which shall devour the
Adversaries, Heb. 10. 27. They cannot be renewed to Repentance, Heb. 6. 6. So
that they make Repentance and Salvation plainly impossible to themselves. Such
is the Punishment of them who blaspheme the Holy Ghost. Though many of these
may live a while in worldly Peace, yet their case is miserable, and so
miserable as no Tongue of man can express, and God delivers them up unto
security, till they suddenly sink into Hell; or, before their end, awakes
them, and they become desperate, and the ^lames of Hell begin to kindle, and
rage in their hearts, and so intolerably, that some, with Judas, murder
themselves.

The Sins, Impenitency and Unbelief. Impenitency is a continuance in Ignorance,
or Error, or other sins against the means and motives of Conversion: and it is
the same with Blindness and Hardness of Heart which admit of many degrees,
according to the means, greater or lesser, or continued a shorter or a longer
time; or according to the Malignancy of the Heart, which may be more or less.
Unbelief is a re^usal to receive Christ upon those terms God does offer him.
After a time of Mercy, wherein God calls us to Repentance, misspent; Impenitency
and Unbelief, which before were Sins, may become Punishments. The Punishment of
these Sins is denial of the Spirit, either sufficiently to prepare them, or
convert them, and so justify them. From some of these he takes the Word: To
some of these he continues the Word, and denies the Spirit: To some he grants
the Spirit for some degrees of Preparation, but not of full Conversion. From
some he takes away the Spirit wholly, and delivers them up to Satan. And this
denial of the Spirit is the heaviest Judgment that God inflicts, or man can
suffer, in this life; when men shall hear, and not understand; see, and not
perceive; to have their Hearts made fat, their Ears heavy, their Eyes shut,
lest they see with their Eyes, and hear with their Ears, and understand with
their Hearts, and convert, and be healed, Esa. 6. 9, 10. and Act. 28. 26, 27.

As the State of impenitent Sinners, Being, yet it deprives them of all hope of
a better Being. Their Bodies are laid in the Grave, or left upon the Surface of
the Earth, for a prey to Fowls, Dogs, wild Beasts, or hurled into the Deep, or
howsoever, dissolved and turned into dust, are reserved for greater Torment.
Their Souls, departed from their Bodies, are forsaken of God, not received by
Christ, not guarded by Angels, nor carried into Abraham's bosom, and are left
as a prey unto the Devils: and into whatsoever dismal Lodging they are brought,
or in whatsoever woeful Region they wander, as, in this life, they had no faith
in God, no Union with Christ, no heavenly Consolation of the Spirit; so now
they are destitute of all peace, and joy. And it is not the least Torment to
remember that once there was a day of Mercy, and Grace, an Opportunity of
obtaining pardon, or at least a power to have lessened Sin, to lessen the
Punishment; yet now that day is past, and that Opportunity neglected, is for
ever lost. They are in the same condition with the Devils, and reserved, (as it
were) in chains, unto the Judgment of the great Day. This certainly known, and
continually remembered, continually torments. In consideration of which woeful
estate, it highly concerns all, and every one of us, whilst it is said to day*
if we will hearken to his voice, not to harden our hearts, lest God swear in
his wrath that we shall never enter into his Rest. We that live in the last
days, and enjoy the Ministry of the Gospel, have not only many a fair
Warning, but many a fearful Example represented before our very eyes.

These are the Punishments of the unregenerate,

For as they have their Negligencies, Ignorances, Failings, and sometimes their
grievous Sins; So they have their Punishments accordingly. For the most just
God, who is most holy, and of purest Eyes, will in no wise allow of Sin in his
own dearest Children. For, though his greatest design is to save the sinner,
yet he will punish, and destroy the sin. As, the greater their diligence, care,
and zeal shall be, the greater their peace, joy, and comfort, shall prove; So,
if they offend, be negligent, careless, cold, the less Communion they shall
have with their God, and the greater their doubts, fears, troubles, griefs,
shall be. And these spiritual Desertions of their God, and the withdrawings of
the Spirit, are sad and heavy Judgments. How great must their discomfort needs
be, when God does hide his face, Christ stands at a distance, and the Spirit
does not appear. This is evident, from the many doleful complaints and
lamentations of God's Servants, and dearest Children. They suffer many
temporal Afflictions, in their Persons, Goods, Families, Children, near
Relations besides. For they are many times chastened of the Lord, that they
should not be condemned with the World, 1 Cor. 11. 35.

The Sword departs not from David's house, and his Children wrong and murder
one another, for his crimes of Adultery and Murder. Yet these, though
grievous, were not his most grievous and greatest Punishments. The sting of
sin, and guilt thereof, does deeply pierce, and torment his Soul; the
sanctifying and sealing Spirit was abated, and in a great measure withdrawn; as
his divine Virtues, so his blessed Comforts were almost reduced to a spark
raked up in the ashes; and if God had not in due time, out of depth of Mercy,
revived it, What had become of him? What his case was, we may easily
understand, by Psalm. 51. at large; especially by that earnest Petition, Create
in me a clean Heart, and renew a right Spirit within me. Cast me not away from
thy presence; and take not thine holy Spirit from me. Restore unto me the joy
of thy Salvation, and uphold me with thy free Spirit, that is, Comfort me with
the Spirit of Adoption. Psalm. 51. 10, 11, 12. This Punishment Peter felt
tormenting his Soul, when he reflected upon his Sin in denying his Savior. And
surely to find the Power of Sanctification, and spiritual Consolation, to
abate in our Hearts, and the Vigor of it, for present, extinct, is an
unvaluable loss, and an intolerable Punishment to God's Saints.

Therefore we are advised not to grieve, or offend* the Spirit of God, whereby
we are sealed unto the day of Redemption, Ephesians. 4. 30. and exhorted to give
all diligence to make our Calling and Election sure, 2 Pet. 1. 10. For the more
diligent, wa^chfull, zealous, constant we are in the Practice of holy Duties,
the more our sanctifying power shall be increased; the ^^ronger our Hope, the
greater our Assurance, and the more abundantly our Consolations will ^low.
Otherwise God being light will not communicate himself to men that live in
darkness, nor to his own Children, but as walking in the Light.

It Is strange that Saints, and Martyrs, in the midst of flaming fire, and
whilst under most cruel, and most exquisite, Torments, should rejoice with
unspeakeable joy; and in these Desertions, should be so fearfully dejected. Yet
the cause is, God will not abate the least Jot of his Justice, when he shows
the greatest Mercies.

After the Punishments inflicted by this most just Lord, universal, and
supreme Lord, and that there is one most high, whose Throne is in Heaven, that
orders the Kingdoms of men, and disposes all things in it, according to
certain Rules of Justice, and Wisdom. It Is a great Mercy of God to afford us
civil Government, and to preserve the same: And though the benefit thereof be
general, and extends to all Mankind, yet in the ordering, and establishing
Commonweals, God has a special care of the Church, and the Society of
Pilgrims, and Strangers, here on earth, who seek eternal peace in Heaven, as
Subjects, and Citizens, of an eternal State. This he continues, protects, and
orders aright, by his almighty hand, and profoundest wisdom, in the midst of
all the Tumults, Confusions, Ruins, D^solations of the Kingdoms of the World.
These have their Beginning, Increase, Corruptions, Alterations, Ruins, and
fatal Periods, not according to any certain Numbers or revolution of times, nor
the motion and influence of heavenly bodies, and Ethereal lights, nor from the
power, or weakness, the imprudence, or policy of man; but from God, according
to the eternal rules of Justice, and Wisdom determined, and observed by him.
Yet he does all things in number, weight, and measure, most exactly, and in the
execution of his Judgments ^^th the ministry of Angels, Men, and other
Creatures. When States, that profess not the Gospel, shall govern negligently,
imprudently, unjus^ly, and shall be corrupted, and Corrupters, and, especially,
Persecutors of the Church; and when States, professing knowledge of the true
God, and the faith of Jesus Christ, shall not only violate the Laws of
Nature, but neglect to protect the Church, persecute the power of Godliness,
under what pretense ^oever, become superstitious, idolatrous, profane,
administer Injustice, Cruelty; be imprudent, negligent, unmercifull, vicious,
and degenerate; then the Punishments, both of the one and other, shall be
Famine, Pestilences, Seditions, civil Wars, foreign Invasions, Captivity,
Poverty, Desolations, many other Miseries, and, many times, change of
Government, or the Translation of the Power Civil from one People to another,
and sometimes Anarchy, and a total dissolution of all order. God uses the
Governors to punish the People, the People to punish their Princes, and
sometimes the Sword of a foreign Prince, to punish or destroy both. And when
no Justice can be had from men on Earth, he executes Vengeance, in some
extraordinary manner, from Heaven.

Thus it was in the beginning of civil States, and it shall be so unto the end
of the World. God will have it to be so. To all these Punishments must be
added, the loss of safety, peace, plenty, and all other Blessings, and
Comforts, which God does usually give to men by good Government. In the
Execution of these Judgments, the great Lord respects no Persons; He punishes
many, as well as few; the mighty Monarchs of the World, as well as the meanest
Subjects. The ruin of so many royal Families, of so many large and potent
Empires, and Kingdoms, might teach the Princes of the World to do Justice, and
to fear this everlasting Judge.

As there be civil, Adam and Eve, being penitent, and believing in that Seed
of the Woman, which should break the Serpent's head, which was Christ. It
increased, and was enlarged in that Family by their Children, especially, Abel
first, and then Seth: and as mankind was multipled, so it multiplied. And at
length there was a separation of the Sons of men from the Sons of God; which
Sons of God were, in process of time, so degenerate, mixed, and polluted, and
the former Worthies, and Sons of God translated into a better World, that it
was reduced again to that one Family of Noah. Yet the greatest part of the
Posterity of that Family, who peopled the Earth, did so apostate, that a great
part of Mankind was ejected, and excommunicated out of this blessed Society.
And out of this great Body, God calls Abraham, and renews the Promise of Christ
unto him, more particularly and explicitly then formerly he had done. He
continues his Church, in a more special manner, in his Family, and entailes
the great Promise upon his posterity Isaac, and Jacob, and then in his
Children, who being multiplied into a Nation, he brings out of Egypt, and
settles them in the Land of Canaan, and encloseth them from all Mankind; makes
them his peculiar People, continues the great Promise unto them, trusts them
with his Oracles, and gives them Laws, and Statutes, sends them Prophets, and
takes special charge of them, till the Son of God was exhibited and incarnate.
Yet these, with the Proselytes, had their sins, and according to their
impenitency, besides their temporal, their spiritual Punishments.

But when Christ was once come into the World, had finished the work of
Humiliation, was exalted to the right hand of Glory, had powered down the Holy
Ghost upon the Apostles, God calls the Jews first, then the Gentiles, and by
them, commissioned to go into all Nations, he begins to gather a Church
Christian: For they preach; the Jews and Gentiles bear, believe, profess
their faith, and so are admitted as Subjects of God's spiritual Kingdom of
Grace.

As Disciples and Professors were multiplied in any City or Country, the
Apostles, or their Assistants, and Commissioners, appoint Elders, and Ministers
of the Word, over them, to take care of their Souls, for to conform the
converted, and build them up, and perfect them that were converted, and convert
others, for to enlarge Christ's territories. The Officers of Christ were
extraordinary and ordinary; and some did plant, and some did water, but God
gave the increase. And the Elders, and ordinary Officers, were trusted with the
Word and Sacraments, for to dispense the one, and administer the other,
according unto their Commission.

After that not only People, but Ministers, were increased, and several
Congregations settled under several Ministers, they begin to associate, and
combine for Discipline, according to their Vicinities, and other conveniences.
This was the beginning of outward Ecclesiastical^ Po^^ties Christian: The end
of this discipline was to preserve the several societies in unity, and Purity
of Doctrine, an worship, to promote Piety, to prevent Errors, Heresies,
Sch^m^s, Scandal, (...) er^^^tion, and Idolatry; and so preserve them pure
according to the first plantation of the Apostles, and institution of Christ.
The power of this outward discipline was (...) Virtually, in the whole body of
the Church whether greater or less, associated into one body; but delegated
for the exercise thereof in an orderly way, unto such persons as should be
judged most fit, and able for that business. This power did extend to the
making of Canons, constituting Officers, exercising Spiritual jurisdiction, in
binding and loosing on Earth, which should be made good in Heaven.

All the particular Churches of the World on Earth at one time make up one
body, Monarch: I say as one Universal body, its subject only to Christ. For
as for outward discipline, we cannot find that Christ Instituted any
Vicar-generall, or erected any Court supreme in any one City, or place of the
World. As God never made an Universal King, so He never made a Catholic or
Universal Bishop. Men may fancy such a thing: But it is only a fancy, not a
real truth, nor ever can be proved to be so. In the Church of Christ there are
some living members, Real Saints, who have a real communion with their head,
and derive Heavenly blessings, and comforts from him; and these make up that
which we call the Mystical Church; of which no Profane or Hypocritical
Wretch can be a member. But in the Churches several, which we call Visible,
and Instituted, there are good, and bad; sincere Believers, and bare
Professors, and Hypocrites. And of these visible societies, I now intend to
speak, when I declare the judgments of God inflicted upon the Churches. When
Ministers, and People begin to neglect the duties of worship, are remiss in
discipline, as the Church of Ephesus, Corinth, Laodicea, and many others were,
fall from their first Love, Purity, Piety, abate in devotion, and the fire of
their zeal is quenched. T^heir punishments spiritual, besides, their temporal
are Persecutions from without, Schism, and Heresy from within. By the one the
body is torn asunder, and by the other the members are poisoned. And as they
abate in their duty, God abates in the powerful, and comfortable Workings of
the Spirit: And if they continue in their sins, God in the end will wholly take
away his spirit, and remove the Golden Candlestick; as He once threatened the
Church of Ephesus and in it all other Churches in the like case. And He will
send his Word and Messengers unto another People, and will let out his Vineyard
unto other Husbandmen, which shall render him the fruits in their season: Thus
He dealt with the Jew. Many times God brings in upon their Cities, an their
Countries, where they profess the Gospel, but not Practice it, Cruel, and
Barbarous enemies. Thus He gave the Northern, and Western Churches, and Nations
to the Goths, and Vandals, who like a mighty deluge overflowed them, and like
an impetuous stream did carry all before them. This was the judgment of the
Eastern, and Southern Christians, invaded by the Saracens, and possessed by
them from beyond Babylon, and Arabia, unto Barbary, and Spain; where they met
the Northern Barbarians. In these latter days? How many Churches Christian, are
swallowed up by the Turkish Empire, These were not merely temporal judgments,
but spiritual: Because the enemies did not only invade and possess their
Countries, but in many places deprive them of their Teachers, and the Gospel;
the glorious light whereof is mightily darkened, as in ^ormer times; so in
these latter days by that Smoke, and mist of Hell, the doctrine of the
Alcoran, and that in many places of the World. This is a just judgment of God
(which Christ avert from us) because they walked not in the light of the
Gospel, when it so clearly shined upon them. And its one of the most feafull
punishments of Christians to be delivered up to believe lies, and false
doctrine in matters of Salvation. Yet Turks, and other Mahumetans do not
profess themselves Christians, as we in this Western Corner of the World do.
But amongst us, there be such as profess their faith in Christ, who yet are,
in the just judgment of God, delivered up to superstition, Idolatry, and most
dangerous doctrines, which have formerly been, and now are, dispersed into
several Nations. We read, That because men received not the Love of the truth,
that they might be saved: for this cause God shall send them strong delusions,
that they should believe a Lie, 2 These. 2. 10, 11. Where we may observe,

1. The sin, which is, Not to receive the love of the truth that they might be
saved.

2. The Punishment; God shall send them strong delusions, that they should
believe a lie: For when God does take away his Spirit, from such as enjoy the
word of God, which they will not believe and practice, it is an easy thing for
the Devil to delude the wisest, and most learned in matters of Religion: and
then there is no Doctrine so false, and absurd, which man so deluded will not
believe. This has been confirmed by experience of former times, especially in
that Temple, or Church, wherein the Son of Perdition, shall exalt himself above
all Civil, and Ecclesiastical powers. The seat of this Wicked one must be some
eminent City, so the Scripture tells us: and this City shall be called Babylon
in a mystery, and stand built upon seven hills. Some say, that Constantinople
which was called New-Rome, is so. Yet that cannot be it: Because it must be
that City which did Reign over the Kings of the Earth, when John received the
Revelation from Heaven, and that was not Constantinople, which was obscure at
that time. The Character of this Whore was,

1. That She made the Nations of the Earth drunk with her cup of fornication;
And

2. She Her self was drunk with the blood of the Saints, and the Martyrs of
Jesus. Fornication is Superstition, Image Worship, and Idolatry: The drinking
of the blood of the Saints is the persecution, and murder of all such
Christians, as shall refuse to acknowledge Her power, and to receive Her
abominable and Idolatrous worship. Lest any therefore should be ignorant what
City this is; The spirit informs us,

1. That it is a City which professes Christ.

2. It Is the seat of the Son of Perdition, arrogating Supreme power not only in
temporals, but spirituals.

3. It Is Idolatrous and Superstitious; worshipping of Images.

4. It sheds the blood of such Christians, as will not acknowledge Her power,
and drink of Her cup of fornication.

5. It Is a City that was built, and once stood upon seven hills.

6. It Reigned over the Kings of the Earth, in the times of John the Divine.

7. It Is a City that boasts of many lying signs, and wonders, and believes
lies, and receives false Doctrine. That this City, and the man of sin therein
should continue so long, have so great power, delude so many Nations, in^atuate
them, seem to be holy; profess her self the Mother of all Christian Churches;
the Temple of God infallible, and that society out of which there is no
salvation: is a spiritual judgment from Heaven, and far greater then the
I^vasion of the Saracens, and Barbarous Nations; yea, then the damned Doctrine
of the Alcoran: For that in many things is gross, ridiculous, and absurd; In
this Mystical Babylon, the grossest errors put on the Vizard of saving, and
infallible truth; the most abominable superstition of zealous devotion: the
greatest pride of deepest humility; and he that bears the title of Servant of
Servants, will be the Lord of Lords. Besides, all the transcended perogatives
of this Church as of Supremacy, Infallibility, Authority above Scripture, are
maintain^d by the choicest wits of greatest Scholars. And their Sophisms are
so effectual, that not only the ignorant sort of people, and silly women, but
persons of greatest power; the Princes, and Potentates of the Earth, men of
most excellent parts, profoundest Learning and Policy, are enchanted and
bewitched by this great City. This is one of the greatest trialls of
Christians, and the Church of God, that ever came upon the World. And if we
Seriously consider, we may easily understand that it is God alone, who preserves
us in the truth: And all such as love the truth, and endeavor to practice it,
according to the plainness, and simplicity of the Gospel, may expect this
blessing from Heaven, even in the midst of these most dangerous times. This is
a fair warning to us all, who enjoy the Scriptures, and therein the word of
God, to take heed least we live unprofitably through our own neglect under the
means of salvation. For if we do not seriously attend unto the saving doctrine
of the truth, and give all diligence to practice it so far as we know it; it
will be just with God to suffer Satan to delude us, be a lying spirit in the
mouths of our Prophets, and to give us over to believe lies, errors, heresies,
as we see it come to pass with many amongst us at this day. By the former
sins, and neglect of our duty, we do not only lose all the benefits, and
comforts, which God has promised, and we might enjoy in a well constituted
Church, reformed in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, according to the word of
God, but also make our selves liable to the former punishments and all others,
which God has threatened against us in his Book.

It Is the great and unspeakable mercy of God, Israel, is true, not only of all
the rest written in Scripture, but of all those, which we ourselves both hear
of, and see, and of those we read of in other Histories. They all happened unto
them for ensamples; and they are written for our admonition, upon whom the ends
of the World are come, 1 Cor. 10. 11. God by them speaks unto us in this
manner: Avoid such sins, and you shall escape such punishments; But if you will
sin, as they did, ye shall suffer as they did. And we upon whom the ends of the
World are come, should be more careful to avoid sin; because as we have more
examples to warn us; So if we sin, our guilt will be the greater, and our
punishment the heavier. And though these punishments be a reason, yet they are
not the principal, why we should take heed of disobedience. For a wicked man
may fear to sin because he fears to suffer. But such is the love of God, of
goodness, justice, virtue, in the regenerate, that they hate sin, because it is
so base and unjust in it self, and so offensive to their Heavenly Father.

CHAP. XXI.
Some Rewards tendered by God, before the Universal Judgment; as, taking out
Stony Hearts, Writing his Laws in them, etc.
THe Scriptures many times speak of rewards before Punishments: Doom; yet here
I have changed the order, and that for several reasons, and have first
declared the punishments, and now proceed to the rewards. And in this place I
take Reward for any mercy, and blessing of God, which follows by Divine
ordination, according to promise, upon the performance of any duty required by
the Laws of God-Redeemer. And as the proper, and formal object of punishment
is disobedience to the Law of Redemption; So reward looks at obedience,
performed according to that Law: and the subject immediately capable thereof is
the penitent believer. Yet no man by obedience, faith, repentance can merit any
thing at God's hands: For all rewards given to sinful man, are merited by
Christ; and only upon his merit, and Gods promise, the obedient derive their
right unto them. God cannot be bound to reward either man or Angel, though
innocent, and perfectly obedient, except by promise he bind himself; How then
can he any other way be bound to sinful man? So that it is hence Consequent*
that though man perform his duty, yet the reward is free. These rewards are
either Temporal or Spiritual: For (as you heard before) Godliness has the
promises (that is) the rewards promised, of this life and that which is to
come; whether they be deliverances or blessings.

We may understand by the holy Scriptures that God did not only promise, but
gave unto his obedient Children in all times, even Temporal rewards, and not
only blessed them with earthly blessings, and upon their prayers delivered
them out of afflictions, and their enemies hand; but also upon their
repentance, either removed, or diverted by way of prevention, Temporal
judgments.

And because these are many, and may be easily understood by the promises, I
pass them by, forbearing all further mention of them in this place, either as
they are proper to single persons, or to Societies. For so Cities civil have
their proper blessings, if they be just, and well ordered; as safety, peace,
plenty, prosperity, victory over their enemies, and help and comfort from their
confederates, and allies.

Neither will I enlarge my discourse with a debate, whether heathens, and
others out of the Church, may not obtain from God temporal rewards for their
moral Virtues.

That God does bless them Temporally for their justice, and other deeds
virtuous in that low degree, is evident.

Neither will I enquire how far, Ahab, and other unregenerate persons, by their
humiliations, and repentance, such as they are, may prevail with God to avert,
or put off judgments.

It Is very certain, he is mightily inclined to mercy, and will encourage the
lest degree of goodness in any Person. He prevents us with many blessings, and
does many things even to the great sinners, which he was in no wise bound unto:
He is willing that sinful man should love him, and live: for he takes no
p^easur^ in our ruin and misery, for that is his strange work, and not so
suitable to his gracious disposition.

Rewards spiritual are the principal, Asia. For there is hardly any Church,
that is not fearfully degenerate, but may be found in the same condition, and
case with some of them. Yet because most of the rewards there promised are such
as single persons regenerate may enjoy, I therefore single out some of the
principal of them.

Before I can enter upon particulars, Esaias. 65. 1. For no man by the light of
nature, especially so much darkened in man, does ask for God, or seek him first.
God must first seek us before we can seek him. As God loved us first, and gave
Christ for us when we thought of no such thing; so he calls us first, before we
can do so much as call upon him for spiritual mercyes. And it was a great
mistake in Pelagius to think that if man did any good, though but by the power
of nature, God was bound to reward him, and that necessarily: For this was his
great error (as some tell us): So it is no less an error to assert that there
can be in any man (meritum ex congruo) to deserve the first spiritual rewards.
The one takes away grace, and the freeness of Gods spiritual mercyes; the
other, preventing-grace.

Such men as these little know themselves, and their condition by nature.

These means of conversion are the Word, and the Spirit: The word must inform,
the spirit must reform us: For we are both blind and impotent. We have no
spiritual knowledge of Jesus Christ by nature; no active power to do so much
as effectually desire him.

The word alone is not sufficient without the spirit; the spirit without the
word will not ordinarily do any thing. The word concerning man's ^in, Gods love,
Christ's redemption, man's duty, as it is an outward revelation, written or
spoken, cannot penetrate the heart of man. Something it may teach and something
it may move, and work upon a man, that attends unto it, and by natural reason
considers it. But this is nothing to purpose. Whether God concurs with any
measure of his preparing Spirit, with the first publishing, or making known his
word by man to natural man, is hard to determine. He may do so if he please:
and there can be no doubt thereof. Yet if he do, I think its a special, if not
an extraordinary gratuity. But this is certain that man is bound to this duty
of hearing, and attention to the word first spoken unto him. And besides if any
man will neglect this duty at the first, or to do any thing in this kind, which
by nature he can do, God may justly both deny the Spirit, and also take away
his word for ever from such a person. To allege in this point that of our
Savior; To him that has it shall be given; that is to him that uses that
power, which he has, God will give him more, and reward him, is to little
purpose: For our Blessed Savior is not to be understood of that power, which
man has by nature; but of some stock, or talent of grace, which He his Lord
and Master had given him. And suppose it were true, that to him that does (Quod
in se est)) what he can do, more shall be given him; Yet

1. No man does what he can do by nature.

2. Nor can do any thing in spirituals without grace.

3. Though he should ever answer man in this kind, Where do we find that he
has bound himself by promise so to do. Men may talk at random this, and that;
yet the Cross of Christ was such a doctrine, as neither Jew nor Gentile could
by nature digest: It was to the one a Stumbling block, and to the other
foolishness, though some of them might be of exquisite and highly improved
natural parts. This doctrine is Gods Wisdom in a mystery, and so hidden, that
it poseth the great wits, and profoundest learning of the World; and if Paul
himself had not preached it in demonstration of the Spirit, and power, it had
taken little effect. It Is far above nature. God must give man so much of his
Spirit, as he may see the want of the Spirit, before he can pray for the Spirit
so as to obtain it for conversion, and consolation.

The first duty that man being instructed by the word can perform, Hearing the
Word. Yet there be many kinds of hearing, and many degrees thereof: neither is
any kind of hearing such as upon which faith does follow. For when the Apostle
says, That faith is by hearing, he intends some special hearing, which
requires a due preparation, of the heart ^ntecedent. For when a regenerate
person hears the Word with an unprepared heart, he shall find little effect:
neither can man hope for a benefit by the Word, when he does not hear it in due
manner. A man may hear the Word with attention, and he may hear the Word
without attention. He may hear, and forget; hear and remember it. He may
hear, and consider, with application of it to himself; He may hear, and
neither seriously consider it, nor rightly apply it. He may hear for
knowledge, or some other end only; He may hear for practice, and real
practice. He may hear it as the Word of God, or not as the Word of God, but of
man. He may hear it so as to obey the commands, and to do the duties
commanded, to avoid the sins prohibited, to trust in the mercyes promised, to
fear the punishments threatened, He may hear it as casting away all filthiness,
and superfluity of naughtiness, and with a meek heart; and he may hear it
another way. Though notwithstanding the Word may be heard many and several
ways; yet these things are certain,

1. That a man is to hear the Word of God according to the best power natural
God has given him, and to proceed so far as a natural Moral Heathen may do.

2. Whether there be any promise of further grace to be given upon this
performance or no; yet if he neglect to do what he can in this particular, its
just with God to deny any further grace, then that which has been granted, the
teaching of the Word.

3. That the Word of God ought to be heard as the Word of God.

4. That it is never heard as the Word of God, so as to assent to the truth, and
consent to the practice of it effectually, without the power of the Spirit
going along with it, and carrying it close to the heart.

5. One effect, if not the first, which by the Word, God works upon the heart
of him that uses the means of conversion aright, is, to make the heart
sensible. For by nature it is senseless, stupid, stony.

And this is one promise of God to put a new Spirit within us, and to take away
the stony heart out of our flesh, and give us an heart of flesh, Ezekiel. 36. 26.

This is not to give us a new soul; but a new quality, another disposition of
the Soul, different from that which we have by nature.

And even in this work as he makes use of our senses, so he does of our
natural reason, and wit.

He, by illumination, and inspiration, takes away the blindness of the
understanding, which naturally cannot judge of spiritual things, as spiritual
represented by the Word; and the stupidity of the Will, which does not, cannot,
relish, affect, heavenly and spiritual things, so as to be moved by them
effectually.

Because the word finds the heart of man under the guilt and dominion of sin,

Upon this the heart begins to bleed, grieve, smart, as being deeply and
mortally wounded.

And it may be God does not at the first represent unto man all his sin, but it
may be one, and the same principal, or more predominant, or some other; nor
discover all the punishments due, but some few, or one, especially the eternal.

This may be called that part of judgment which we term to be Conviction upon
Summons, and a charge, and the same confessed.

For when God has thus made the heart of man sensible, he is convinced,
confesses, accuses, and condemns himself.

And though at the first the work begins with the apprehension and sense of one
sin, yet afterward he begins to see his sins to be many and heinous, and so
his condition to be very miserable.

And in this case a man may continue a longer, or a shorter time as it shall
please God: and this his sad condition is sometimes made more sad by outward
afflictions, or inward terrors, or both: and all this while the sinful wretch
is in danger of despair, if God prevent it not by restraining Satan's rage, who
then will be very busy.

Yet God gives man no occasion to cast away all hope; because he does not at
the first represent sin as unpardonable, but pardonable, nor the punishment as
unavoydable, but avoydable.

Some say this is done by the Law, and they mean the moral Law, discovering
unto man his sin by the precept, and his misery by the commination: But

1. God does not use only the moral law, but all other laws, or any law in
force, and he makes use of the History of the first sin, and ^all of man, nay
of the sufferings, and death of Christ, of his judgments executed upon others.

2. No man ought to preach the law of works unto sinful man as in force: for
that makes sin unpardonable, and is the high way to cause despair. He indeed
that will only threaten death, and punishments according to the Law of works,
and silence, and conceal the promise of the Gospel is a Legal-Preacher indeed,
and can be no faithful Servant unto Christ in this work.

3. It Is not the Law, nor any other Doctrine preached by man, which can break
his stony heart, without the Spirit and power of the Gospel. That Doctrine
which, used by God in this work is most effectual, is, the Doctrine of Christ
Jesus crucified for our sins, and it must be the law of the Spirit of life,
that must free us from the Law of sin, and death.

In this sad condition, Men, and Brethren what shall we do? Acts 2. 37. And
with the Jaylour, Sirs, what shall I do to be saved? Act. 16. 30.

To this question made in the anguish and bitterness of Spirit, the answer is,
Repent, and be baptized in the name of Jesus Christ for the Remission of sins,
and ye shall receive the Holy Ghost, Act. 2. 38.

And, Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved, Act. 16. 31,
This implies,

1. That the Sinner is Savable, and remission possible.

2. That Remission, and Salvation is only by Jesus Christ.

3. That the means to obtain both by Christ, is, repentance and faith. Upon
this follows an appeal from the Throne of Justice, to the Throne of Grace, and
mercy: Christ is pleaded; the guilty person offers the sacrifice of a broken
heart, and bruised Spirit to the supreme Judge, and earnest suit is made, not
only for pardon of sin past, but for power against sin for the time to come.

And though man desires and endeavors to repent, and believe, and quiet his
mind in Christ's merits, and Gods promises, yet he cannot do these things to
purpose, nor any man in the world can give him effectual comfort by the
application of the promises, till God put his laws in his mind, and write them
in his heart by his Divine Spirit.

Thus to do is a work of the Divine Spirit, who alone can write immed^ately,
and imprint the Divine precepts, and promises of the Gospel upon the heart of
man; and so give him a divine power to repent, to believe, to understand, to do
the Laws of God, and apply his promises.

The word now is no longer only in books, or in men's mouths, or in their
ears, but also in the heart.

Yet it is here to be noted.

1. That this great promise of the Gospel is not absolute, as though God
pre-required no duty to be performed by man.

2. That he does not this work without the word both taught, heard, and learned.

3. That this Law is not fully and perfectly written in any man's heart, in this
life.

4. That therefore the most illuminated, and sanctified man in this life has
need of the written Word. This is not any precept, or promise of the Law: it is
a performance of a promise upon some precepts performed, and so an act of
judgment, and the same not a bare sentence pronounced out of man, but executed
in the soul of man; and not a punishment, but a blessed reward.

Upon this follows another performance, natural, and moral: They are divine and
supernatural, not performed by any acquired power, but by a strength from
Heaven. For in writing these divine precepts in the heart of man, God himself
so immediately speaks to man, that he receives the Word of God, as the Word of
God indeed, is taught of God, drawn to Christ, and comes unto him, never to
depart from him again.

I will not deny but there may be some supernatural illumination, and
alteration in the heart of man, and some comforts thereupon in an heart not
fully humbled.

But for God so to write his laws in our hearts, as to cause us to walk in his
statutes, and keep his judgments to do them, and that sincerely, and
constantly, Ezekiel. 36. 27. is a far higher degree of grace in Christ, and the
duty performed thereupon is far more perfect, and excellent. In this repentance
and faith there are several branches. The

1. Is a sincere and total submission unto Christ alone, as our only Savior,
and to God as our only Lord, and Redeemer by him, and so we take him to be our
God. The

2. Is total reliance upon God as our Redeemer in Christ Jesus dying; and
rising again for us.

3. An engagement with the whole heart, unto the obedience of his commands, and
to be his people, his loyal, and obedient subjects. And because this duty is a
return unto our God formerly forsaken by us, therefore it is called Repentance:
And because it is not only a belief of his truth, but a reliance upon his
promises, its called Faith.

By this we turn from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God.
The reward that follows upon this, is that God will be to us a God, and we
shall be to Him a people; Heb. 8. 10.

This is our admission of us as subjects of his Kingdom, wherein as we must
perform duties, so we shall enjoy privileges.

This makes us one with Christ, ingrafts us unto him, so as we become his
living members, and derive from God by him all grace, and peace, and saving
blessings.

But of this there are degrees.

1. We have Christ as our Savior, and Redeemer. 2. A right unto the mercyes
merited by him, and promised by God in him. 3. Some degree of possession and
enjoyment of them. 4. In the end a full communion with God the Father, and
Jesus Christ his Son, so that our joy is made full.
Before I proceed to the next benefit or reward, something must be observed,
both concerning this duty, and this reward.

1. The repentance, faith, and submission unto God Redeemer in Christ is in
consistent with the habitual dominion of any sin.

2. Though it be such, and therefore sincere, yet it is not perfect, but admits
of degrees, and must increase until we come to perfection.

3. They do not look at any particular promise of God, or office of Christ, or
benefit merited by Christ, but at God Redeemer in general, as the fountain of
eternal life, and all benefits conducing thereunto, and at all the offices of
Christ, and all the merits of Christ, even at whole Christ, as by whom God will
give us this eternal full salvation.

4. Yet they virtually include, and are the root of all particular acts to be
terminated upon particular promises, offices, merits.

Concerning the reward.

1. The estate of such as have received, it is inconsistent with the estate of
such, as are under the dominion of sin, and liable to the condemnation unto
eternal death. 2. As the duty, so the reward is imperfect at the first. 3.
It Is no particular reward, as of justification, or reconciliation, or adoption,
or the rest formally, actually, and particularly considered, but virtually all.
For we have God to be our God, whole Christ to be our Savior, and be in
Christ, Christ is in us by his Spirit. And whereas formerly the Spirit was in
us to prepare us, now he as the Spirit of Christ our head, is in us to abide,
and constantly to sanctify and comfort, and seal us to the day of Redemption.
And the first reward upon this faith, having received Christ, and God received
him as a member of Christ, is Justification, a reward, The great reward.
CHAP. XXII.
Of Justification by Faith in Christ.
Justification is a reward of God Redeemer, whereby he justifies a sinner
believing in Christ,

1. The Judge. 2. The party judged. 3. The judicial Act, or the reward actively
considered.
1. The Judge is God, but

1. Not largely as Judge of men and Angels, but as Judge of men.

2. Not as Creator, and Judge by the Law of Creation, and of works, but by the
Law of Redemption, and grace.

3. Not as merely just though just, but as merciful.

4. Not as merciful in general, and (ex nuda voluntate) without any respect
had to satisfaction, but as propitiated by the blood of Christ, and having
accepted the propiation made by his blood.

5. Not merely as propitiated by his blood, but as moved by his intercession,
which he makes as our Advocate in Heaven, not only pleading the propitiation
made and accepted, but the repentance, and faith of the sinner, and the promise
of him the Judge, before whom he pleads.

6. The Scriptur^s, in this judicial process, consider God as a Judge, and
Christ as an Advocate: as may appear, Romans 8. 33, 34. Heb. 7. 25. and 9. 24. 1 John 2. 1, 2. In which places Christ is made the propitiatour, and
intercesso^r, or advocate.

7. Though God by Christ as King may pass this judgment, yet he must, before
that act be passed by Christ, look upon Christ as propitiatour and intercessour
as a priest; and ^uch he must be before he can be a Judge, and so looked upon,
not only by God the Judge justifying, but the sinner to be justified, before
this Judge proceed to pass and execute the judgment by his Son as King. For
man must first be justificable by Christ a Priest, before he can be justified
by Christ a King. The general nature of justification is a reward. It Is a
reward merited by Christ, as Priest, and Mediator, promised by God Redeemer,
as a Lawgiver, and rendered by him as Judge upon a duty performed, by the
Sinner to be justified: and this does difference it from the retributions of
punishment, according to the Laws of Redemption violated.

The party judged,

1. Man.

2. Man a Sinner.

3. Man a Sinner believing.

4. Believing in Christ, as propitiatour, and intercessour: Propitiatour by his
blood shed, and offered unto God: Intercessour by his blood being shed,
offered, and accepted, as pleaded.

1. The subject of this act, and the material immediate cause of this act is
Man: For it is not a judgment passed upon Angels good, or bad.

2. Man is here considered, not as innocent, as he was first Created, but as a
Sinner, and disobedient, and so guilty. For it is God that justifies the
ungodly, that is sinners, and guilty persons, Romans 4, 5.

Therefore the Apostle, making way for his Doctrine of Justification, proves Jew
and Gentile (that is all men) under sin, Romans 3. 9. and that all the world was
guilty before God, (that is Gods tribunal) verse 19. and again affirms that all
have sinned, verse 23. For death passed over all men, because all have sinned
in one man. Romans 5. 12.

For he that has the least sin, is guilty of the first sin of the first man,
and lies under the penalty thereof, till he be delivered. For by the offense of
one, many were dead; and, by the offense of one, judgment came upon all men to
condemnation, verse 15, 16, 17.

For there can be but two ways whereby men or Angels can be justifiable before
God the universal, and supreme most just Judge: and that is either by their
own righteousnesses, and perfect obedience; or by the mercy of this eternal
Judge propitiated, pardoning their disobedience upon a certain condition.

By the former way the Blessed Angels were, but man cannot be, justifiable, or
justified.

3. It Is man as a Believer: For though every man that is justifiable, and
justified, is a sinner, and may be so considered (specificative) as the
Schoolmen speak; yet as a sinner (for maliter, et reduplicative) he cannot be
justifiable: For then every sinner should be justified. Therefore it is so
often said, that man a sinner is justified by Faith.

4. To be a Believer, so as to be justifiable, presupposes Christ,

1. As Propitiatour, and Intercessour. 2. Faith in him as such. It
1. Presupposes Christ; who Christ is, what his person, natures, with the
union, and distinction of them, and his offices be; Who sent him, and upon what
inward motive, and to what end he was sent, what his work was, what the
immediate effects, and the mediate of the redemption applied were, you have
heard before: and all these things must be understood, believed, and remembered.
But the principal thing here to be considered, is, how Christ made God
propitious, and placable: and how he procures actual remission. That which
made God propitious and merciful to sinful man, was, his great Sacrifice:
That which obtaines actual remission, is, his intercession. Both these are
proper acts of him as Priest, and Mediator. For mediator and Priest, the
Apostle takes to be the same, as if you consider, you may observe, Heb. 7. 25.
and 8. 6. and 9. 15. He may be called a Mediator, Nuntius inter Deum and
hominem; A messenger between God and Man, as Moses was between the Lord and
Israel, as a third person really and essentially distinct from both, Gal. 3.
19. So Christ never was: Or, he may be a Mediator participating in nature with
both, being God with God, and Man with Man. But though it is true that Christ
may be called Mediator in these two respects; yet where does the Scripture
call him so, in either way? The man Christ Jesus is the one mediator between
God and Man, as giving himself a ransom for all; that is as a Priest, 1 Timothy
2. 5, 6. That, He as Priest, is the propitiation for our sins, through his
blood, is express Scripture, Romans 3. 25. For by his own blood entering once
into the holy place, he obtained eternal Redemption, or Remission for ever,
Heb. 9. 12. For as the High Priest in the Sacrifice of the great and general
expiation, when the Sacrifice was slain, enters with the blood thereof into the
holiest place, and presents, and sprinkles it before the throne of God, and
then comes out again: So Christ having suffered; and shed his blood, being
slain, presently enters into the Holy place of Heaven, and presents his soul,
as separated from his body, and so himself as having suffered; and so the
propitiation, and the eternal expiation was made. And to signify this
instantly, the Vail of the Earthly Sanctuary was rent from top to bottom, that
men might know that the great High Priest was entered the eternal Sacrary of
Heaven, to appear before the Tribunal of the great Judge. This Sacrifice was
truly propitiatory, and by the eternal spirit being offered without spot to
God; had power to purge the conscience from dead works, to serve the living God
in the Heavenly Temple, to confirm the everlasting Covenant, to consecrate the
Sanctified for ever, Heb. 9. 14, 15. and 10. 14. And He that knew no sin* was
made sin, that is, a Sacrifice for sin, for us, that we might be the
righteousness of God through him, 2 Cor. 5. ^1. He knew no sin; for he was
holy, and without sin in his Conception, Birth, Life, Death; And perfectly
obeyed all the Commandments of God. Otherwise he could not have offered
himself without spot, Heb. 9. 14. Nor have been an offering and sacrifice to
God, for a sweet smelling Savor, as he was, Ephesians. 5. 2. Without this purity,
this sacrifice could have had no expiatory, and redemptory power; So that we
might be Redeemed from our vain conversation with his blood, as of a Lamb
without blemish, and without spot, 1 Pet. 1. 19. And as without this spotless
purity, He could not have offered this spotless Sacrifice; so though He was
pure, yet without this sacrifice and death, He could not have bin a
propitiation for sinful man. So that purity, and death must both concur to
satisfy Gods justice, and make sin pardonable. Yet sin can never be actually
pardoned, nor immediately pardonable to any particular person, except this
propitiation is made, and accepted, be pleaded in Heaven by him that was
consecrated by Death, constituted upon the Resurrection, and confirmed upon his
Assension; to be the High Universal, and Eternal Priest in Heaven after the
order of Melchizedeck. For if we have sinned (as who has not) we must have an
advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, who is the propitiation
for ours sins, etc. 1 John 2. 1, 2. This Christ and Son of God is King, and
Prophet; yet neither as King, or Prophet, does He either make propitiation, or
intercession, but only as a Priest; and after His first service of sacrifice
was finished, and He made immortal, and set at His Fathers right hand, He
begins this second service of His Priesthood, and shall continue it till all
His Saints be fully justified for ever: And oh! How happy are they that have
Him Advocate in the Heavenly Court?

Though Christ has done all things, He ever lives to make intercession for
such as come to God by Him, Heb. 7. 25. Where we must observe,

1. That the place speaks of Christ as a Priest.

2. Such a Priest, as having offered the great Sacrifice of expiation is risen
again, and entered into the Temple of Heaven.

3. Such a Priest as has obtained an unalterable Priesthood, confirmed to him
by the Solemn Oath of the eternal God.

4. Such a Priest as is immortal, and ever lives.

5. This Priest does make perpetual intercession.

6. Those for whom he makes intercession, are such as come to God by Him.

7. To come to God, is to present our selves before His Throne of grace, and sue
for pardon, and Salvation.

8. To come to God by Him, is to sue for these in His Name by Faith in Him. For
otherwise there is no access for guilty persons to the Throne of grace:
Therefore is He said to be set forth, or ordained to be a propitiation through
faith in His blood, Romans 3. 25. For we are not immediately made justifiable
either by Christ dying, or Christ pleading, but by Christ dying and pleading,
believed upon. The righteousness of God is by faith in Jesus Christ, unto all
and upon all that believe, Romans 3. 22. This is an unspeakable comfort to
sinful guilty man, deserving to be sentenced unto eternal death and the
extreme punishments in Hell, that

1. There is a Court of Grace, Equity, and Mercy ever kept in Heaven.

2. A propitiated, and most merciful God is the Judge.

3. Jesus Christ His Son being once tempted, and having suffered cruel
punishments is very sensible of our miserable condition, and full of compassion.

4. Every penitent, and believing sinner on Earth is his client, and he will
undertake his cause, and plead it as his own.

5. A prayer, a sigh, a groan, will mind him of our cause.

6. A most righteous Advocate, pleading vehemently, and before a Father of
eternal mercy, for penitent, believing, and heart-bleeding sinners, and that
with his own blood, and urging Gods own promise must needs prevail. Oh! fear
not guilty Wretch, thy cause will be carried in Heaven: There can be no doubt
of it. -- Yet the Saints of God, who lived and died before Christ's exaltation
to glory, had faith in Christ, and were justified by it, as Abraham was: Their
faith indeed was implicit, and far short of ours, yet it pleaded Mercy, a
Promise, a Messiah, a Sacrifice, though very darkly: and God did look upon
Christ though to come as a Propitiatour, and intercessour: and for his
propitiation, and intercession foreseen, and fore-accepted, and imperfectly yet
sincerely believed, did justify them.

This Faith whereby we are justified is opposed by the Apostle Paul, Jew, in
his Letter to the Romans; to the Faith of the Judaizing Christian, in that to
the Galatians; unto the Faith of Jews, of Philosophers, of the Worshippers of
Angels, in that to the Colossians. Its opposed to these several faith's in a
twofold respect:

1. As an assent, and persuasion, 2. As a confidence or reliance.
The Jew believed that he might be justified by the Works of the Law, and so
trusted unto, and relied upon his own Works alone. The Judaizing Christian
believed that Christ alone without the Law could not save him, but with the Law
he might, and so his confidence was not in Christ alone, but in Christ and the
Law. The Jew, the Jewish Christian, the Philosopher, the Worshipper of Angels,
were persuaded either that Christ was needless; or yet, if he was needful, he
was not sufficient without the Law, or without Philosophy, or without the
Worship of Angels; and did either trust in Christ with these, or in these
without Christ; and none of these would be complete without, or with Christ,
without some of these. The Doctrine of the Gospel different from, and opposed
to all these, proposes Christ, and him only, and Christ alone as the complete
High Priest, Sacrificing himself, and pleading his Sacrifice, as the means,
and only means of justification. Justifying faith believes all this, and out
of this belief rests upon Christ, and Christ alone, and pleads him, and him
alone; and none else, nothing else.

This Faith is not a persuasion that our sins are already forgiven, assent to
the truths of the Gospel, concerning Christ as our Savior; which vanishes
with the speculation, and does not pierce the inwards of the soul; nor is it
any kind of resting upon Christ, as our High Priest, and Mediator; neither is
it a sincere receiving of Christ, as our Lord, and King, much less is it a
general act of faith in God Redeemer, merely considered under that general
notion.

1. It cannot be a persuasion, that our sins for Christ's sake are already
forgiven* For we must believe before we can be justified, much more before we
can be assured that we are justified: But this persuasion follows
justification, and remission it self. It puts the act before the object, and
the reward before the performance of the duty, and so makes justifying faith
which is antecedent, to be consequent and needless: and from hence its
consequent that a man may be justified without faith, by a faith which follows
justification: But these things are absurd to a considerate Christian.

2. It Is not a mere speculative assent to the truths of the Gospel concerning
Christ: for it presupposes practical acts antecedent, and issues from a
practical habit. It looks upon, and closes fast with the object, wherein
there be the Highest and most powerful motives unto practice and obedience,
that ever were, or possibly can be. How is it possible that a man should
believe seriously that stupendous love of God which moved him to give his
only begotten Son, That whosoever believes on him should not perish, but have
everlasting life: and not be powerfully stirred up to love that most loving and
merciful God, who loved him so much? How can Faith look upon the Son of God,
blee^ing and dying for his sins upon the Cross; and not hate sin with an
eternal hatred, and give himself wholly to Christ, as infinitely more
precious, and beneficial to him then many Worlds? Our reformed Writers had
good reason to say, that though this faith in receiving Christ Satisfying,
meriting, interceding, was Sola, yet not Solitaria: for it must of necessity
work, and work by love: For it is a lively principle of all heavenly virtues,
and sincere obedience. That faith which is not predominant over all lusts, and
a mother of universal obedience, is no faith, whereby a man can be
justifiable, and justified.

3. It Is not any kind of resting upon Christ, as our High Priest, and
Mediator: For we may rest in part on Christ, and in part on the Law and our
own Works, and in Saints and Angels, and Superstitious rites of men. We may
rest on Christ for benefit and not duty: We may rest on Christ, and yet
continue in sin, be Hypocrites, and so presume. It must be a total, and a
sincere dependence with a detestation of sin.

4. It Is not a receiving him as Lord, and King, in that it presupposes him as
so received already. For faith it self is a duty of obedience, and presupposes
a submission unto him as Lord and King, to command and bind us to obedience.
But it is one thing to receive Christ for duty, another to receive him for
benefit: Justification is a Benefit, a reward; not a duty, not an act of
obedience. And though faith receiving Christ as Priest for justification, be a
duty as doing that which is commanded, yet it is but the general nature of it,
whereby it agrees with, and differs not from, any duty commanded by God
Redeemer: And consider it as a duty, it is a work, and faith it self as a Work
is not justifying. But to come more closely up to the point and head of the
matter, now by some much agitated; and to speak distinctly, and pertinently: We
may consider faith in Christ alone propitiating, and interceding for sinful
man, as a duty; and as a duty,

1. In general commanded by God Redeemer.

2. As this particular duty, receiving Christ as Priest in this matter. But
neither of these ways considered, is it a receiving Christ as Lord and King,
but presupposes him as so received: For so to receive him is the act of
submission, or subjection, which is necessarily antecedent to the performance
of any particular obedience to any particular command, as this faith in Christ
is. Submission has for object the power of the supreme Lord: Duty looks at the
command of the Lord acknowledged.

2. Faith, this faith, may be considered as looking back upon the command, or
forward at the benefit. In the former respect it is a duty properly, in the
latter respect it is a condition, the performance whereof leads unto the
receiving of the benefit.

3. Faith may look at the command, or at the promise, both parts of the Law:
and it is justifying as looking at the promise, not as resting in the
performance of the duty, though without the performance it cannot be
justifying: For these things which God has joined together, no man must put
asunder.

4. Faith may be considered as having connection with the reward, and benefit of
justification, or as having an aptitude for the connection. The connection with
the benefit is not Physical, that is certain, but it is moral, and divine, and
arises from Christ's merit, and Gods promise; with respect unto the merit. If
Christ had not merited, God had never promised: If God had never promised,
justification had never followed upon this faith: For let a man believe with
the highest degree of ^aith in Christ, and in the greatest sincerity, yet
justification had never followed thereupon, nor could have been expected with
any certainty, except God for Christ's sake had promised that upon such a duty
performed, justification should have followed. So that the indissoluble
connection of this faith and justification, is, from Gods institution; whereby
he had bound himself to give the benefit, upon the performance of the duty, to
him that performs it. Yet there is an aptitude in this duty, in this faith to
be made a condition, and have connection, and such an aptitude as can be in no
other duty. For no other duty commanded by God-Redeemer, nor any other act of
faith but this, can receive Christ, as Priest propitiating, and pleading the
propitiation, and the promise of God for his sake, as such to give the benefit.
As receiving Christ, and the gracious promise in this manner, it acknowledges
man's guilt: and so renounceth all righteousness in himself, acknowledges God
the Father, and Christ the Son, the only Redeemer, and so gives God the
greatest glory of justice, wisdom, mercy, and free grace, and does virtually
acknowledge it self to be a gift, and performed by the Spirit of God Redeemer;
and that, as a duty, a work, an act of obedience, it cannot challenge any right
to justification. This no other duty, no other act of faith, no good works can
do.

Therefore God in his infinite Wisdom thought good to pitch upon this, and
make it the means, the only means, whereby justification both for the right
unto it, and the possession of it, should be derived from Christ meriting, and
himself promising for Christ's merit.

This aptitude is intrinsecall to the duty it self, the connection is
extrinsecall for Christ's merit, and Gods promise. This act of faith must look
not only at the promise, but at Christ, not only at Christ but the Promise
too. It must look at Christ as sufficiently, and abundantly meriting, and that
without any Promise; and at the Promise as grounded upon Christ's merit, not
adding any Meritorious Vigor unto it, but as added for man's sake, that when
the benefits were merited already, man might know them, have some hope of them,
and a remote conditional right unto them.

Christ is the special object of our faith, and He is so, not only in respect
of His Person, Natures, Acts, but also of His Offices: For He is King, Priest,
and Prophet, and faith receives Him in all His Offices: But this act of says,
as a duty presupposes Him, (as you heard before) received as King, or else
this act is no duty, no obedience; and as Prophet, or else this act could not
be a belief of the truth revealed, and taught by him infallibly, as a Prophet.
Yet if we consider the matter of this particular act believed formally, and
properly it is Christ as a Priest.

Now let us abstract, though not separate the general nature of this act, as
it is a duty and a belief, according to both which, though not without either,
because presupposed both must be, it cannot be justifying faith, then it will
appear that it is properly, particularly justifying, as receiving Christ as a
Priest, and as having formerly received Him as King and Prophet. For there can
be no justification of sinful man, if we believe the whole tenor of the
Gospel; but as merited by Christ alone; and promised, as merited, and procured
by Him alone: But its no ways merited, and procured by Him, but as a Priest.

And if it be so represented, ex part objecti, it must be so received by this
act of faith, ex part subjecti. As the act must be conformable, so it must be
commensurable to the object represented; it must neither exceed and be greater,
nor contract and be less.

If it be not conformable, it is irregular; if not commensurable, it is either
imperfect, and defective, or or else falls, and fancy. But the truth is, it is
impossible for an act to exceed its object, as its object.

To say that faith as a duty, is justifying, will bring in all other good
works, and duties to share with it in justification. But this act of faith,
truly understood, renounceth all good works; even at the last judgment, as
giving any right unto justification, and eternal life. It annihilates all
righteousness, merit, confidence in it self, or any other thing but Christ: It
rests in Christ alone, and pleads for pardon only in his name, and urges Gods
promise, as made only for his sake.

Its the most glorifying and magnifying act that ever was performed by Man, or
Angel: It glorifies Gods mercy, and free grace in the highest degree. It
acknowledges on Earth, as it will be perpetually acknowledged in Heaven; that
the whole Salvation of sinful man from the very First beginning, unto the Last
degree thereof, whereof there shall be no end, is from God's freest love,
Christ's merit and intercession, his own free and gracious promise, and the
power of his own holy spirit.

And since the first sin, and fall of man, it could not be otherwise: For man
lost all power to save himself, forsook the fountain of his happiness, made
himself a slave to Satan his deadly enemy, and deserved eternal death.

This is the duty which qualifyes the subject,

But faith does not only make him capacable, and a fit subject to receive
justification, but upon it by virtue of the promise made in the blood of
Christ, the party thus, as thus believing, has a right unto it. The foundation
of this right, or the title (which is sometimes taken for the right, sometimes
for the foundation of this right) is faith, but not faith as a duty performed,
or such a duty in particular, but as it is specified, and made a condition, in
the grant and promise made for Christ's sake.

For a donation essentially includes the Donour, the Donee, and the
Consideration (if there be any); as, if it be nudum pactum, there is none. In
this Grant God is Donour, sinful man believing the Donee, the Consideration is
the blood of Christ.

If Christ have made no purchase, there is nothing to be granted.

If He have purchased, and there be no grant, there is no conveyance.

If Christ has purchased, and God has granted; and yet the Donee be not
specifyed, it is no grant, no donation.

But in this donation man is the Donee, and is specifyed as a Believer.

Yet the party does not only believe; but in and by the power of this faith
does confess, pray, vow: and Christ an Advocate in Heaven does plead.

The Devil accuses, charge the sinner, desires justice to be done upon the
guilty wretch.

For why should he himself be guilty, being condemned, and punished; and man
being guilty, as he is, go unpunished?

Here Christ comes in, confesses his client guilty in himself, yet just
another way; and though he deserve to be punished, yet by law he ought not to
be punished.

He Pleads three things,

1. His own propitiation made. 2. Gods promise as part of his Law. 3. His
clients unfeigned faith.
By this plea, the charge of the Devil is make void, the cause of his client
made good, and the judge effectually moved to pardon.

This pleading and intercession of Christ is necessary, not only because God
ordained and required it, but also because our prayer, and pleading is very
imperfect, and His perfect.

And happy is he that has such a Counselor, and Advocate in Heaven, who is
ever ready, day and night, before his Fathers Throne; taking care of the cause
of all his Clients, pleading GRATIS, without any Fee, and ever carrying the
cause.

Yet a sinner may be justifiable, and yet not instantly actually justified: For
the sentence may be delayed for a certain time.

But this is the comfort of a true believer, that the sentence will certainly
be passed in Gods due time, which, in his wisdom, he knows to be best.

Thus you have heard,

1. Who is the Judge. 2. Who is the party judged. Now 3. It Is high time to say
something of the judicial act, which is the principal thing.
But before I proceed to unfold the nature of it, I must digress a little, and
examine the different opinions of men in this point.

For some question whether it be a sentence properly or no: and, if it be a
sentence properly; when, and where it is passed; and, if it be passed, whether
it be a bare sentence without any execution, or with some execution.

1. That it is a sentence, most will grant; but some distinguish of, Sententia
Legis, and Sententia judicis: The one is not, the other is properly a sentence:
and this no doubt is an act of judgment, not of Legislation: For if it be an
act of Legislation, it is then only promise: and that looks at none in
particular, but all in general to whom the promise is made; and presupposes a
duty to be performed.

But justification presupposes a particular person, a particular cause, a duty
performed, and the performance, as already past, is pleaded, and the Judge
solicited to pass judgment accordingly. But let it be a sentence, and that
properly, and of the Judge as it is; When and where is it passed? For passed if
properly a sentence it must be. For it is not a sentence as conceived in the
breast of the Judge, but as judicially pronounced. It Is not Sententia, mere
concepta, sed prolata, some ways declared.

Whether for the time, is it passed in eternity before time, or in time? For
the place, whether is it passed in man, or out of man? If out of man whether in
Heaven or in Earth? If on Earth whether by God and Man? If by God, whether by
the promise of the Law, that whosoever believes is not condemned, or some
other thing? If by man, whether by the Minister, or the Church binding or
loosing so on earth, as to be bound, and loosed in Heaven? If it be, whether it
be an act of conscience, or the blessed spirit? If the spirit, whether it be by
inspiration and enthusiasm, or by some real operation? Thus the wit of man,
forsaking the rule of Gods word, will wander, and ignorance, joined with
curiosity, will start many doubts, puzzle a clear truth; and infinitely
multiply questions, not so much for edification, as destruction, and
distraction.

1. The sentence was not passed in eternity, and only manifested in time: for
if it were, passed then and only manifested now, it might from hence be
argued, that the world was created from eternity, and so is eternal; and the
glorious work of creation in the beginning, had only been a manifestation of
that, which was from everlasting.

And how absurd, if not blasphemous, must such a fancy be? It is tr^e, that as
God before the foundation of the World, did decree all things to be done in
time, so he decreed to pass this sentence. But the decree it self, without the
issuing out, and exercise of an almighty executive power is no sentence. In
eternity before time, no man was created, no sin committed, no Savior
promised, no law published, no duty of faith performed, no person conven^ed, no
promise pleaded; and therefore no sinner believing, justified.

2. For the place.

1. It Is not passed in Heaven, and only there: for no Scripture says so;
neither is there any means discovered, how the poor guilty sinner should know
whether it be past, or no; and if past, when and so till it be known to be
passed, and that certainly, the believer must always be in doubt. The cause
indeed is pleaded in Heaven by the great High Priest, and his plea is
effectual: But that the sentence is always passed presently upon the cause
pleaded, cannot be proved. It Is true that if a man does certainly know his
faith, and the sincerity thereof, he may certainly know his right unto
justification: and so he knows his cause to be good in Law. He is justified in
law-title, that is, he is justifiable by Law.

But whether this be all the justification the Scripture speaks of, especially
the Writings of the Apostles, shall be considered hereafter.

3. It cannot be the sentence only of the Church or Minister, because they do
not always judge, and absolve, Clave, non errante, infallibly: and so one may
be absolved on Earth, and not in Heaven; or in Heaven, and not on Earth, either
in foro interiori, aut ext^riori; as many use to express themselves. It Is
true, that when it is exactly agreeable to Gods rule, then it is ratified in
Heaven, that is by Christ, and manifested so to be by the execution. For Gods
sentence is not a bare word, or distinct sound in the Air.

4. It Is not the sentence of the conscience: For conscience is neither the
supreme judge, nor infallible. 5. That it is not pronounced by inspiration or
enthusiasm, as the words are ordinarily taken will easily be granted.

6. Whether it be signified to the soul in man by some real operation, with
some execution, is more disputable. That it is signified by some real operation
of the spirit, with execution, seems very probable, if not very certain. But
let others judge when they have considered these places following: The
justified by faith have peace with God, through our Lord Jesus Christ: by whom
also they have access by faith into his grace, wherein they stand, and rejoice
in the hope of the glory of God, etc. And the love of God is shed abroad in
their hearts by the holy Ghost which is given them, Romans 5. 1. 2, 5. Believers
in Christ by the spirit, mortify the lusts of the flesh, and are led, moved,
acted by this spirit, have received the spirit of Adoption, whereby they cry
Abba Father: This spirit witnesses to their spirit that they are the Sons of
God, and having the first fruits of the spirit, they groan within themselves,
waiting for the Adoption the Redemption of their body, Romans 8. 13, 14, 15, 16,
23. Now he that stablisheth us with you in Christ, and has anointed us is God,
who has also sealed us, and given us the earnest of the spirit in our hearts,
2 Cor. 1. 21. 22. We know that we have passed from death to life, because we
love the Brethren, 1 Ioh. 3. 14. God will give him that overcommeth a white
stone, and in the stone, a new name written, which no man knows saving he
that receives it, Rev. 2. 17.

1. All these places, with many more, speak not only of Believers, but
Believers justified, and in this life.

2. All these places, either expressly, or by consequence, speak of the Spirit
of God, and of this Spirit in us, and the effects of this Spirit in particular
persons.

3. The Effects are Divine, and such as only God can produce.

4. These Effects are the shedding of the love of God; that is, the
Manifestation, the evident and abundant manifestation of God's special love,
accepting us to Eternal Life, the Sanctification of the Spirit, and enabling
them to mortify the Deeds of the Flesh, and acting them to Obedience;
Adoption, whereby call upon God as a Father, their Father, and giving them
boldness and confidence to approach the Throne of Grace; testifying inwardly,
testifying in them, and to them, that they in particular are the Sons of God,
and Heirs of Glory, giving them assurance of Eternal Glory, as giving the
first fruits thereof, being a Seal, and Earnest of the same, making them know,
and certainly know, that they are passed from Death to Life, and that God is in
them, and they in God, and that God abides in them, and they abide in God.

5. All these signify and declare, and that evidently, that there is a great
change wrought in them, both for disposition, and condition. For disposition,
they are regenerate, and sanctified: For condition, they are in the state of
Life, not of Death; of Salvation, not of Damnation; and neither of these can be
without Justification actual. And this change is the more evident, because the
Spirit abides in them constantly, as a constant Spring of Sanctification, and
unspeakable consolation, and joy.

6. Therefore, God by this Spirit in them, by these Effects, and real
operations, speaks plainly, with some execution, that particular persons, in
this life, are justified; not merely by the Promise of the Law, but the
Sentence of the great Judge. God's Word is not like man's word, which is a bare
sound, but it is a Word with power: It Is like the Word of Creation, saying, Let
there be Light, and there was Light; like the Word of Christ, to the man of the
Palsy, Arise, take up thy bed, and walk; and presently the thing is done:
Health, and Strength is given: He takes up his bed, and walks, and so his sins
were forgiven, and the remission was signified by a real operation, and word of
power. And certainly, there is no greater Evidence of sin past, forgiven, then
power given to subdue sin for the time to come: and after fear sorrow, and
trouble of men; sweet peace, joy, and Heavenly Consolation. (...) this Word,
which the Spirit speaks within, is the very same Word, with (...) Word, which
the Spirit speaks without us, in the Scripture. Yet with this difference, that
there it is a Promise made to all Believers in general; here, a Word, with
performance, unto particular Believers. The Word is not the Sentence of the
Conscience. The Witness of the Spirit, is not the Witness of Conscience. The
Sentence of the Spirit is infallible: the Sentence of the Conscience is
fallible. The Spirit is the Supreme Judge by which God so justifies, as no man
can condemn; the Conscience is an inferior and subordinate Judge, and the
Sentence thereof may be revoked, and made void. The Spirit speaks with power,
and produces Divine Effects, and in the very Soul, and such as neither Man nor
Angels can produce: These, or like Effects, the Conscience cannot reach. If any
say, or ask, How can God pass this Sentence, but by the Conscience? It Is
answered, That such men seem to be ignorant, what the Conscience is, and what
the Sentence of it is; what the different Sentences of the Conscience, before,
and after Justification be. The Sentence of the Spirit is a principle; but that
of the Conscience, a conclusion: And the Spirit must speak by these real
Effects, before Conscience can certainly conclude Justification to be past, or
the state of Justification to be present.

But this Point will receive some further Light, Absolution; the other,
Condemnation; it is that of Absolution, called Justification: and therefore it is
opposed to Condemnation, Romans 5. 16. and Romans 8. 1, 33, 34. This Sentence
follows Christ's Intercession, which is opposed to the Devil's Accusation. The
party sentenced, is a sinner guilty, and unjust, and so condemnable by the Law
of Works; yet believing in Christ, and so justifiable by the Law of Grace. This
Sentence is not like the Sentence of Man, which many times being only in words
is antecedent unto, and separated from the Execution, which sometimes follows,
sometimes fails; but it is pronounced by God with power, and is always executed:
and many times, if not always joined, if not the same with execution, as the
Sentence of Phineas was. This Sentence does not take away sin, so as to make it
no sin, or that which was done, not to be done: neither does it take away the
desert of sin committed: neither does it abrogate the Law, or relax, and
abate the power of it, either in the Prohibition, or the Commination. Neither
does it prevent the guilt of sin, nor the shame, sorrow fear, hatred, which
follow upon sin, and go before Judgment. But the proper act thereof is known by
the effect, which is a freedom of the sinner from the guilt of sin wherewith he
is chargeable, and for which he is condemnable and punishable. For the end of
it, it is not to destroy the sinner, but to remove the sin, in the consequents
thereof, so that it be not his ruin. Yet ye must observe,

1. That to take away the guilt, is to take away the condemnation, and the
punishment too. For there is no condemnation to those who are in Christ, etc.
Romans 8. 1.

2. Though guilt cannot be taken away by prevention, but removal; yet
condemnation and punishment may be taken away, both by removal and prevention.
For if the Sentence of Condemnation be past, and the Punishment already
inflicted, then there is no way to take them away but by removal, which is by
nulling the Sentence, and taking off ^he Punishment. Thus the Sentence passed
upon Adam, and all his, is revoke, (...) Justification in Christ, and the
Punishment removed.

3 Freedom from Obligation, may be total, or partial: if it be total, the
puishment is totally prevented, or removed; if partial, it is not,

4 If any punishment lie still upon the party justified, the Obligation is not
wholly taken away; for if it were, the punishment would be unjust: for where
there is no guilt, there can be no just punishment.

5 He that is totally freed from the punishment, is totally freed from the
guilt and obligation.

6 That Believer, which is justified by God, is freed from the Eternal
Punishment by way of prevention, though not wholly, from either Temporal or
Spiritual punishments. For the state of the justified, is inconsistent with the
Obligation unto Eternal Death, whether it be in privative loss, or positive
torment. Otherwise, the Apostles arguing from justification, to conclude
freedom from Condemnation, and a certain right unto Eternal Glory, was invalid.

7 Justified persons, once entered into the state of Justification, may sin and
contract new guilt: and by the same means, they obtained mercy at the first,
they must seek freedom from new-ly contracted guilt, and use the means to
secure, and evidence their Title to Eternal Glory. Yet this new guilt is not a
total intercision of Justification, or putting them wholly out of the state of
Justification, to make their condition such as it was before they believed. For
whilst there is the Root and Habit of justifying Faith in them, they have a
remote, and virtual, though not an immediate actual right unto the reward. And
if God put His fear into their inward parts, so as they shall never depart from
him, Jer. 32. 40. Then certainly, He, by that Promise, is bound to preserve,
and revive that Faith, and not suffer it to be totally lost in it self, or to
be finally unprofitable. That Promise is of the same nature with the former, in
Chapter 31, 33, 34. But something of this, hereafter.

8 There never was any man justified by God, but he was instantly put in the
state of Justification. But this cannot be done without some execution: and in
this respect, though we may distinguish between the Sentence and Execution, yet
we must not separate them. For though the final Judgment be so described, Math.
25. from the 31. unto the end of the Chapter, as that the Sentence of Eternal
Reward is represented as pronounced first; and, after that, the Sentence of
punishment, and both, before the Execution: Yet,

1. Any man may easily understand, that the final Judgment is described there
after the manner of Humane Judgments, and in some sort parabolically. 2. In
other places, we find the Judgment and Execution the same. 3. Neither is it
evident from that very place, that the Sentence and Execution were separate.
For though the Sentence be related before, as separate from the Execution: yet
it does not follow, that because it is so in the relation, therefore it shall
be so indeed: For the very saying, Go ye cursed, etc. might be the very casting
of the wicked into Hell. 4 Suppose it should be so; yet it does not follow,
that it shall be so in our Justification in this life. That the Sentence, and
the Execution may be considered under distinct Notions, I do not deny. The
Scripture does sometime so represent them.
9 Though the state of Justification be begun, Simul and Semel; yet it is not
perfected, but by degrees. For all our life, after our first entrance into that
estate, should be a continued Repentance and Faith, every day renewed, and
exercised, till we attain perfection.

10 This state of Justification once begun, does not prevent all future guilt
contracted by sins afterward committed, though it prevents such a guilt, as
lay upon us before we were first converted. The reason hereof will be manifest
hereafter. Whether there be two parts of this Sentence; the one, remission of
sin; the other, imputation of Christ's Righteousness, shall be examined anon.

That we may understand the Nature of this Act of Justification more fully,

1 Remember, that it is a freedom from the guilt and obligation, immediately;
and by consequence, from the punishment.

2 That it is an Act of the Supreme Judge, who so justifies, that no one can
condemn, and is passed upon the intercession of Christ, who so pleads, that
none can lay any thing to the charge of God's Elect: For who shall lay any
thing to the charge of God's Elect, for whom Christ not only dyed, but role
again, and ascended into Heaven, to make intercession for them there? It Is God
that justifies, who is he that condemns? Romans 8. 33, 34.

3 We must consider the punishments, whereunto the sinner to be justified, is
liable, as either justly suffering them, or bound in strict Justice to suffer
them.

4 These punishments are Temporal, or Spiritual, as opposed to Temporal: For,
otherwise* Bodily punishments, which we call Temporal, may, by continuance, be
Eternal. To pass by, therefore, these Temporal Penalties, one Spiritual
Punishment, and the greatest, is the want and loss of the Holy Spirit, to be a
continual and constant Principle, and cause of Sanctification. This Spirit was
given Man in the day of his Creation and was taken away from Adam; and, in him,
from all his Posterity, by the judgment of God, and a Sentence yet in power and
force, and to continue to the end of the World. The Law, indeed, of Works, is
ab^ogated; but it was in force at that very time when the Sentence was passed,
and upon the Promise of Christ, the Law was abrogated, as a Law of Works; but
the Sentence remained in force still. Concerning the sanctifying Spirit, we may
observe, and consider,

1 That the loss, and so the want of it, is a punishment.

2 This punishment, lying upon every Man before this Spirit be restored,
presupposes a guilt.

3 This punishment and guilt is never taken away, till this Spirit be restored.

4 This Spirit may be testored for preparation of a sinner for justification,
or in, and after, to continue as a constant cause of Sanctification: Or, as
others express it, for perpetual Habitation, to prevent the Dominion of Sin,
and Damnation for time to come. It does not prevent all sin, and so the
contracting of new guilt nor is given in that measure to us: and this is the
reason, why your estate of Justification is not perfect at the first.

5 God never justifies any man with that justification, whereof Paul speaks in
the Epistle to the Romans, and Galatians, and elsewhere; but in justifying
them, He gave them instantly this Spirit; as the Spirit of Christ, to be in
them, a constant cause of Regeneration, and Sanctification: and, therefore,
that Justification is not without some Execution.

6 Consider this restoring of the Spirit, as the removal of a Punishment, and
the loss and want of the Spirit as a Punishment* it must needs be essentially
included in Justification, and Remission of Sin. For that which

1 Takes away the Punishment of sin; And, 2 The Guilt and Obligation unto
Punishment, is, properly remission of sin. If the Punishment, as a Punishment,
should remain so far as it does remain, it does invincibly prove, that the
guilt is not taken away, so far, and in that respect. If any distinguish of the
Sentence and Execution, and make the one, the cause; the other, the effect; I
will not quarrel about words: Only I will demand, Whether it is not better to
say, in this particular judgment of God, that the Sentence and Execution are
really the same, and differ only in respect, or at most in degree.
7 The active sanctification of this Spirit, taken in it self, either
habitually, or actually, and as inherent in us, can in no wise be
Justification, or any Branch of Justification, as Justification is a remission
of sins. For God gave this Spirit to Angels He gave it to Adam in the day of
Creation; and this Spirit did sanctify, and now does sanctify the blessed
Angels: yet this Sanctification is not re^mission. But consider remission of
sin, as a removal of punishment as punishment, whether of sense or loss,
deserved by sin, and the loss of the Spirit, and the blindness, perverseness,
and slavery under the power of Satan, following necessarily upon the taking
away, and denying the Spirit by a just Judgment, as a Penalty; then this
restoring of the Spirit must needs put on another Notion, as it has another
Nature. This restoring of the Spirit is so necessary, that a bare Sentence,
without it, can give a man no comfort; nay, Heaven, without it, is no Heaven,
or place of Bliss, and abode.

But lest I may be thought to agree with the Doctrine of the Council of Trent,
or at least come too near it; Let us consider what they say: Their Doctrine,
Sess. 6. Cap. 7. is this: That Justification is not only remission of sins,
but also the sanctification and renovation of the Inner-Man, by the susception
of Grace, and Gifts; whereby, or whereupon, a man of unjust, is made just, and
of an Enemy a Friend, that he may be an Heir, according to the hope of Eternal
Life. And afterward, The only formal cause of Justification, is the
Righteousness of God, not whereby he is just but whereby He makes us just, They
mean inherently just. Thus far they. Now let us examine, Whether, there be any
Agreement between the former Doctrine and this: And

1 I grant, with all our Divines, that Justification and Sanctification, go
always inseparably together: and this they of Rome know well enough, to have
been always the constant Doctrine of the Reformed Churches.

2 They say that Justification is not only remission of sins, but
Sanctification. I say it is only remission.

3 They assert, that this Sanctification and Renovation is by voluntary
Susception, and so understand this Sanctification passively, as formally
inherent; I make neither Sanctification active, nor much less passive, as
considered in themselves to be justification, nor any part of justification.

4 They make the formal cause of Justification, to be this Sanctification, I
utterly disclaim this. I had said before, that Sanctification in it self is no
remission, and is in Angels without any such thing: and do affirm, that this
Sanctification, as they understand it, is no part of that justification which
the Gospel speaks of: and that the restoring of the sanctifying Spirit for
Renovation, as an act of God, as Judge, for to remove a punishment, as a
punishment; and the obligation thereunto is properly remission. And here I
cannot but much wonder, what these Tridentine Divines did understand by
Remission: For if the formal cause of Justification, be Sanctification, and
inherent Righteousness, as they make it so to be, I find no place, nor need of
any place, for remission: Yet first they make it a part of Justification
distinct from Sanctification. It Is neither final, nor efficient, nor
meritorious, nor material; neither by their own words can it enter the formal.
That this Sanctification considered in it self, especially Passive, and
inherent, cannot be Justification, is evident: For,

1 Sanctification, thus understood, is not properly any act of God, as a Judge,
much less a Sentence passed upon a guilty Wretch.

2 That justification of Believers, in this life, whereof the Scripture speaks,
does leave the party chargeable with no sin, is perfect, and bears out the
severity of God's Justice before His Throne. This our inherent Righteousness,
in this life, can never do, both because we are guilty before, and also it is
imperfect.

3 A man may be sanctified, and that perfectly, so as to prevent all sin for
time to come, and yet the party may remain guilty, and liable to Eternal Death
for the guilt of former sins committed before this Sanctification, and not
remitted by it. Some make remission twofold, Remissio Culpae, Remissio Poenae,

1. Of Sin. 2. Of Punishment.
The Learned and profound Bradwardine understands it so, that the former, of
unjust, makes a man just and holy; the latter renders him, of miserable happy:
The one* takes away sin to come; the other, the punishment of sin past: The
former is Sanctification, as we understand it: The latter is Justification
properly. Here it is remarkable* that He makes both the one, and the other to be
Remission, contrary to the Doctrine of Trent: yet, to speak properly, there is
no remission of sin, as sin, but of the guilt and punishment of sin.

Before this Chapter be concluded,

1 Whether God, at the first Justifycation, or in remission of particular sins,
after the first Justifycation, does totally remit, and justify at once; or
sometimes, nay often, in part.

2 Whether there be two parts of Justification: the first whereof, is remission
of sin: the second, the imputation of Christ's Righteousness?

3 Whether good Works be a condition of Justification continued, and of final
Absolution?

QVEST. I.
FOr this, we have the Example of David; who, after his first justifycation,
contracts the guilt of two heinous sins, Adultery, and Murder. The Prophet
Nathan is sent by God to reprove him, and charge him with them, Upon this,
through the mercy of God, and the Spirit, renewing him, he confesses,
repents prays. Nathan returns from God, declares the Sentence of
Absolution, and says, Thou shall not die. Yet withal, lets him know, that the
Child should die, the Sword should not depart from his house; his Concubines
should be defiled in the sight of the Sun, and all Israel: And all these things
came to pass; the event was answerable, 2 Samuel 10. 11, 12, 13, 14. where many
things are remarkable; As,

1. That a Regenerate Man (though not as Regenerate, yet Regenerate) may sin
grievously, and so as to deserve Death: and if Death be due to sin; Eternal
Death: yet in such a person removeable, and not only so; but removable in that
manner, as it is in no unregenerate man. For whilst there is Habitual Faith,
and Repentance, though for the time dormant, and not acting, the Covenant of
Grace is not totally violated, because the Condition of it is Repentance and
Faith; both which were in David, though, through negligence, grievous sins,
divine desertion, for a time, were laid asleep, or stupifyed. For only a total
Apostasy, and a final Desertion, takes these away wholly: neither of which can
be affirmed, and proved of David: whom God did not regenerate again, but renew
and stir up. This the Author of Censura Censurae does confess: and further
says, That he lost not Spiritum Regenerantem, sed obsignantem For the vigor
of the Spirit, both as sanctifying, and sealing, was abated, and little or none
for the time.

3 God says, Thy sin is forgiven thee: Thou shall not die: Yet he must suffer,
and for these very sins, which are said to be forgiven, which does teach us,
that

The Obligation to Punishment was not wholly taken away, but in part only; yet
in the principal part. The Remission, therefore at that time was not total, but
partial* yet it was Remission, and Justification.

3 In the same kind he sinned, he was punished. He sinned in Adultery, and the
Sword: By Adultery, and the Sword, he is punished. This is a fair Warning to
God's Regenerate Saints, To watch, and pray, and beware of grieving that good
Spirit wherewith they are sealed till the Day of Redemption.

4 He suffers all this in His Children, in the Child begotten, and conceived in
Adultery, in Ammon, and Tamar, in Absolon, and his Concubines.

This proves clearly, that Parents and Children, the Head of the Family, and
the Family are considered, by God, as one Person, in Law, and that in
Punishments.

QVEST. II.
Whether there be two Parts of Justification, Remission, and Imputation of
Christ's Righteousness?
FOr Answer whereunto, it may be

1 Remembered, what I have said formerly against Imputation of Christ's active
Righteousness separated, or abstracted for Reward from the Passive. The Reasons
against this Opinion, seem to me strong; yet when I find the force of them
dissolved, I shall abate of my confidence.

2 If we examine the Doctrine of the Apostle Paul, and other Scriptures, we
shall find (if I very much mistake not) that Remission and Imputation of
Righteousness, are taken for the same. We read that Abraham believed God, and
it was counted to him for Righteousness, Romans 4. 3. Now to him that works, is
the Reward not reckoned of Grace but o^ Debt. But to him that works not, but
believes on him that justifyeth the Ungodly, his Faith is counted for
Righteousness, Verse. 4, 5. Even as David describes also the blessedness of the
Man to whom God imputes Righteousness without Works, saying, Blessed is the
Man whose Iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered: Blessed is the
man to whom the Lord imputes not sin, Verse. 6, 7* 8. And therefore it was
imputed to him for Righteousness. Now it was not written for his sake alone,
that it was imputed to him, but for us to whom it shall be imputed, if we
believe in Him, who raised up Jesus our Lord from the Dead, Verse. 22, 23, 24.
Here many things are very observable,

1 Abraham believed, that is, as the Chaldie Paraphrast turns it, In the word
of Johovah, in that word, which being with God, in the beginning was God, by
which the World was made, and who was made flesh, and to whom the Lord said,
Sit thou on my right hand, till I make thine Enemies thy Footstool.

2 It was reckoned to him for Righteousness, that is, his Faith, or in that he
believed in that Eternal Word Christ Jesus, to be incarnate. The plain meaning
whereof is, that he judged him believing in Christ to be righteous by Christ.

3 To him that works, that is, to him that so works, or obeys, as not to
disobey, nor sin at all, the Reward of Righteousness is adjudged to him, as
righteous perfectly; as of Debt by the Law of Works, not of Grace by the Law of
Redemption.

4 God justifies the Ungodly, or the Sinner, and the Guilty Person; not as
such, but believing on him that justifies the guilty; yet as Penitent, and
Believing.

5 This Imputation of Righteousness, is the forgiveness of sin: for to have
Faith counted, or imputed for Righteousness, is explained by David, to have sin
forgiven, covered, not imputed.

6 The estate of the Party justified, even in this life, is blessed, and very
happy. Blessed is he whose sin is forgiven, etc.

7 That the Party to whom Righteousness is imputed, is he that believes on him
that raised up Christ from the Dead; not he that believes that Christ
performed perfect obedience active to the Law in his Person. For though he
perfectly obeyed the Law, as without which he could not have offered himself an
un^potted Sacrifice for us; yet He did it not, that that active personal
Righteousness should be imputed to us. Though God in His absolute Power might
have done so; yet His Wisdom did not think good to do it; neither do we read
that he does it. The principal thing to be noted, is, that this is the
principal, if not the only place, that speaks of Imputation of Righteousness;
and this Imputation is Remission of Sin, by a Sentence of the Supreme Judge.

3 Remission, and Justification, and Eternal Life, is ascribed to the Sacrifice
of Christ's Death, as the meritorious cause thereof, in many other places,
especially Heb. 9. And Christ is said by one Offering to have perfected, that
is, consecrated the Sanctified for ever, Hebr. 10. 14. To be consecrated for
ever, is to be made complete Priest to serve the Living God in the Temple of
Heaven, and to be eternally glorified: And this is ascribed to the Death and
Offering of Christ.

QUESTION III.
Whether Justification, continued, and finally consummate, be by Works, and not
by faith alone, as the first Justification is?
MIne Answer hereunto is negative, Do this, and live; But the Gospel says,
Confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and believe in thine heart, that God
has raised him from the dead, and thou shall be saved, Romans 10. 9. If by
works, then why does the Apostle say, By Grace you are saved, through Faith,
and that not of your selves; it is the gift of God. Not of works etc.? Why
might he not as well have said, By Grace ye are saved, through faith and works?
It was as easy for him to say the one as the other. The power to do good works,
and our doing of them is a reward derived from Christ by faith. For we are his
workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good works, Ephesians. 2* 8, 9, 10. After
that we are once ingrafted into Christ Jesus, we derive all the good from first
to last, whether for duty or reward from him. All the virtues which we have;
all the good works, which we do on earth, or in heaven, presuppose us in
Christ, and justified by, and for, his merits, All good works of regenerate
persons are virtually in faith receiving Christ, and no such faith continuing
can be without good works. It is certain that as God in the Gospel commands
good works, commends such as do them, promises rewards unto Well-doers, ^o he
will in his last Judgment justify good Works, and the doers of them, so as
Wisdom is justified of her Children: But this Justification is only
Approbation, whereby man may justify God, as well as God justify man in this
manner. Therefore we must needs say, that as good Works are commanded by God,
pleasing unto God, so they are approved and rewarded of God. They, so far as
good, prevent future guilt, take away no former guilt, do evidence our faith,
and Title, unto everlasting Glory, strengthen our union with Christ, because
they strengthen faith, confirm our hope, glorify God, give good example unto
men, make us more capable of Communion with God, tend toward the possession of
Glory, distinguish us from the profane, and hypocrites, give some content to
our Consciences, and there is a kind of happiness in the doing of them, and in
the remembrance of them done: Blessed are they who always abound in them; For
they know that their labor is not in vain in the Lord. Yet Bellarmin, though a
great advancer of Merit, thought it not only safe, but the safest Way, to put
our whole and sole trust, not in these our good Works, but in Christ. But it is
not only the safest, but the only way so to do, if we would be justified
before God. To say, that good Works are a condition of the Covenant of Grace;
we shall be judged according to our works; remission of Sin is promised to such
as forgive others, and that such as love God, fear him, serve him, do his
commandments, shall be rewarded, and have eternal life, therefore We are not
justified by faith alone, but by good works also, is no good arguing. If the
Sequel be denied, as it must be, no wit of man can prove it, and make it good.
They may be a condition of the Covenant, yet not such a condition as faith,
receiving Christ as Propitiatour, and Advocate, and resting upon God's Promise
in him alone: and such must of necessity be that condition, whereby we are
justified, and stand blameless, and without Spot, before the Throne of God.
Though we shall be judged according to our works, it does not hence follow that
we shall be justified by our works. In the matter of Judgment, and the Cause to
be tried, there are two things; the Merit, and the Evidence: And who dare say,
that good works are the merit of the cause, which are only the Evidence?
Gregory the Great distinguishes in this case, and says we shall be judged,
and so rewarded, Secundum* sed non propter Opera. Where Promises of Life,
Blessing, Reward, and of Glory, and of Remission of Sin, are made to such as do
works of Mercy; or suffer for Christ's sake, or love God, or serve and fear
him, we must observe that where any one of these is named, all the rest are
meant; and that the Person qualified with one is qualified with all: and the
reason is, because there is such a connection between them, that where one is
predominant, and in sincerity, all the rest are inseparably joined. Yet none of
these can be, where faith in Christ is not; neither can a living faith
continue, without all these, or any of these; and where such a faith is not,
none of these can be, in such a Subject, or if they could be without it, yet
without it, they could not be acceptable, nor rewardable. Neither could this
qualify the Person aright, nor faith qualify aright if it were not fixed on
Christ. The Apostle James indeed says, that Abraham was justified by works;
and that by works a man is justified, and not by faith only, Chap. 2. 23. Yet
we must consider

1. That he speaks of the same justification of Abraham, wherein Paul
instanceth, who affirms that Abraham was justified by faith, and not by works
and proves it out of Psalm. 32. 12.

2. That James speaks against such as profess ^aith without practice: and his
principal Scope is to show that a vain faith, a dead faith, a faith without
works, the faith of Devils, which may be in Devils, cannot justify, nor can
any man be justified by such a faith; and implies, that when Paul or any
Apostle, speaks of justifying faith, they do not mean such a faith; and that no
Solifidian can be justified at all before God.

He speaks of such works as follow faith, and Justification by says, which did
evidently prove the sincerity of their faith, and the certainty of their
Justification. One cause of this mistake, both in them of Rome, and others, is;

1. Because they do not consider that the Righteousness required before the
Judgment Seat of God, especially, at last trial, must be perfect, and such as
the party to be justified cannot by law, that Law, which should be the Rule of
Judgment, be chargeable with any the least Sin.

2. They do not consider that the party to be justified is in himself a guilty
Sinner, and as such, can in no wise be justifiable before the most just, and
sin-detesting Judge.

3. That the Justification, so much spoken of in Scripture, especially, in the
Apostles writings, is Remission, and only Remission of Sin; in which respect,
no man guilty can be justified by Works. For all the good works a man can do in
a thousand years cannot expiate one Sin antecedent, intervenient, or
consequent, nor free him from the guilt of eternal death. Austin says truly,
that our righteousness is true, because referred to the right end, yet in this
life it consists, potius remissione Peccatorum, quam perfectione Virtutum,
rather in Remission of Sin then perfection of Virtue. For as he manifestly
shows, our righteousness of good works is imperfect, many ways imperfect;
therefore he exhorts us to give thanks to God for our good works; whereby he
implies that they are God's gifts, and more God's then ours. And certainly they
are so, and God never gave them to us that we should stand upon Terms with God,
and plead that the Righteousness of them was such as, that for them, he in
Justice was bound to justify them. No penitent Sinner dare plead so; No wise
man will plead so: and the best of men in that last day of Trial will wave the
Plea of Works, and will only plead God'^ Mercy, and Christ's Merit, and his
own faith in the one, and the other, only. What? shall we plead Merit, or
righteou^ness of works, or any title to reward by them, because God has freed
us from the Dominion of Sin, and the Power of Satan, and, by his Spirit,
enabled us to do a few good Works, and the same, through our own default,
imperfect? whereas he might have bound us to a thousand years o^ Penance, and
as many of service, in good Works, without promising any Reward the least. Men
may dispute acutely, and subtly, for justification by Works, now, and here;
but, then, and there, summond to be tried before the great, glorious, and most
just, King, they will recant, be ashamed of their arguments, and abhor
themselves, as in themselves, most sinful and guilty wretches. God did never
ordain good works, which are the fruits of a sincere faith in Christ, to
acquire a right unto Remission of Sin, and eternal life, but to be a means,
whereby we may obtain the Possession of these Rewards he has promised. And
whosoever will take the words of St. James in proper Sense, neglecting the true
Scope of the Apostle can hardly avoid it; but must contradict the Doctrine of
St. Paul, agree with the Papists, in their Doctrine of justification by Works,
for the main, use the same arguments to maintain it, and give the same Answers,
to Objections against it, which they do; though, in some Terms, and
Circumstances, they may differ.

CHAP. XXIII.
Of the several Branches, Parts, and Degrees of Justification, and the
continuance of them unto us, until the Final Judgment.
HItherto of Justification by Faith in Christ, Lord, and King-Redeemer. These
are Regeneration, Reconciliation, Adoption, Ministry of Angels, and the rest.
And they may be considered,

1 As they free us from the guilt and punishment of sin; Whether the punishment
be privative, or positive. 2 As they make the estate of the justified person,
of miserable, to be happy and blessed.
The first is Regeneration; which, in the Execution of this great and special
Judgment, frees us from that great Penalty of Original Unrighteousness, the
Dominion of sin, and slavery under Satan: of this you have heard before, and
shall hear more distinctly and particularly of it, in the continuance hereafter.

For the first thing in order, though not in time, seeing all go together, is,
the restoring of the regenerating and sanctifying Spirit to abide in us, after
it has prepared us: and it is so necessary a part of Justification, that if we
distinguish between the Sentence removing the guilt, and the Execution removing
the punishment; the Sentence without the Execution could be little advantage
unto us, nor could it minister any comfort. And God knowing this, does always,
in this particular, declare the Sentence by the Execution, and never did
justify and person, and left him unsanctified. And, by this Sactification, does
plainly testify unto the party justified, that he has freed him from the guilt
and obligation to the greatest Punishment of all.

Yet this Regeneration is not perfect at the first, neither shall be fully
perfect in Body and Soul, until the Resurrection. This must needs be the first
part of branch; because all that follow depend upon it, and without it we are
incapable of them. For as God, for order, so far as our shallow capacity will
reach, is first conceived to be holy, before he be conceived as happy, so man
must needs be.

The greatest, and first, penalty for Sin, was to take away the sanctifying
Spirit; and the greatest mercy is, to restore it again. And this, as all the
rest, is derived immediately from Christ believed upon. For, by faith, we first
have Union and then Communion with him, and derive both Grace, and Peace, from
God the Father, and his Son Jesus Christ: and are blessed in him with all
spiritual Blessings. It Is called Regeneration, because we are by it delivered
from that most fearful death, we call the death of Sin, and receive a new, and
spiritual life, being created anew, according to his Image, in Righteousness
and true Holiness. It may be said to be begun (though at some distance) in
Vocation, when ou^ Hearts are first prepared for, then informed with, Faith,
and so we are ingrafted into Christ, and made one with him. Yet all this was
but a preparation for it, and tending unto it, to complete our union with our
Savior. And when we are once united, that Spirit which did only prepare us is
given to abide in us constantly, and first as a Spirit of Sanctification. In
this, the foundation of eternal Joy, and Glory, is laid, and now we begin to
move directly toward our full happiness. This not only takes away former
guilt, but the very Root of former guilt of Sin.

The second Branch is our Reconciliation: Romans 5. 1, 2. we must consider

1. The Condition of the party to be reconciled, before he be reconciled. 2.
What this Peace with God, is. 3. Who they are that are thus reconciled, and
have this Peace. 4. How they have it through Jesus Christ our Lord.
1. Because Reconciliation presupposes Emnity, therefore the condition of the
party to be reconciled must be, that he is at Emnity with God, and God at
Emnity with him. There is Emnity between them: and this is a very sad
condition, to be at Emnity with that God, in whom all our comfort is, and upon
whose favor depends our spiritual and eternal happiness. The cause of this
Emnity is Sin, considered either in the habit, or in the act, or guilt. By the
habit, and the act, we are contrary to God as just and holy: and God must needs
abhor us. Therefore the Scripture represents Sin, as base, and filthy,
polluting the Sinner; and God, as pure, and holy, hating, detesting,
abominating sin. For nothing is so contrary to God, and so odious in his sight,
as sin. Therefore is it said, Thou art not a God that have pleasure in
Wickedness, neither shall evil dwell with thee. The foolish shall not stand in
thy sight: Thou hate the Workers of Iniquity, ^ Psalm. 5. 4, 5. And thou art
of purer eyes then to behold evil, and can not look upon Iniquity, Hab. 1.
13. And there shall in no wise enter into the new and holy Jerusalem any thing
that defiles, Rev. 21. 27. And, without, as in no wise admitted to enter, are
Dogs, and Sorcerers, and Whoremongers, and Murderers, and Idolaters, and who so
makes a Lie, Rev. 22. 15. That is, men polluted and defiled with sin, are
incapable of this Society, and communion with the most holy God, and his most
holy people. Nay we are commanded to be holy, as He is holy: and if we be not
so, He will not admit us into his presence hear our Prayers, accept our
Persons, or our Service: nay, He will cast us out of His Presence. And though
He may love us as Men, yet He cannot love us as polluted with sin. As sin, so
the Emnity begins on our part: for we first sin, and so are alienated, and
Enemies, in, or by, our mind by wicked Works, Col. 1. 21. Where the Learned
Bishop of Salisbury observes,

1 The miserable estate of those Colossians, before they were reconciled* it
was an estate of Emnity and Hostility. And,

2 The cause, and that was the mind in sin, set on sin: so he, with Beza,
understands it. The first Emnity therefore is from sin, as sin. But this is not
all; for sin, as a transgression of the Law of God threatening punishment,
offends God, and provokes him to anger, as it makes man liable to punishment.
So as that God, who as merciful, is inclined to reward, as just is bent to
punish, and so not only take away his mercies, but inflict Positive Penalties,
to take vengeance upon the sinner, for the Transgression and Contempt of His
Law. And he that continues in his sin, without repentance, must needs be an
Enemy, and the subject of His Wrath. God is an enemy to him, not as a man, but
as a sinful man and continuing in sin: and as he is unclean, he can have no
fellowship with God, who is Light, and in whom there is no Darkness, because he
walks in Darkness^ and he is deprived of his special favor and love, and lies
under His heavy displeasure. This is the condition of the party before He be
reconciled. The

2d* Thing to be considered, is, What this peace with God should be? And

1 It Is peace after Emnity: Therefore called Reconciliation.

2 It Is a removal, and taking away the emnity, by taking away the cause thereof
(as you shall hear hereafter.)

3 This Emnity is so taken away, that the state of the Person reconciled, is
not a bare Neutrality between God and him, but a state of special love and
favor, whereupon follows an acceptance of the person, and an admittance into
God's presence, to come with boldness and confidence unto the Throne of Grace,
a delight in his Prayers and Service, and a Peace, and quiet calm of
Conscience, which cannot be without great joy. God before did hate, hide his
face, cast out of his presence; and man, once sensible of his sin, does fear,
and fly from God's pre^ence, as from a con^uming Fire. As Adam hearing the
voice of God was afraid, and hid himself, and Israel trembled before Mount
Sinai, burning with fire up to the midst of Heaven. Now God loves, and man is
bold and confident. This is a special favor God bears unto his People, which
the Psalmist prays for, Psalm. 106. 4. The light of God's countenance, whereby
His frowns are turned into smiles, and he looks cheerfully upon us.

4 This favor is not a fancy and conceit, that God does love us, but it is
really and fully manifested in our hearts by the Holy Ghost, which God has
given us, Romans 5. 5.

5 As this Emnity begins on Man's part, turning away from his God, and
provoking him; so this Peace and Reconciliation begins on God's part, in mercy,
turning unto man.

6 As the hatred and displeasure of God, and the want of his favor, maybe
considered as a Penalty, and the same removed by Reconciliation; so it may
belong to Justification, and Remission, as a branch thereof, without which it
cannot be perfect.

3 The party reconciled, is the justified by Faith. For being justified by
Faith, we have peace with God. Take this Peace Passively, as a benefit and
reward received by Man, it is an effect of Justification, and may so be called:
but take it Actively as coming from God, it may be a part or degree of
Justification, essentially included in it. For God in justifying* in that very
act* accepts him as a friend, and looks not on him as an Enemy. It presupposes
the taking away of the general guilt, and the removing the great penalty of sin
and corruption by restoring the regenerating Spirit. For how can man as guilty
and polluted with sin, and under the dominion of Corruption, be a subject of
this special love and favor? According to the Scriptures, and His Eternal
Laws. He cannot possibly be such. God may so love Man, when he is his Enemy, as
to give his Son for him, and his Spirit, to take away the cause of this Emnity;
but to love him with this special love, as such, is impossible: For this
Reconciliation, necessarily presupposth the cause of the Emnity, not as to be
taken away, but as taken away already. Otherwise God should love those whom He
hates, as He hates them, and be well pleased with those, that lie under his
fearful displeasure.

4 We have this peace by Jesus Christ our Lord: for by whom we have
Justification, by Him we have Reconciliation. We find two degrees of this
Reconciliation, and both by Christ. For so the Apostle informs us. For, says
He, God was in Christ, reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing their
Trespasses unto them, and has committed to us the Word of Reconciliation. Now
we are Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you by us; we pray
you in Christ's stead, to be reconciled to God, 2 Cor. 5. 19, 20. By which
words we easily understand, that the Foundation of this Reconciliation was laid
in Christ's suffering. For even then God did not impute our sins to us, but
unto him, and punished them, in him, for us. For, He who knew no sin was made
sin for us, that we might be the Righteousness of God in him, Ibid. ver. 21.
And if this first Reconciliation had not been made, and so God made propitious,
the second had never followed. Again, if when we were Enemies, we were
reconciled to God by the death of His Son: much more being reconciled, we shall
be saved by his life. And not only so, but we also joy in God, through our
Lord Jesus Christ, by whom we have received the atonement, Romans 5. 10, 11.
Where we may observe, that the first degree of Reconciliation,

1 Was by Christ's Death. The 2 By his life, when we are justified.
For, by His Death, He merited it; and by His life and intercession, procures
the actual enjoyment of it. The first is, Reconciliation made: The second,
Reconciliation and Atonement received: and both by Christ, who reconciled us to
God, both Jew and Gentile, in one Body, by the Cross, having slain the Emnity
thereby: And came and preached Peace to them which were afar off, and to them
that were nigh. For through Him we both have access by one Spirit to the
Father, Ephesians. 2. 3, 12. In whom we have boldness, and access, with confidence,
by Faith, in Him, Ephesians. 3. 12. So that by Christ we have this Peace with God.
For by his death, he averts the Wrath and Displeasure of God, and merits his
favor. He, by his Ambassadors, preaches Peace, and beseeches us to be
reconciled, and so by his Word and Spirit converts us. He, by his intercession,
takes us by the hand, and brings us before the Throne of Grace, as though He
were the Master of Ceremonies, and Admissionate of Heaven: and presents us
holy, and unblameable, and unreproveable in His sight, as washed in His Blood
believed upon, Col. 1. 22. Upon this Reconciliation it follows, that we cease

1 To be Enemies. 2 To be Strangers. 3 To be Neutrals. 4 We are Friends,
Fellow-Citizens with the Saints, and of the Family of God. This Reconciliation
makes the state of the Reconciled very happy, and it is an unspeakable mercy, as
may appear.
1 From the sad condition of Cain, when he was driven from God's presence, and
others in his case, from the Lamentations and Complaints of God's Servants,
when he did hide his face, absent himself, withdraw his Spirit, and in anger
(as it were) cover himself with a Cloud, that their Prayers could not pass
through, and be heard: By their Deprecations of God's anger, least they should
be cast out of his presence, and his Holy Spirit taken from them: From the
unspeakable joy, and consolation, which did diffuse it self, and warm their
hearts upon this Reconciliation, and return of the Spirit, after their penitent
and importunate Prayers. For as it is lost by sin, so it is regained by
Repentance, and Faith, We seek the love and favor of great ones, and fear
their frowns. But what are their frowns to God's displeasure? or their love
unto his favor, which is the Fountain of Eternal joy?

A third degree of Justification, Adoption, whereby those who were no Sons,
believing in Christ, are made the Sons and Heirs of God, and joint-Heirs with
Christ of Glory. Where we must observe,

1 How this Adoption agrees with Justification, and differs from Regeneration,
and Reconciliation. 2 What the nature of this Adoption is? 3 Who they are that
are Adopted? 4 What the condition of the Adopted is?
1. It agrees with Justification, as a part or degree thereof, as it does
remove a great penalty, and so the guilt; which Justification properly does.
The guilt and penalty you shall know hereafter. It differs from Regeneration,
because that gives only a n^w life of Grace, and Sanctification altering our
disposition. And this new Being and Life might be given us, without a further
Dignity, and Title to an Heavenly Inheritance. It Is true, that if God beget us
again, and renew us, we may be said to be His Sons; yet it does not follow,
that if we be Sons only in that sense, that therefore we are Heirs: though if
we be adopted Sons, we are Heirs according to express Scripture, Romans 8. 17. It
differs from Reconciliation, because God may love us as his Servants, and yet
not as Sons and Heirs. Therefore it is a further degree of God's love and
special favor. For we may be His Subjects, and yet not of His Household and
Family. We may be of His Family, as Servants and Friends, yet not as Sons and
Heirs in the highest Rank, and Degree of Dignity, in His Family. And we must
here take special notice,

1 That God, by one act, does justify, regenerate, reconcile, and adopt. For
though we may distinguish them, and conceive of them under several notions, yet
we must not separate them. For though God might have separated some of them,
yet He does not.

2 That Justification, Regeneration, Reconciliation, are not distinct, and
different Titles, but one and the same Title unto Everlasting Life, which God
does give us by these in our Lord Jesus Christ. For we are justified by His
Grace, that we should be Heirs according to the hope of Eternal Life, Tit. 3.
7. Where Justification gives right unto Eternal Life. And, Blessed be God, and
the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who, of his abundant mercy, has begotten
us again unto a lively hope, by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ from the Dead,
unto an Inheritance, etc. 1 Pet. 1. 3, 4. Where Regeneration is said to give
right unto glory. And again, If Children (that is, adopted) then Heirs,
joint-Heirs with Christ. Where Adoption is said to be the Title unto this
Heavenly Inheritance, Romans 8. 17. The like may be said of Reconciliation. For,
having Peace with God, by Jesus Christ our Lord, by whom also we have access by
Faith into this Grace wherein we stand, we rejoice in the Hope of Glory, Romans
5. 2. How Faith and these, may be the Title, shall be known hereafter.

The second thing to be considered, and heirs of Wrath, or rather Slaves to
sin, and Satan. By sin we lost our ^iliation, and our right to the inheritance
of eternal life: and this was a very sad condition, and an heavy judgment of
God. This is our condition before Adoption: But presently upon our Adoption, we
who were no Sons are Sons of God, and heirs of an eternal Kingdom, and being
washed in Christ's blood, are as Sons advanced to the dignity of Kings and
Priests unto ou^ God for ever. Yet we are not heirs severally, and apart from,
but jointly with Christ, and of the same estate in our measure, but in his
right. For as one with him, and members of his body, as he is a Son, and heir;
so we must needs be Sons, and heirs with Him.

In the third place, Believe on his name, Joh. 1. 12. You have heard often
before, that faith is the Title to justification, by virtue of Christ's merit,
and Gods promise; But the immediate title to eternal glory is justification,
in regeneration, reconciliation, and Adoption. For though by faith we have a
remote, and mediate right to glory, yet the immediate subjects of this right to
glory are the justified, regenerate, reconciled, and adopted Saints, and Sons
of God. For though God give this inheritance of glory unto Believers; yet he
gives it to Believers as justified, regenerated, and adopted. This faith is
fixed on Christ as meriting, and interceding for this adoption. For such as
believe in his name are made the Sons of God. Joh. 1. 12. And as God
predestined us unto the Adoption of Children by Jesus Christ unto himself,
according to the good pleasure of his Will, Ephesians 1. 5. So he also by him
according to this Pedestination by him before time adopts us by him in time.

The fourth thing to be considered, Ioh. 3. 1, 2. And now we have the first
fruits of the Spirit, and we our selves groan within our selves, waiting for
the Adoption, to wit, the Redemption of our bodies, Romans 8. 23. Where, by the
Redemption of our bodies, is understood the Resurrection, when our Adoption
shall be perfect. And this is our great comfort for the present that we not
only are, but certainly know that we are the Sons of God. For the Spirit it
self bears witness with, or rather to, our Spirits that we are the Children
of God, Romans 8. 16. And we are assured, and have good security, that in due
time, when we shall be at full age, and past our minority, we shall have ^ull
enjoyment of the inheritance. For we have the first fruits now* ibid. 23. and
are sealed with the holy Spirit of promise, which is the earnest of our
inheritance until the Redemption of the purchased possession unto the praise
of his glory, Ephesians. 1. 13, 14. Where, the Redemption may be the Resurrection:
and it is the Redemption of Acquisition; because upon the same we shall have
full possession. Great is the happiness, joy, and comfort of the Adopted Sons
of God: For

1. By Adoption, we are not only freed from the slavery of sin, but the
bondage, and servitude of the Law now in the times of the Gospel. We have not
received the Spirit of Bondage to fear again, as it was under the Law, Romans 8.
15. We are not now under Tutours, and Governors, nor in Bondage un^er the
Elements of the World, that is, the Ceremonial Law, Galat. 4. 3* 4.

2. We have the Spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry Abba Father, Romans 8. 15.
Gal. 4. 6. We cry, and pray: and we pray unto God as a Father, and that with
greatest confidence. For what may not Children expect from a Father, such a
Father, before whose Throne of Grace we may approach without fear. We are free
Children of a free Mother: We are not Servants born of Hagar the Bondwoman;
but free women of Jerusalem, which is above, and Mother of us all, Gal. 4. 26.
And as Jerusalem is our Mother, so God is our Father, who has given us the
Spirit of Adoption.

3 We being adopted, enjoy the Ministry of Angels, those Blessed, and Immortal
Spirits, who have a charge to keep us in all our ways, guard us, and pitch
their Tents about us. If we be in any place, in any danger, at any time, they
must be ready at hand. If Jacob fear his Brother Esau, two Armies of them shall
meet him, and secure him from danger. When man, by sin, forsakes his God, he is
out of God's special Protection, and the Angels have no Commission to take care
of him. But if he return unto his God again, they rejoice upon his Conversion,
and, upon God's Command, do pitch their Tents about him. And since Jesus
Christ, the Son of God, was made Lord of Angels, as soon as any do believe in
him, and are made the Sons of God, he gives them special charge concerning his
little Ones. For they are all ministering Spirits, sent forth to minister for
them, that shall be Heirs of Salvation Heb. 1. 14.

4 So soon as we are Sons, we fall under God's special Providence, and so He
takes a far greater care of us, than of others. If we offend, He, in dearest
love, will chastise us; not to destroy us, but correct us; because He will not
suffer sin to lie upon us. He will try us, not vex us, but to exercise our
Virtues, and purify our Faith that so we may come out of the Furnace of
afflictions, more pure then finest Gold. If we fall, He will raise us up again:
If we grow cold, He will quicken us. If we fall into danger, He will deliver
us; if into want, He will provide for us necessaries. For our Heavenly Father
knows, that we have need of all these things.

5 He, in His excellent Wisdom, out of greatest mercy, so orders all events,
all conditions, either of Prosperity, or Adversity, all his Works of Providence
so that Heaven and Earth, Men and Angels; yea, all Creatures, and all things,
shall conspire and work together for our good, and all shall unite Forces, and
full power; which united, as in one single cause, shall further our Salvation.

6 God loves them as his Children with a special love, and pities them far more
then any Father in the World pities his Child, and nothing shall be able to
separate from the love of that Father whom they love.

7 He gives his Spirit of Adoption into their Hearts, to anoint them, seal
them, assure them of their present right unto, and the full Possession, in due
time, of their Heavenly Inheritance. God their Father loves them; and they must
certainly know it. Their estate, therefore, is an estate of unspeakable joy and
comfort: Yet it requires, that we should be obedient and dutiful Children; and
the love of God, which is so great, and advances them so high, should deeply
engage them to the love and obedience of their Heavenly Father.

This is the beginning of God's Judgment,

As their Faith and Repentance are not made perfect at the first, so their
rewards, joys, and comforts, are, not consummate, but by degrees.

And as their Faith may be sometimes greater, sometimes less; so this estate is
better or worse, or rather not so good. Whilst Faith habitual, remains rooted
in (...) heart, they are virtually justified: When it is actual, their
Justification actual will follow: When their Faith is lively, and continues to
act vigorously, their estate is so much the more comfortable.

In this continuance of Rewards, (the same Rewards formerly given) there is
required a continuance of the grace of God's Spirit abiding in them, to enable
them to Duty, and observance of his Laws: and according to the continuance of
this grace, a continuance of performances* without both which, there can be no
continuance of Rewards. The grace of God is so continued, that it does not
prevent all sin and disobedience, and therefore we are not free from all
punishments.

Yet as we contract new guilt every day, so every day, we should renew our
Repentance, and Faith, and so present our selves before the Tribunal of this
Heavenly Judge, and sue for Pardon in the Name of Christ, and suffer no guilt
to lie long upon us.

And as this Court is continually open to dispense Rewards, so it is to punish,
and chastise, according as our deserts shall be. If our sins shall be greater,
and our neglect of our renewing our Repentance and Faith longer, the greater
punishments, both of loss and pain, shall be; as was evident in David.

This state of Conversion, Active, and Passive. As Active* it is an act of God
sanctifying us; Passive, it is those gifts and graces of the Spirit, whereby we
are enabled to avoid sin, and obey God. For though this be an active Power, yet
in respect of God giving it, and us receiving it, it may be called Passive,
though properly it be an effect of God, the cause, and a cause of an obedience
following. The active Sanctification is

1 The acting of the Spirit to prepare us, convert us, work Faith in us, and by
Faith unite us unto Christ. For all these may be called Acts of Sanctification
in a large sense: yet, in Scripture, they are called Vocation, whereby God,
through the power of the Spirit, accompanying the Word, does convert us, and
bring us to Christ.

2 This Sanctification active, when we are once in Christ, and the Spirit, is
derived from him, to us, in him, to abide as a constant Spring of Regeneration
at the first, is that I call Regeneration, as a Branch of Justification: and as
neither before nor after the first judgment of justification.

3 This Sanctification active, not being perfect, in respect of the Subject, is
continued. For we being in Christ, as Branches in the Vine, derive continual
Sap, or sanctifying Vigor from him, that we may bring forth Fruit. Christ
communicating this continually unto us, by his Spirit, may be said to continue
to sanctify us. From all this, you may understand a threefold Sanctification.

1 Preparing. 2 Initiating us prepared. 3 Continued to consummate us. For the
First Work of the Spirit is to prepare us, and ingrast us into CHRIST. The
Second, Is to regenerate, and renew us once in CHRIST at the first. The Third,
Is a continuance of the Second to perfect us.
In the first sense, it seems to be taken, 2 These. 2. 13. and 1 Pet. 1. 2.

In the second sense, Joh. 15. 1, 2, 3, etc. Romans 6. 4, 5, etc. 1 Cor. 6. 11.

In the third sense, 1 These. 5. 23. Yet this must be known, that Regeneration,
Sanctification, Renovation, are taken for the same, several times: and
Sanctification, in Scripture, is taken for Justification, and that we call
Sanctification too; as Ephesians. 5. 26. Heb. 9. 15. and 10. 10, 14. and 13. 12.
and many other places. Sometimes it is taken for that purity we acquire by the
Works of Sanctification, and the constant practice of Righteousness; as Romans 6.
19, 22. As for Sanctification Passive, it is easily understood by the Active.

This Sanctification differs from that of Adam, Blessed Angels: for this finds
us unsanctified, corrupted, unclean, perverse, and blind. Therefore it is called
Regeneration, and Renovation, and Cleansing: the other did not find them such.

What this does at first, it continues to do: it makes us at the first
Righteous, and holy, and imprints God's Image upon us, and continued it;
continues us such, and makes us more and more holy. And the more we exercise
this Active Power, the more we are sanctified; according to that Promise, To
him that has (that is, uses and exercises) it shall be given; that is, more
shall be given.

It Is a Reward given at the first; and it is a Reward continued, enabling us to
perform Duty, that the Reward may be greater, and greater. For the effect of
it, is, to cause us to walk in God's Statutes; and the more our obedience is
improved, the more our comfort is increased, because our estate of
Justification, and our Title to Eternal Glory, is thereby the more evident.
There is an ablute necessity of the continuance thereof: For if God desert us
but a moment, there presently follows a Relapse.

The subject of it is the whole man, Soul, and Body; the Soul chiefly and
primarily; the Body, secondarily. In the Soul, it enlightneth the Understanding
more and more, and dispelleth the Mists of Ignorance and Error; and rect fies
the Heart, declining it from sin, inclining it to Righteousness. It fixes it
upon the right Object Christ, and Eternal Glory in Him, and continues to
strengthen, and incite us to the performance of Obedience, and the practice of
those Duties, whereby Eternal Life is obtained.

All the Motions, and Inclinations, and Dispositions, and those we call
Affections, are by it set in a right order, especially the Affections of Love
and Hatred, which principally move and sway the Soul. It limits and directs the
Sensitive Appetite, and makes the Body and the Members thereof Instruments of
Righteousness to Holiness. Yet this Sanctification was neither given to expiate
sin past, nor merit life to come, but to prevent sin, and bring forth the
fruits of Righteousness.

In respect of Sin, and Corruption, yet inherent, it is called Mortification; in
respect of righteousness, this heavenly active power is called Vivification:
And by virtue of Christ's death it destroies Sin, and by virtue of Christ's
Resurrection it quickens us to an heavenly life. Yet this Mortification, and
Vivification, are not properly integrall Parts, but only Adjuncts of this
Sanctification. For take away Corruption wholly, there will be no
Mortification; because there remains nothing to be mortified.

Because this regenerate power is not consummated at the first, Jacob and Esau
continually striving in the Bowels, and Womb, of our Souls, The Assistants to
the Flesh, are the Devil and the World: The Assistants of Grace, are the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, the blessed Angels, Ministers, and sanctified
Christians. For as God uses the Ministry, and Discipline of the Church, in
the declaring, outwardly, with the Word, the Sentence of Absolution; so he
uses them to stir up, continually, to holy Duties, to restrain Sin, to
strengthen us, and promote our Sanctification. And I cannot see but the blessed
Angels should have as much power to help us, as the Devil to hurt us. For they
are ministering Spirits, not only for temporal Safety, but spiritual
Assistance. And from this opposition arises that spiritual War, so much
mentioned in Scripture: in respect of which, all spiritual and heavenly
Virtues are called Armor, the Armor of God, and the more we exercise them
with Prayer, and Watchfullnesse, the more and the faster we gird them upon us;
the stronger and safer we are. Some of these, though only the principal, are
named, Ephesians. 6. 11, 12, 13. etc. 1 These. 5. 8. Yet all are understood: for
Sanctification inclines to Obedience, and fenceth us against all Sin.

The event of this War is either intermediate, Peter's faith, and so ours,
though fearfully sometimes shaken, might not fail. This war is to be waged, not
only by strength, but policy and holy prudence, whereby we foresee dangers, to
prevent them, and take all opportunities and advantages for our safety, and our
Enemies ruin. Because our weakness is great, we must often pray, humbly
depend upon our God, and work out our salvation with fear, and trembling;
because it is God that works in us the Will and the Deed of his good pleasure.
Because of our many foils, and falls, one work of our Sanctification is to
renew our Repentance, and our Faith in Christ, and that daily, that as we
contract new guilt, and are weakened, so we may be cleansed, and strengthened.
Therefore David, after his grievous fall, petitions to God to create in him a
clean Heart, and renew a right Spirit within him, Psalm. 51. 10. And Peter goes
out and weeps bitterly; and, no doubt, prays fervently. Divine Desertions are
fearful, and we must take heed of offending the sanctifying Spirit of God. By
these frequent returns unto God, and our Savior Jesus Christ, our
Sanctifycation is renewed, and recovered. What should be the reason, whereupon
the Eternal Wisdom of God should determine, to put his Regenerate Ones upon
this Bloody War, sometimes continued long, and not wholly destroy sin at once;
and so, in an instant, give us perfect and perpetual Security, is hard to know.
Yet this is certain, that he thought it best to teach us Humility, so as that
we might learn that Lesson perfectly, and that we should fully know our total
and perpetual dependence is upon his grace. For Pride, and Security, was the
ruin of Man at first, and the ^inal Fall of the Apostate Angels. Besides, He
knew how to turn all the Events of this War unto our good and greatest glory:
and He would let the Devil plainly see, that he, by frail man, over whom he had
so domineered, and whom he had so insolently trampled under his feet, could not
only Resist him, but eternally subdue him.

This is the intermediate Event of this War: Victory. For we are enabled, not
only to withstand in the evil day of Temptation; but having done all, and
finished the War, to stand victorious in the Field, and see all our Enemies
subdued, Ephesians. 6. 13. For this end, the complete Armor of God was given us.
And this is the Promise; that God, the God of Peace, who will put an end unto
this War, will bruise Satan under our feet shortly, Romans 16. 20. And the God
of all grace, who has called us to his Eternal Glory, by Christ Jesus, after
we have suffered a while, will make us perfect, stablish, strengthen, settle
us, 1 Pet. 5. 10. We shall overcome the Great Dragon, and Old Serpent, by the
Blood of the Lamb, and his Testimony, not loving our lives to Death, Revel. 12.
2. The Reward, upon this Victory, is an Eternal Crown, which will be certain.
For when Paul had fought this good Fight, had finished his Course, and kept the
Faith, from thenceforth there was laid up for him a Crown of Righteousness,
which the Lord, the Righteous Judge, would give him at that day: and not to him
only, but unto them also that love his appearing, 2 Timothy 4. 8. This Victory is
obtained by final Perseverance, which is often* in part, interrupted by our
many failings, and falls; yet continued by a continual Supply of inward
strength, and outward Assistance, upon which it does chiefly depend.

God requires, on our part, a constant Exercise of that Power He has given us,
and humble dependence upon his strength, a continual Watchfulness, a daily
renewing of our Repentance, and Faith: For, without Duty, there is no
expectation of solid comfort.

This Perseverance is never totally interrupted by Apostasy in the Saints of
God, once regenerate, and sealed with the Holy Spirit of Promise, who have
received the first fruits of glory, as an earnest of the full possession of the
great Inheritance. That these ever did, or may, according to the Eternal Rules
of this Government fall totally, and so finally, never any yet could clearly
prove.

That others, though baptized, enlightened, changed in their hearts, reformed
in their lives, so as to forsake, in some measure, their former sins, endued
not only with ordinary, but extraordinary gifts of the Spirit, and out of an
imperfect hope of Salvation, have tasted of the joys and comforts of the
Gospel, may fall, will not be denied. Yet all these things are not sufficient,
sufficiently to qualify the subject of this Question concerning Perseverance.

For the Question, Whether those, who by a sincere Faith are living Members of
Christ, have received the Regenerating Spirit, as a Seal and Earnest of Eternal
Glory, can, according to the Laws of God-Redeemer, fall away totally from the
estate of Justification?

The Question may be, De esse, aut Posse, or both. That any such did ever so
fall, no man yet did ever prove. That they may fall, according to the tenor of
the Gospel, has not been yet, nor I think can be, made evident. The Scripture
does sometimes take Righteousness, Calling, Regeneration, Sanctification, the
purging away of sin, in a large sense; and attribute all these to such as have
been baptized made profession of their Faith, and have not by Scandal, or
Apostasy, stained their Profession: and as the Scripture, so the ancient
Writers also term these Saints, Righteous and Regenerate. But a thousand such
places will not evince this Fall that is here denied. For they changed the
subject of the Question, and so the Question it self. Many do instance in
David, who, no doubt, was regenerated, and ^ealed with the Spirit of Promise,
and he fell grievously, and contracted the guilt of Adultery and Murder. But
what though? Was this a total Fall? It was not. For,

1 Though the sins were heinous, and did highly offend God, and deserved Death;
yet this Death was removeable. For they were not the sins of Apostasy, or
final Unbelief; nor properly, nor immediately Impenitency and Unbelief, which
are the sins directly and formally against the Covenant and Fundamental Law of
Redemption. Therefore they could not make him of a subject to be no subject;
neither did God wholly reject him, and take his Spirit wholly from him. A man
may commit heinous offenses against the Law, and yet be a Subject: but if he be
guilty of Rebellion, or High Treason, he loses all right of a Subject. Thus
David was not guilty.

2 This Death was more easily removable, then that Penalty of that Party, which
never did believe, never was regenerate.

3 Though the Sins were actually, yet they were not habitually contrary to the
Law or to Repentance, and Faith: For to be an Adulterer, and Murderer was not
his constant temper.

4 God made such promises to David, and those personal, as were not consistent
either with total, or final rejection. This was one promise, and that
Personal; My mercy will I keep for him for evermore: and may Covenant shall
stand fast with him. And for his seed, if they transgress, he would chastise
them: Nevertheless his loving kindness He would not take utterly from them,
Psalm. 89. 28, 29, 30. etc. And this did include an obligation on Gods part, to
revive his Faith, if Actual, and Particular Faith, and Repentance were
necessary to actual Remission. Though it is certain, that many great sins are
remitted upon a General Repentance, if sincere.

5 That 51. Psalm, wherein we have so full an expression of serious Repentance,
and a very lively faith, was not made by a new faith upon a new Regeneration,
but by his former faith, which for the time was Dormant, and as it were dead.

6 The divine Apostle says unto his little Children. The annoyntment which ye
have received abides in you, 1 John 2. 27. And the seed of God is not only in
him, who is born of God but, remains in him, Chap. 3. 9. And hereby we know
that God not only is, but abides in us by his Spirit, which he has given us
ver^. 24. Upon what other ground could Paul be persuaded, that nothing could
separate true believers from the love of God, Romans 8. 38. And except there were
some promise in the Covenant to this purpose, why should he be so confident of
this very thing, that God who had begun a good work in the Philippians, would
perform it unto the day of Jesus Christ; Phil. 1. 6. And lest he should
terrify the Hebrews, by his doctrine of the peremptory rejection, and
perdition of Apostates; as though he understood it of them personally; He
explaines himself, saying: But, beloved, we are persuaded better things of you,
and things that accompany Salvation, though we thus speak. For God is not
unrighteous to forget your work and labor of love, which ye have showed to his
name; in that ye have ministered to the Saints, and do minister, Heb. 6. 9, 10.
Where real love to Christ, and his Saints, is joined with salvation, as having
an inseparable connection with it, by virtue of the divine ordination. Yet he
does not cease in these places, and others, to press duties and perseverance;
because the performance of their duty, and endeavor of perseverance, was a
means of Perseverance. And surely that God, who never deserts man, before man
deserts him; will never totally desert man, before man totally deserts him.
Certainly, there is a state of confirmation in this life, wherein, by virtue of
the earnest of the Spirit, the Sons of God may be certain of their present
right unto, and their future Possession of, eternal glory: Though few attain
to this, till the end of their lives. But of this more fully upon another
occasion in mine exposition of the Epistle to the Hebrews. For the present, we
may observe these particulars:

1. That we may make our calling, and election sure in this life. For we are
commanded even in this life, to give all diligence, to make our calling and
election sure: For if we do these things, we shall never fall, 2 Pet. 1. 10.

2. That the highest degree of sanctification in any intellectual subject, Men
or Angels, may be lost.

3. That the perpetual continuance thereof in a created subject, depends upon
an extrinsecal cause, which is Gods perpetual conservation.

4. The certainty of our perseverance in this life, both for the thing it self,
and the certain knowledge of it, depends upon a promise in the Covenant of
grace in Christ.

5. The controversy in this point between the Contra-remonstrants, and
Remonstrants, if both parties had dealt plainly, had been near an end, and so
far more easily determinable. For if God has made a promise, that he will put
his fear into the hearts of his Children in this life, so that they shall not
depart from him, though they may sin, and fail in many Particulars grievously;
then, if the question be rightly stated, the quarrel is ended.

6. The first proof of the Remonstrants out of Scripture, which by some is held
unanswerable, out of Ezekiel. 18. it nothing at all to purpose: Because it speaks
of the judgment of God, and his judicial proceedings with Israel, according to
the Law, and Covenant made at Horeb, which the Apostle says expressly, is a
distinct Covenant from the Covenant of grace, Heb. 8. 9. But for the present to
lay aside the controversy, let us every one endeavor, and give all diligence
to persevere; and every day pray for perseverance: for that will be better then
to dispute; because by this means we may attain to that which many do deny.
But this you must know, that no promise can give us comfort upon, and in the
time of disobedience, and neglect of duty.

Thus far, Regeneration: The continuance of Reconciliation and Adoption
follows, which makes our condition, to be a condition of peace and joy in this
Vale of Death. In this I shall be brief, because I have spoken more at large of
the nature of both formerly. It Is God's Will, that the continuance of these
should depend upon the continuance of Sanctification: For no man can be happy,
if he be not first holy. Therefore, he that has the hope of glory, and joy
upon that hope, does purify himself, 1 John 3. 3. The more God continues to
sanctify, and assist us, the more we improve our Heavenly Graces: the more
diligently we practice, pray, and watch, the greater evidence we shall have of
the continuance of our Reconciliation and Adoption, and the greater will be our
assurance of God's special love unto us. And the greater this Assurance of His
love shall be, the greater our peace and joy will be. The more we love God, and
the more we keep His Commandments, the more He will love us. He loved us much,
before we loved Him, and even then He gave His Son to be the Propitiation for
our sins. But when we receive His Son, He loves us more, and several ways
discovers, that His love to us, loving Him, is everlasting, and far greater
then the heart of man can imagine. And nothing can more quiet and content the
heart of miserable man, then assurance, that God loves him with a special love,
which He has manifested already, and will manifest it more on Earth, and most
of all in Heaven. For when we are fully glorified, we shall fully know how much
He loved us. And, for the present, what can disquiet our hearts within, when
the Love of God is shed abroad in our hearts, by the Holy Ghost, which is given
unto us, and continued within us? Surely, no tribulation without, no muttering
of the Conscience within, can disturb our peace, abate our joy, diminish our
comfort. We joy in Tribulation, and in the midst of greatest Afflictions we can
quietly repose our minds in God, and sweetly rest in His Fatherly Affection.
Yet this requires an heart above the Earth, and such a measure of Faith, as to
overcome fears, and desires of the World. For if we love our God above the
World, desire Heaven, as infinitely more excellent then the Earth, scorn the
menaces of the Devil, and wicked men; disdain to look upon the glory and
prosperity of the World, as not worth the seeking; so that no Worldly Cross,
nor Crown, can work upon us, to affect, or disquiet us, then our peace must
needs be great. This love of God is manifested to us many ways: As

1 By Trials, Chastisements, Corrections, which are bitter for the present,
sweet in the end; so that we know God, in these, was not angry, but did love us.

2 By strange and wonderful Deliverances, wherein his Power, his Wisdom, and
special love unto us, do evidently appear.

3 By the return of our prayers, which is many times such, as that we certainly
know, that we were heard in Heaven, and God did far more for us, then we
desired, or could have desired.

4 And most of all, when we find our Faith strengthened, our Graces increased,
our Power over Sin improved. For, by these things, we know assuredly, that God,
by the Spirit of Christ, dwells in us, and we are very sensible of his powerful
presence in our Souls, as in his Temple. By these things, when we look back, we
begin to discover God's everlasting love in Predestination, and those stable
and unchangeable Decrees made in Christ before the Foundation of the World: And
when we look forward, we see Heaven open, Christ our Savior, at his Fathers
right hand, making intercession for us; our Eternal Mansions there by him
prepared, and an excellent estate of glory ready for us, as reconciled and
adopted to this estate. And upon our Prayers, our Eyes are enlightened, so that
we gain a further knowledge of the hope of his Calling, and the Riches of the
glory of his Inheritance in his Saints, and of the exceeding greatness of his
power toward us. The more we do good, and suffer ill for his sake; the
greater, and more certain our hope of eternal glory is. And though we live by
hope, and see somewhat dimly our heavenly Country afar off, and have but some
glimmerings of the eternal light, that there does ever shine; yet for the
present Faith is the substance of these things hoped for, and the evidence of
these things that are not seen, nor enjoyed. These imperfect Representations,
and apprehensions of this glorious estate do inflame our hearts with vehement
desires of nearer approaches to our God, cause us to press with all our power
toward our heavenly Prize, and warmes our hearts with unspeakable joy; because
we know one day, we shall have full Communion with our God, and shall never be
in danger to sin again.

Yet this joy, Power God has given us, and the use of those means, and our
opportunities he has afforded; so our peace, and joy abate. And much more are
they lessened and abated by our grievous sins. As by word and prayer this
heavenly fire was first kindled, so by these it is kept alive, and increased.
Fervent, and frequent prayers, serious meditations upon Gods holy Precepts, and
his gracious Promises, with constant practice, are like fuel to this fire, and
like Bellows to stir it up, and cause it burn with a clearer, and more ardent
flame, and so improve this joy unto an high degree. But as when we either
withdraw the fuel, or power water upon the fire, it is abated, and ready to be
quenched; so by neglect of the former duties, and especially by grievous sins,
we grieve, and offend the blessed spirit of joy, peace, comfort; and so he
begins to withdraw himself. Therefore let us not with Ephesus fall from our
first love; nor with Laodicea cool in our zeal, nor with David contract the
guilt of heinous Crimes: For we must know that the most just God will judge his
own people according to their Works, and so reward or punish them. If we
neglect to walk with Him in the light of holiness, He will refuse to give us
the light of joy, and comfort. When we either abate in our performances, or
fall into grievous sins, our God either by afflictions, or admonitio^s, and
reproofs, or by the working of the blessed Spirit, or by some or all these,
does cause us to see our guilt, and make us sensible of our sins, and so bring
us back again. And upon our serious return, our joys are revived, and our
peace restored: And great and wonderful is his care over his Children in this
kind; for as he prevented them with his grace at first to convert them, that he
might make them his Children; much more when they are his Children, and do
fall, will he prevent them by his grace, to raise them up again, and revive the
sparks of fire remaining: He will not suffer them to dye; He will punish them
that He may Reward: as He afflicted the offending Corinthians, with sickness,
and some of them with death; and so judged, and chastened them, that they
should not be condemned with the World. Lest this first Regeneration, and title
to the eternal inheritance should be in vain, He will keep them by his power
through faith unto salvation, which is ready to be revealed in the last time, 1
Pet. 1. 3, 4, 5. And if his power should not preserve their Faith, as well as
their Persons, they must needs perish. He has signified that the Connection
between their Faith, Love, Patience, and eternal glory is indissoluble: For
the patience, and faith of the Thessalonians in all their persecutions and
tribulations they endured, were a manifest token of the Righteous judgment of
God, That they might be counted worthy of the Kingdom of God, for which they
did suffer, 2 These. 1. 4, 5. For if we suffer with Christ, we shall be
glorified with him, Romans 8. 17. 2 Timothy 2. 11, 12. And this is a faithful
saying.

These things being so, there was little reason why the Remonstrants, in their
Synoda^ Acts and Writings, should so mince the matter, as though they were
afraid to give any advantage to the Truth. Upon the 5th Article of
Perseverance, they say, that God

1 According to his absolute Power, not according to the Law of Grace;

2 In an extraordinary, not an ordinary way;

3 May reward, not will reward;

4 Not constantly, but sometimes;

5 Not all his Children, but some, long and much exercised in Piety, and tried
in Afflictions, with the grace of not- failing Perseverance.

6 This they will not determine, but leave indifferent: How this can consist
with the Scriptures, I know not.

As there be Spiritual Rewards in this life; Romans 8. 12. Besides, it is freed
from all weariness, faintings, diseases, annoyances, and pains; so that the
loss of Sense is turned to a benefit, though in it self it be a punishment. As
for the Soul, the reward thereof is excellent, though not perfect. It has
obtained a final Victory, over sin, Satan, the World, and is out of all danger
of Hell. It Is freed from all trouble and inconvenience, that did arise from the
Body, and is delivered up with great peace and joy into the hands of a gracious
Redeemer, who sends his Angels to receive it* guard it, and set it in the
Heavenly Paradise; where Satan can never come near it, or tempt it any more,
either to sin or despair. And now it is free from all sin, all fear, and sorrow,
and temptations, and, washed in Christ's blood, shall be presented pure and
blameless before God's Throne. The place, whatsoever it is, is full of comfort,
the Society excellent, it is secure of the great reward of Eternal Glory. And
that which is the accomplishment of all comforts, it is with Jesus Christ it is
blessed Savior, who takes the charge and protection of it: Paul desired to
depart, and be with his Savior, which was far better, Phil. 1. 23. Which words
inform us,

1 That the Soul lives, after it is separated from the Body.

2 That Death is not a destruction, but departure.

3 It Is departure from a worse place and condition, to the better.

4 Though it is absent from the Body, yet it is present with the Lord.

5 Though it had many sweet and excellent joys and comforts in Christ, in this
life; yet now it has more and greater.

CHAP. XXIIII.
Of the Universal and final Judgment, and the Eternal Rewards, and
punishments of the World to come.
AFter all the judgments past, Punishments and Rewards in the highest degree,
and everlasting; Many Signs and Prodigies both in Heaven and Earth shall go
before, and prognosticate the approach thereof. The world shall be consumed by
fire, the dead shall be raised; the living shall be changed, and both shall be
immortal. The Judge is God, who has given commission to Jesus Christ to judge
both Angels and men, both quick and dead. He has appointed a day, wherein he
will judge the World in Righteousness, by that man whom he has ordained,
whereof he has given assurance unto all men, in that he has raised him from
the dead, Act. 17. 31. Yet of the day and hour when he shall come, no man
knows, no not the Angels of Heaven. He shall come in great glory; all the
holy Angels shall attend him: a Cloud shall be his Chariot: his Tribunal shall
be high and dreadful. The Archangel shall sound the Trumpet, and make all the
World to hear. All shall be summond; all shall appear. All causes shall be
evident. The sentence shall be irrevocable, the Punishments and Rewards great,
the execution certain; and the estate of the parties judged shall be
unchangeable. That such a day will come; that it will be a great day; that it
will be dreadful unto many; and a day of unspeakable joy to true believers,
it is certain: For God has said so; and all his Saints believe him, and long
for that day, and wait for their Saviors coming from Heaven. That it will be
a day of judgment; and that Christ shall be the Universal judge, we doubt not.
Yet the manner of his coming, and the way of his proceeding, we do not
perfectly, and distinctly, for the particulars, know. Something of it God by
his Son Jesus Christ has signified unto us, and informed us of: as that an
Eternal Kingdom upon a final and total absolution will be adjudged to some;
but others shall receive the doom of an eternal curse, and excommunication, to
be cast out of Gods presence, and condemned to suffer eternal Punishments with
the Devil, and his Angels. All secrets shall then be brought to light, and the
judgment shall be exactly just, according to men's works; and the execution
shall be answerable: For the condemned shall go into everlasting Punishment:
but the righteous into life eternal, Math. 25. 46. So that of this judgment
and the execution thereof we have two parts;

1. The Reward of the Righteous.

2. The Punishment of the unrighteous, according to their obedience, or
disobedience unto the Laws of God Redeemer.

The reward of the righteous shall be of the whole man, Working, whereby he is
able to subdue all things to himself, Phil. 3. 21. The greatest perfection
shall be this, that it shall be united to a Soul fully sanctified, from which
it shall never any more be separated; and both together shall be the Eternal
Temple of the Holy Ghost. The Soul it self shall be finally and totally
justified fully sanctified and endued with all the graces of the Spirit
requisite to happiness: and then their Reconciliation and Adoption shall be
consummate, the whole man shall be firmly established in Righteousness and
Holiness, never to sin, never to be in danger to sin again. They shall be with
their Savior, and behold his glory, enjoy the clear Vision of God, be ravished
with his Beauty, filled with Eternal Joy and Delights, and be secure of their
perpetual full Bliss. All tears shall be wiped away from off all faces, and
they shall never sorrow any more. No evil that can be feared, shall come near
them, and all good that can be desired shall abound there. As the Light of
God's Eternal Favor shall ever shine upon them in full strength; so the
streams of Eternal goodness shall ever issue from the Throne of God, and the
Lamb; so that they shall be fully satiated with all pleasures for evermore. The
place will be glorious, the company excellent, and no good thing that may add
unto their happiness shall be wanting. Then shall they know how much God loved
them, and how much Christ has done for them. They believe now that the Reward
is great; but then, by the enjoyment, they shall know it to be far greater,
then ever entered into the heart of Man.

As Camaracensts says truly, I come quickly, Amen. Even so, come Lord Jesus.
For, till thy coming, our hearts will never be at rest.

The punishment of the Unrighteous shall be contrary to this Blessed Reward.
These. 1. 7, 8. They shall not only lose the comforts of this life, but the
Eternal joy and glory of Heaven, which was promised in the Gospel, and shall
suffer the contrary evils, and that for evermore. Their bodies, indeed, shall
be raised again, and shall be immortal; and they shall ever live, that they may
ever die, and ever suffer. Their Souls shall be stripped of all holiness and
comfort; and both Body and Soul shall be cast into utter Darkness, and
everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil, and his Angels; where their Worm
shall never die, and their Torment shall be extreme, without any intermission,
without any abatement, without any end. The dismal place, and cursed Company,
will add no little to their misery; and there is nothing which man fears,
abhors, and detests, but they shall suffer there.

God, Moses, and the Prophets: Christians have them with Christ, and his
Apostles; yet men will hearken unto none of th^se, and so sink into the place
of Torment, and are undone for ever. God has done much, to save us; but we do
all, to damn our selves; and our destruction is of our selves. God need not
have promised Heaven, but that He would stir us up to seek it; neither need He
have threatened Hell, but with this intention, that men might escape it. Oh
cursed Wretches! who, for a little Vanity, lose the Eternity of Bliss! Oh! that
men would hearken unto God betimes, and not delay their Repentance, till it be
too late, when no Tears, nor Prayers, nor any other means, that Men or Angels
can use, can do him any good. And this will not be the least of the Torments of
the Damned, to remember, that once they had an opportunity to have escaped
these Eternal Punishments, and yet they let it pass, and must needs acknowledge
they suffer justly, who contemned the expense of Christ's most precious Blood,
the greatest love of God, and would not obey the Precepts, nor trust in the
Promises of the Gospel.

Thus have I, Talent, declared out of the Scriptures, that Special and Eternal
Kingdom of God, according to the Laws and Judgments whereof; Man is ordered
unto his final and Eternal estate.

The Rule of this Doctrine, is, the Word of God revealed from Heaven.

The King, is God, who is most perfect and glorious in Himself; and by the Work
of Creation, acquired an absolute Dominion over all Creatures, especially over
Men and Angels, and continued it by Preservation.

This Power acquired, He did exercise in the Constitution of His Government
over Men and Angels, and in the Administration of the same by Laws and
Judgments.

Many of the Angels obeyed, and were confirmed: Many of them disobeyed, and
were condemned to Eternal Punishments.

All men in the first man sinned, and so became liable to Death.

Yet the Supreme Judge, in passing Judgment upon the Tempter, promised
Deliverance by a Redeemer.

This Redeemer, is the Word made Flesh; by whose Humiliation unto Death, a new
power over man is acquired, and the same exercised first in the Constitution
and New-Modelling of His Kingdom of Grace and Mercy, and in the Administration
by Laws and Judgments. The Laws command Obedience, forbid Impenitency and
Unbelief, promise Temporal and Eternal Rewards, threaten Temporal and Eternal
Punishments: and, as Men shall obey or disobey, so they shall be rewarded, or
punished. And these things are declared, not only that men may know them, but
do God's Commandments; that so they may live for ever, and not howl and curse,
and gnash their Teeth in Hell; but serve their God in the Temple of Heaven, and
there sing an Eternal Hallelujah to Him who sits upon the Throne, and to the
Lamb; To whom be Praise, and Glory, and Thanks for ever: And let all Saints,
and Angels say, AMEN.

(...).

FINIS.

