Grief allayed, Death sweetened, Hope raised.

A SERMON Preached at the FUNERAL OF THE HONORABLE CHRYSTOPHER SHERARD, Esquire
Eldest Son to the RIGHT HONORABLE BENNET Lord SHERARD; February the 28th, 1681.

By T. L. M.A.

LONDON, Printed by S. Roycroft, for Robert Clavell at the Peacock in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1682.

To the Right Honorable, the Lady Elizabeth Sherard, Fullness of true
Consolation in Christ.
Madam,
HAD not your Ladyship desired a Sight of this plain Sermon, I should scarce
have assumed the Confidence to have presented it to your perusal; but as I
receive your desire as a Command, so your favorable Acceptance will add weight
and worth to it. If the witty Censurer shall say, That I tell him nothing but
what he knew lefore; I shall be contented with it, and rejoice that he was so
well Instructed, and wish also that he needed not a Remembrancer; howsoever, no
man ought to be offended, that Sermons are not like curious Inquiries after
New-nothings, but pursuances of Old Truths. I am very sensible your Ladyship is
furnished (from much more Learned Physicians than I am) with very proper
Receipts against the late cause of your Sorrow; yet I hope (Madam) that this
which I here present unto you, may somewhat heighten and improve their
efficacy: And in so doing, I shall esteem it amongst those Blessings, with
which God uses to reward those good Intentions which himself first puts into
our hearts, and then recompenses upon our heads. All Sermons are but Arguments
against us, unless they make us quit our Mistakes, and suffer them in some
instance and degree to do the work of God upon our Souls. And the special
design of this here present (dedicated to your honorable Patronage and
Protection) is, to describe the greater Lines of our Duty, when our Faces are
bedewed with Tears, and our Backs clothed with Mourning: And whatsoever
relish your Ladyship may find in the Comment, yet I am sure the Text, being
carefully laid up in your Religious Breast, will be sound, wholesome, and
consolatory; though what I have in much weakness performed is only in Duty
expressing the many and great Obligations you daily renew upon.

Your Ladyships Most obliged Servant, and devoted Chaplain, Tho. Laxton.

1 Thessalonians. 4.13. But I would not have you to be ignorant, Brethren, concerning
them which are asleep; that ye sorrow not, even as others which have no hope.


THE weeping Eyes and bleeding Hearts which are so plentifully discovered in
this Assembly, tell you the sum of my Errand, our present Business, the Work in
hand, a Funeral. The Party deceased; a most accomplished, ingenious, pious,
well-natur'd, well-nurtur'd Person: The first Son and hopeful Heir to the Great
and Generous, Heroic and Ancient Family of the Sherards. The Mourners, not
only all present, but absent, in numbers as great and considerable, as our loss
and tears are great and wonderful: The Place of Burial, the Sepulcher of his
Progenitors. When Samuel died, 1 Samuel 25. all the Israelites were gathered
together, and lamented him; and buried him in his House at Ramah. To be buried,
is an honor; buried in one's own Country, much; in his own Place, more; with
solemn Lamentations, most of all; the Saints Honor: For he that spends his
days, though few, (as this most excellent Branch of Virtue did) upon God and
Man, shall at the last have all the Honor Heaven and Earth can cast upon him:
A holy and a virtuous Life ends in an happy and honorable Death. Josiah having
received his Death abroad, is brought home in his Chariot, and much Honor
attends him to his Grave; he is buried amongst his Fathers; all Jerusalem, nay
all Judah, and the Neighboring Towns, are Mourners: God and Man concurred in
this, that Josiah's Name should never dye. Good men never go to the Grave
unlamented, but generally are attended with Mourning, as the Mourning of
Hadradrimmon in the Valley of Megiddon. And here lies the mistake of weak and
frail man, that too often performs actions in themselves lawfully good, after
an unlawful and immoderate manner. The words therefore that I have chosen for
our present Subject, are a choice portion of Scripture; teaching us to stere
our Course, and keep up our Heads, that we neither sink nor drown in these
Waters of Affliction. And though I have before now treated on the same Text,
yet, at this time, and upon this occasion, I have renewed my Meditations, and
adapted them, not only for Matter, but also in such Order and Method, as may be
most proper for the end I propose, even, the allaying our Griefs, and raising
our Hopes; I would not have you to be ignorant, etc.

The Scope of the Apostle in these words, is to regulate immoderate Sorrow for
them that sleep in the Lord.

For the Thessalonians, 'though well instructed an confirmed in the Faith, and
particularly of the Resurrection (which Faith, if it had its full working,
would necessarily infer and enforce a mean in Mourning for deceased Christians)
yet, it seems overborn sometimes with immoderate Passion for their deceased
Brethren, they gave way to excess of Sorrow. Against this Infirmity, the
Apostle gives this Exhortation, as a seasonable and wholesome Remedy. I would,
etc.

1. Where observe, The Substance of the Precept, to keep a Mean in Mourning;
not to pour out our selves into excessive Sorrow for the Dead.

2. Reasons to enforce it, interwoven with the Precept. From, 1. The Nature of
Death; a Sleep. 2. The Issue of Death; a hopeful Resurrection.


Withal secretly taxing and reprehending this immoderate Sorrow, as arguing too
little knowledge (practical knowledge) of future Blessedness; and too much
savouring of Gentilism, whose hopes were terminated with this present Life, and
of the blessed state to come, were altogether hopeless. The first, in the first
words, I would not have you ignorant; and the other in the last, even as the
Gentiles, etc.

The first general Oservation is,

To banish indeed all Affections out of the Nature of Man, may be a part of
Stoical, but not Christian Philosophy. Religion, as it does not abolish Reason,
but sanctify and guide it; nor deprive us of Sense, but teaches us a right
use of the Senses; so it destroys not the Affections, but orders and husbands
them aright; as Joshuah did dot kill the Gibeonites, but subjected them to the
use and service of the Tabernacle. They therefore are to be blamed that
stupifie Nature, and quench those Affections that are implanted in us by the
Finger of God in our first Creation; as that rigid Sect the Stoics, who would
have their Wiseman, or Philosophical Saint so mortified, as in no Accident to
Joy, or Grieve, or change a Countenance; or in any Loss, even of dearest
Friends, to suffer any relenting. Such pains they took to cease to be Men, that
they subjected themselves below the degree of Beasts. Patience they may count
it, and insuperable Fortitude, which is indeed rather the want of natural
affection, Romans 1.
condemned by the Apostle as a blockish stupidity; and may justly fall under
that Censure, Jer. 5.3.
Thou have smitten them, but they have not grieved: For certainly the death of
Friends is a stroke. Ezekiel. 24.
I will take away the desire of thine eyes with a stroke; (says God to
Ezekiel,) a stroke which touches all of dear relation; and is it fit the
strokes of God should fall upon a flinty and unrelenting heart? Therefore we
find that Abraham mourned for Sarah; Joseph for Jacob; the Israelites for
Moses, Aaron, Samuel. Customary it was among the Jews to mourn seven days;
sometimes longer; with fasting and renting of the Clothes: This perhaps more of
Superstition, than either of Necessity or Decency.

Yet there ought to be a Moderation for them that are dead in Christ. As all
our Affections, that they may be useful in a Christian Life, must be bankt up
within their due Bounds, and bridled with a strong hand of Grace; neither
misapplied in their Object, nor falling over or short in their Measure: And
therefore some of the very Heathen have placed the top of Wisdom in the
Moderation of the Affections; their Ethics, or Doctrine of Moral Virtues being
exercised chiefly in this Task: So particularly a special care is to be had
that they overflow not the Banks in mourning for the Dead. Hence God did forbid
to his People those Heathen Rites of cutting themselves, Deuteronomy. 14.1.
and shaving of the hair. Our blessed Savior, in the case of Jairus his
Daughter, newly dead, when both the Father and Mother of the Child, and the
Disciples there present opened the Sluice of Tears to their Affections, sets
Bounds and Banks to that Passion, in these words, Weep not; she is not dead,
but sleeps. For this cause he disliked in their Solemn Funerals, the use of
the Jewish Minstrelsy, the end whereof was to increase Sorrow by sad and
doleful Tunes. Detestandae sunt illae lacrymae quae non habent modum.
Thraenodiae.
Affection (says One) in this Case has need of a Bridle, not a Spur. St.
Hierom's Caution is worthy of Observation, Those Tears are to be detested which
have no measure.

Indeed, some of Gods Children have Impotently yielded to the violence of this
Passion (as indeed it is most easy to slip into Excess, where the Matter about
which our Actions are conversant, is of it self confessedly Lawful:) Hence
Rachels Weeping, Mourning, and great Lamentation for her Children, because (as
to her present sense) they were not. And David's Passionate Ejaculations for
Absalom; O Absalom, etc. would God I had died for thee, etc. But these Examples
are neither commendable nor imitable; and rather Documents of Humane Infirmity,
than Precedents of Imitation. And for the last; he bewailed not so much, in St.
Augustines Judgment, his Sons death, as that fearful state wherein he seemed to
die; stained with horrid Incest against his Fathers Bed, and Unnatural
practices against his Fathers Life. How much more comely and Imitable was his
Demeanor in the Death of his Child, born to him by Bethshabe? Seeking to the
Lord by Prayer and Fasting for the Child, while it was yet alive; 2 Samuel 12.23.
but when dead, Wherefore (says he) should I fast? I shall go to him, but he
shall not return to me.

Now, for the suppressing of this Inordinate Passion, take into your serious
Thoughts these Considerations.

1. That it is Gods doing; and we must give him leave to use his own Power and
Sovereignty over his Creature, Isai. 64.2.
in whose hands we are all as Clay in the hands of the Potter. He that inspired
the Breath of life, may justly recall it: Whatsoever the Weapon be, the Hand is
his that wields it. This one Meditation is enough to silence all Repining and
Impatient Thoughts; as to draw from us that humble Resignation of St. Paul,
Acts 21.14.
The Will of the Lord be fulfilled: Of Eli, It is the Lord, let him do what
seems good in his sight: Of David, I held my peace, and opened not my Mouth,
for it was thy doing. This Consideration allayed Jobs Sorrow in the loss of his
Children: He looked not at the Rotten House, or the Four Winds that smote it;
but at him that brings the Winds out of his Treasures; and therefore sets up
within himself this patient Resolution, The Lord gives, Job. 1.21.
and the Lord takes away; Blessed be the Name of the Lord.

2. Consider the Vanity and Unprofitableness of Excessive Sorrow; it profits
neither the Living, nor the Dead. Not the Living: Prove. 12.25.
Heaviness in the heart of Man brings it down, and Worldly sorrow works
death. As Fire lightly sprinkled, burns more clearly; too much overwhelmed
gives neither heat nor light: So moderate Sorrow advantageth the Soul in many
Natural, Moral, and Spiritual Actions; Immoderate, quenches the Vigor of the
Spirits, and renders us unfit for every good Duty.

Again, It profits not the Dead. Should we fill their Tombs with Tears, and
spend our Lives in Lamentation, we cannot redeem them. Excessive Sorrow may
bring us to them; no Sorrow, Care, or Cost can bring them back to us: As David,
I shall go to him, but he shall not return to me.

3. Consider the Necessity of Dying. Ever since that necessitating Law, Dust
thou art, and unto Dust shall thou return, Man is by the Chain of Gods
irrevocable Decree tied unto Death. It is appointed to all Men once to die; and
who shall disappoint his Appointment? Whatsoever parts have been acted upon
this Stage of Mortality, Death is the Catastrophe, and the Grave the place of
Retyring. The Wisdom of the Wise cannot prevent it; the Tongue of the Eloquent
cannot charm it; the Strength of the Mighty cannot resist it: It Reverenceth
neither the Gray hairs of the Aged, nor the Green locks of the Young. No
swiftness can overrun it, no Prowess over-match it: No gifts of Nature,
privileges of Place, endowments of Grace, can free us from the stroke of it.
Where are those Millions of Generations, that have hitherto Peopled the Earth?
Have they not made their Beds in the Dark? And when they have served their
time, have they not seen Corruption? And shall We think to have our Friends,
Fathers, Mothers, Husbands, Wives, Children, exempted from the Universal Law of
Humane Nature?

4. But that which is yet more effectual to moderate Sorrow for the Dead, is,
that Death is indeed a Portal and passage unto Life. If indeed they were
utterly extinct, shut up in Eternal Darkness, some reason had we with Rachel to
Mourn for them, supposing that they are not: But we know that they are, and
believe that they are happy; and that when this Earthly house of our tabernacle
is dissolved, we have a building not made with hands, eternal in the Heavens.
When the Soul, taking her flight into a state of Bliss, and leaving behind her
this Clog of Mortality, shall be removed an incomputable distance from this
Vale of Sin and Misery. And are we sorry for this blessed Exchange? shall we
Mourn for their glorious preferment, whom we profess to live with God? Spei
nostrae ac Fidei prevaricatores. Simulata, ficta, fucata, videntur esse quae
dicicimus. Cyprian.
What difference, in this respect, between the Hopeless Heathen, and the
Professed Christian? St. Cyprian thinks it incongruous to Mourn for them in
Black, that follow the Lamb in White. This perhaps may seem a Flower of
Rhetoric; but certainly, Excessive Sorrow shows us to be of a defective Faith:
That Faith can hardly be thought sincere, unto which we walk so contrary in
Practice. Especially seeing a very Heathen could say, That we do (not amittere,
but praemittere) not lose them, but send them before us; in Hope (as our Faith
further teaches us) to follow and communicate with them in the same Glory and
Blessedness.

It is a sleep.

Sleep, in phrase of Scripture, admits of diverse senses; for we find, First,

The sleep of Nature: A binding of the Senses; Somnus Naturae.
a Rest, cessation, and suspention of them from their Actual operations; and
consequently, Ligatio sensuum.
of all the Members of the Body from executing their Natural offices and
functions. Thus Adam slept in Paradise, Jesus in the Ship, Peter in the Prison.

2. The sleep of Sin: A secure Spiritual Lethargy. Somnus Cul^ae. Ephesians. 5.14. 1 Thessalonians. 5.6.
Awake thou that sleep. Let us not sleep, as do others; but let us watch and
be sober; that is, Arise from the Grave of Infidelity and Sin, unto the Life of
Faith, the Life of Righteousness; and then to keep the Eyes of our Souls
continually waking, lest we be inveigled by the Devil or the Worlds Temptations.

3. The sleep of Grace: Somnus Gratiae.
A holy Peace and Tranquillity of Mind, arising from the apprehension of Gods
favor in Christ. I will lay me down and sleep. If David can attain a glimpse
of the light of Gods Countenance, then he will lay him down and sleep.

4. Somnus Sepulcri.
The sleep of the Grave: The long sleep of Death; when the Body lying in the
Bed of Dust does rest until it be awakened by the Sound of the last Trumpet.
Now to prevent Error and Mistake, this Sleep is not to be conceived of the
separated Soul, as some have vainly thought; supposing it to be not only
without Organical by a bodily Instrument action, but without all Action: Not
considering, that the Soul, even in the state of Union and Commerce with the
Body, has her proper and Immaterial acts of Thinking, Reasoning, Judging, etc.
Yea, the most perfect Acts of the Soul are exercised, when the Bodily Senses
are tied up, as in Ecstasies and deep Contemplations. Besides, the Spirits of
Men, in and after their Transmigration, are still Spirits; but without motion
and activity they would be no Spirits: For the Nature and Essence of a Spirit
consists in Act; and it is not obscurely intimate, Rev. 5.12. that they are
employed in Magnifying and praising God. Understand this Sleep therefore to be
of the Body in the Grave; a Metaphor very frequent in Holy Scripture: Deu. 12.2.
Many of them that sleep in the dust of the Earth, shall awake. Of diverse of
the Kings of Israel and Judah, it is said, that they slept with their Fathers.
St. Paul reproving the abuse of the Holy Sacrament in the Corinthian Church;
For this cause (says he) many are sick and weak among you, and many sleep. And
St. Stephen, having commended his Spirit into the hands of Christ, (...) Act.
7.59.
fell asleep. A Similitude used among the Heathen: Hence their distinction of
the Greater and Lesser Sleep. Homer. (...).
One calls it Deaths Brother; Another, Deaths Sister; Another, Deaths Image. Of
one Gorgias it is said, That being sick and heavy unto Death, and very sleepy;
being asked how he did, Virgil. Stulte quid est somnus gelidae, nisi mortis
Imago. Jamme somnus incipit tradere fratri suo. (...).
replied, Now sleep begins to deliver me up to his Brother Death. These,
although Ignorant of a Resurrection, could easily find in Death the similitude
of a Sleep: Hence our Graves are called Beds, and our Churchyards,
Sleeping-places, or Dormitories. And indeed, if Death be a Sleep, the Grave
must needs be the Bed. Isai. 57.2.
Unto this may fitly be applied that of the Propht, They shall enter into
peace, they shall lie down upon their Beds; each one walking in his uprightness.

Diverse Reasons may be given of this Similitude; I shall pitch upon two: First,
Sweetness of Rest. Secondly, Certainty of Resurrection.

1. Sweetness of Rest. Rev. 14.13.
Blessed are the Dead which die in the Lord, for they rest from their Labors.
Man is born to affliction, as the sparks fly upwards. No Family, Age, Sex, or
Condition of Men, but has experience of Humane Miseries: A heavy yoke is laid
upon the Sons of Men, from the day of their Birth unto the day of their Death.
Afflictions, like Waves, come rolling one upon another; the end of one misery
is the beginning of another. Hear we not one crying, My belly, my belly! with
the Prophet? another, My head, my head! with the Shunamites Son? One, My
Father, my Father! with Elisha? another, My Son, my Son! with David? One
complaining of Cruel Enemies; another of False Friends: One of Sore Labor;
another of Hungry Meals: One of Grief in the Body; another of Sin in the Soul?
Here lies Jacob in the Fields, there Joseph in Prison; Here Jeremy in the
Dungeon, there David in the Wilderness; Daniel among the Lions, the Three
Children in the Fiery Furnace. It is not unsignificant that Nature sends us
into the World, Weeping; a sad presage of our future Calamity: Such our
Ingress, such our Progress through this Vale of Tears. So that Man and Misery
seem to be born under one Planet. If Man had not been, Sorrow upon Earth had
never been. And as we suffer many Evils, so we do more; the Flesh continually
lusting against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the Flesh: so that the good
which we would, we do not; and the evil which we would not, that we do.

From all these, this Sleep in my Text, gives us a sweet discharge; the Soul
carried into Abraham's Bosom. And what is the Fathers Bosom, but a place of
Repose unto the Child? The Body laid up in a Couch of Sacred rest and security;
sweetened, sanctified, seasoned and perfumed by the most precious Death and
Burial of Christ; Cubile in quo mollius dormit quisquis durius se en hac vita
gesserit.
where our sleep shall be sweeter, as our labor has been harder. The Body no
sooner dead, but it feels nothing; the Soul no sooner fled, but it feels it
self happy.

2. Certainty of Resurrection. Indeed, more certain than we are of rising in
the Morning, when we go to Bed at Night. Dan. 12.2.
They that sleep (according to Daniels Prophecy) shall awake. The Sea and the
Grave shall deliver up their Dead, as faithful Trustees and Depositaries of
that which is committed to them. A Voice will one day sound, like that of
Christ (who is the Resurrection and the Life) to Lazarus; Lazarus come forth:
Or like that in the Prophet, Awake and sing ye that dwell in the Dust; Isai.
26.19.
for thy dew is as the dew of Herbs, and the Earth shall give up her Dead. As
the sweet Dews or Showrs (as we commonly say) loosen many a Prisoner, make Corn
and Grass to grow; so the Dew of heavenly Virtue and Influence which flows from
Christ, shall loosen many a Prisoner; raise our Bodies, the Prisoners of Hope,
from that dark Cell of the Grave, unto a state of Blessedness and Glory.

And now since death is a sleep, much may be learnt hence for our Instruction
and Comfort.

1. For Instruction, first, Unto a due and serious preparation for it. We
prepare our selves to sleep, by setting aside all worldly Negotiations, giving
to Body and Mind a Cessation from outward Employments: So should we dispose our
selves to this last sleep, laying aside all worldly Cares and Distractions. 2
Kings 20.1.
Set thy House in order (says the Prophet to Hezekiah) for thou must dye.
While the House is out of order, the Mind is out of frame, and not yet rightly
composed to sleep: Especially the Soul it self is to be set in order, by
serious Repentance, and unfeigned Resolutions and Endeavors of a new Life. It
was Agurs Prayer, Prove. 30.7.
Two things have I desired of the Lord, before I dye. One is, Remove from me
Vanity and Lies: Sin is often represented to us under the Notion of vanity and
lies (as in the sourth Psalm, and elsewhere) indeed a lying vanity; abusing our
Apprehensions with the shadow and appearance of a seeming good, but in the mean
time betrays us to a real evil of guilt and torment. This therefore should be
the chief care, aim and endeavor of our whole Lives, not to dye in our sins:
But laying aside the sin which besets us about, as Clothes do the Body, (...).
the rotten rags of the Old man, and so having made our peace with God, we may
be fit to lay down our heads in peace. Thus prepare thy self continually for
this blessed Rest, by renewing thy Repentance; fortifying thy Resolutions of
better Obedience; confirming thy Interest in the Merits and Mediation of
Christ, that whenever it shall please God to call thee to Bed, thou may
with a serene Conscience, and a good assurance of Hope, lay down thy dying head
upon this Pillow, the free and immerited Grace of God in Christ, and cheerfully
Commend thy Soul into his hands, as into the hands of a faithful Creator and
Redeemer.

2. It teaches Resignation: When we sleep we willingly yield to Nature,
without struggling or reluctation; so should we unto the God of Nature, when he
calls us to this long sleep; being not haled or dragged out of this Earthly
Tabernacle, but willingly resign it into the hands of our great Landlord. Our
Death should not be a violent Divulsion, but a gentle Dissolution. Mark St.
Paul's words, 2 Timothy 4.6. Nihil interest utrum abjures depositum, aut doleas
restitucum.
I am now ready to be offered; ready, as a Freewill Offering. God requires but
what he has for a time lent us; and shall we be unwilling to restore? We had
as good deny the Debt, as grieve to make Restitution.

3. It teaches hope of a Resurrection. When men go to sleep, they put off
their Clothes indeed, but expecting to put them on again in the Morning; so we
are to nourish in our selves this Faith, that 'though we uncloath our selves of
this vile Body, it is not lost, but put to the mending, to be changed in the
fashion, restored to Immortality and Incorruptibility, and made like unto the
glorious Body of Christ. This for Instruction. Again, here is Matter of
exceeding Comfort,

1. First, against the seeming horror of the Grave: That Death is but a sleep,
and differs only from it in this (which is its advantage) soundness of Rest,
and perhaps length of Continuance. Fear not then (O Christian) the stink of
Rottenness, horror of Darkness, gnawing of the Worms, etc. these things shall
not sensibly touch thee. Conceive of it rather as a Castle of Security, a
Chamber of Rest, a Bed of Down, a Pillow of Ease, wherein thou shall safely and
sweetly rest till the Morning of the Resurrection. Truly therefore we may say,
Stultum est mortem horrere, and somno delectari.
It is a vain and foolish thing to delight to sleep, yet to be afraid to dye.
Do thou go to Bed every Night, and art thou afraid to go this once? Art thou
not yet weary of hearing, seeing, doing, and suffering so much evil? Art thou
like a pettish Child, unwilling and fearful to go to Bed? When therefore our
time of sleep approaches, and that we are called to rest in our Fathers Bosom,
let us be affected as good old Hilarion; Go forth, Egredere anima mea,
egredere, quid times?
O my Soul, go forth; What fear thou? My Body lie down and sleep.

2. This Comforts us against the Miseries and Sufferings of this present Life.
Methinks when I look on Man, I see a deplorable Creature, subject to
innumerable Miseries, hurried with Temptations, distempered with Passions, Job
7.2.
as a Servant earnestly desiring the shadow, and as an hireling the reward of
his work. Cheer up thy self in this, that as the shadow of the Night does
equally gratify Master and Servant, High and Low, Rich and Poor, with the
common benefit of Nature; so there is a time of sleep and rest approaching,
which will shut up our Miseries with our Eyes, and end our Labors with our
Lives. Though here we have born the travail and heat of the day, our Comfort
is, we shall go to Bed at Night. It is recorded of Babilas, that renowned
Martyr, that when Decius the Emperor commanded his Head to be chopped off;
receiving that bloody Sentence with a sweet Calmness and Serenity of Soul, he
used only those few words of the Psalmist, Psalm. 116.7.
Return then unto thy rest, O my Soul. A blessed sleep indeed; not as our
Natural sleeps often are, troubled and short; but restful without disturbance;
blissful without pain and annoiance, and which shall not be startled or amazed
with the voice of the Archangel, and the Trump of God: But both Body and Soul
united, shall be put into possession of that glorious Eternal Rest, which
remains unto the People of God.

The third General part of the Text remains; which is the second Ground of
Comfort, The hope of a blessed Resurrection; implied in these words; Even as
they that have no hope.

The Hope here mentioned (as appears by the following words) is of a blessed
Resurrection; and consequently of Eternal Glory: Where besides a severe
Reprehension of immoderate Sorrow for the Dead, we have a solid ground of
Comfort, both against the Fear of Death, and Sorrow for deceased Christians.
And it is this; That a Christian is a Man of Hope.

Hoc ipsum quod sumus Christiani spei res est. Psalm. 97.11.
laid up for us in Heaven: So that a Christian's Treasure and Felicity consists
in Hope. Light is sown for the Righteous, and Joy for the Upright in heart.
But sown, and under the Clods here; the Harvest is yet to come: It does not
yet appear what we shall be; 1 John, 3.2.
our Happiness here is in Reversion, not in present Possession. And though God
give us a comfortable taste of it, in the first fruits of the Spirit, Peace of
Conscience, and Joy in the Holy Ghost; the full fruition is not till the Life
to come.

The Use is first of Instruction,
1. To inform us of the difference between the Children of God and of this
World; one is a man of hope, the other hopeless; one has his portion, and
receives his good things here, the things of a better Life he neither cares
nor hopes for. For something in present, though a Possession of Dirt, he is
ready to forfeit all his great and glorious hopes; with Esau, preferring his
pottage before his birthright. But the true Christian is a man of hope, and
has quitted the pursuit of things Temporal, for things Eternal. Therefore may
say to the Worldling, as our blessed Savior to his Kinsmen in another case;
your time is always with you; but my time is not yet come; much good may your
Portion do you. I envy you not, I rather pity you. I have other things to think
of, of more worth and certainty: In the mean time, my Soul shall rest in hope.

2. To teach us to cherish this Hope by a godly and Christian Life. Hope and
Holiness, like Hyppocrates Twins, wax and wain, rise and fall, live and dye
together. As we grow up in the true fear of God, and conscience of well-doing,
we confirm our hope of eternal Blessedness. Acts 24.15.
We have hope toward God (says the Apostle) that there shall be a Resurrection
both of the just and unjust: And (for this hopes sake) I exercise my self to
have a Conscience void of offense both toward God and Man. Thus hope is
nourisht by the study of holiness, as the light of a Lamp is by the Oil that
feeds it: Therefore live well and hope well. 1 John 3.3.
He that has this hope purifieth himself as God is pure. Again, here is matter
of Comfort,

1. First, Against the difficulties we meet with in the course of Piety. There
is naturally in us a certain tenderness ready to sink under Duty, unless born
up and encouraged with the hope of the Prize set before us, 1 Thessalonians. 1.3.
St. Paul speaks of a work of Faith, and labor of Love; implying some hard
Enterprise. And what is the work of Faith? to march constantly against all
Oppositions, to resist Temptations, to overcome the World, to endure hardship,
as good Soldiers of Jesus Christ, and to persevere in our holy purposes unto
the end. And what is the labor of Love? An unwearied industry and diligence in
procuring the good of others, with all good offices and fruits growing from the
root of Charity. Both these are quickened by a hopeful intuition of the Reward,
which he calls in the next words, the patience of hope. So having blessed God
for the Collossians Faith and Love, he points to that which supported both;
Col. 1.5.
for the hopes sake which is laid up for us in Heaven. Without this hope, we
should desire and yet sit still; (like men languishing in strength) purpose and
be weary of our own purposes; resolve, and presently loath our own Resolutions;
but the patience of hope having an eye to the Crown, sweetens our Labors,
perpetuates our Endeavors, and enables us with invincible Constancy to
surmount all Difficulties, Thus hope by fortifying our Resolutions, and
smoothing the roughness of the way, makes us to pursue the good we aspire to,
with more heat and less pain. The Husbandman would not so freely expose himself
to toil and travail, wind and weather, but for hopes sake, which promises him
the Fruit of his Labor. The Soldier would not cast himself into so many
horrid forms of dangers, scale Walls, enter Breaches, thrust himself into the
fury of Combats, but for hopes sake of either Booty or Glory. The Merchant
would not expose himself to Waves and Storms, Rocks and Quicksands, but in
hopes of a golden Recompense: This will men do and suffer for (alas!) a poor
shadow of Wealth and Glory. Brethren, as a Christians work is much more
honorable, so the reward set before us, to quicken fainting Virtue, is
incomparably more glorious. Therefore let this hope in our bosoms encourage
us, not only patiently, but joyfully to tread upon all Difficulties, and
considering the joy that attends us in the end, to fix our eye, gird our loins,
gather up our strength, and run with patience the Race that is set before us.

2. Against the Sufferings and Afflictions of this present Life: Let us not be
dismayed with crosses and losses of whatsoever is dearest to us, so long as the
Treasure of our Hope, our Bank in Heaven is safe and untoucht. Hope is an
excellent Receipt against all Cardiack Passions; it has a special virtue
against fainting of the heart, and therefore to be laid up in the bosom against
all distresses, especially when the thing hoped for is so excellent. Well yet
(says Job) I know that my Redeemer lives, and that I shall one day see him;
when his reins were consumed within him. And this wrought in him a patient
expectation of betters things; All the days of my appointed time will I wait
till my change come; a change from sin and misery, to happiness and glory. We
see by experience, that even natural hope solaceth the Soul in all Afflictions;
it tells us there is no impossibility of Emergency, and rising out of the
deepest Miseries; that Humane Calamities have their bounds, and will not always
tire themselves about one Man; that there is succession of Storms and Calms in
the course of Man's life, that unexpected ways of relief may happen: Such is the
Vicissitude of Earthly things. If there be the least chink or cranny to let in
any Beam of Comfort, Hope will not lightly fail. Natural Hope therefore is an
excellent Anchor in the Troublesome Sea of this World. But (alas) oft-times the
Cable breaks, our Hope spends it self in Vain Imaginations, and in the end
makes us ashamed. (...). Heb. 6.11.
But this Hope; as the end is more certain, so the Assurance more full. A full
Assurance of Hope, and so of far greater virtue to support the Soul. It has
made the glorious Martyrs to suffer the loss of all things, of Life it self;
not accepting deliverance (that is, upon base terms, and with loss and
prejudice of their Faith) that they might obtain a better Resurrection. The
Natural Hope carries us but to our Lives end; that is the utmost Verge of it:
While I live, I hope to live. Dum spiro spero, cnm expiro spero.
But the Grace of Hope carries us further: When dead, I hope to live; and
therefore let Health, The Righteous has hope in his death. Prove. 14.32.
Wealth, Liberty, Friends, yea Life and Breath, and all go; yet I will hold
fast the hope of Joy that is set before me. Though therefore we dwell here as
Lot in Sodom; our Souls vexed, tortured with the sinful Vanities of Men, there
is hope of a Day when every thing that offends shall be cast out. Though our
sincere endeavors to please God be derided by the Profane World; there is hope
of a Time coming, when our Judgment shall break forth as the light, and our
Righteousness as the Noon day; when we shall have Beauty for our Ashes, and
Glory for our Shame. Do we groan under the burden of Sin, the rebellion of
Nature against Grace, of the Flesh against the Spirit? there is hope of an
exchange of Weakness for Power, Imperfection for Perfection, Necessity of
sinning for a Confirmed state of obeying. Thus Hope supports the Spirits, and
keeps us from Sowning. It seems, St. Paul was sometime a little dispirited and
out of heart; but revives presently: and what was his Cordial? Hope of the
Resurrection, and the consequent Glory; That this light affliction, which is
but for a moment, works to us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of
glory. If our Hopes were terminated within the narrow bounds of this Life,
Christianity were at a poor stay, and Christians of all Men most miserable; (so
cold entertainment does it find in the World) but being Anchored within the
Vail, we are of all Men most happy.

3. To Conclude, as I began; This should moderate our Sorrow for them that are
Dead in the Lord; That they breathed out their Souls in hope; that their flesh
rests in hope, and their Bodies in Graves are but Prisoners of Hope; and their
Reunion with us in a glorious and Triumphant Fellowship, In quo non potest
subesse fulsum.
is the matter also of our Hope. And though a Fiducial and Infallible assurance
of another final Happiness (while they are yet in the state of Travelers)
none can have, without special Revelation. ('It Is well if we can attain this
Assurance to our selves, with all diligence and much difficulty, by many
degrees working out our salvation with fear and trembling;) yet for them that
have fought a good fight, and finished their course in the true Faith and fear
of God; well may we have an erected Hope of a glorious and eternal Association,
and that together with them we shall for ever be with the Lord; (...), v. 7.
wherefore comfort one another with these words. Indeed, a solid ground of
Christian Consolation in this short Temporal privation of our dearest Friends,
and such as the Gentiles, who were without Christ, the ground of Hope; without
the Church, the Sanctuary of Hope; without the Covenant of Grace, the Reason of
our Hope, could not afford. Those Cordials that are fetched out of Natures
Boxes; That Death is the common end of All; Mors exitus communis, ea lege
nascimus.
that it is the Law and Condition of our Birth, are but cold Comforts, in
comparison of that which Christian Hope holds forth unto us: And therefore,
Blessed be God and the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has begotten us
again unto a lively hope, by the Resurrection of Christ from the dead; to an
inheritance immortal, incorruptible, undefiled, that fades not away, reserved
for us in Heaven. Amen.

And now my Discourse, like a Circle, is returned to the Point where I began,
viz. This truly Virtuous, Noble, Courteous, Dearly beloved Gentleman. A great
Treasury, though exhausted; a shining Light, quenched; a burning glorious Lamp,
extinguished, a sweet, delicious, comely, fragrant Flower, cropped and fading; a
bright Star of a distinguished magnitude, removed from our Horizon, and well
may Darkness cover this Hemisphere. Here I could willingly sit down a while in
silence, and only by the language of our Tears, speak our sense of this heavy
Loss; but (as I have newly Discoursed) all Passions, especially that of Grief,
need rather a Bridle than a Spur. Let therefore the Thoughts of his Superlative
Merits, while living, and the Inexpressible Glories he is now in possession of,
bring down the Sluice a while, and dam up the streaming Fountain of our Tears
and Sorrow, whilst, to his most deservedly Worth and Memory, and our abundant
Delight and Comfort, we pay that Tribute of Praise that is due to Gods Servants
and Children; advancing thereby his Glory, and adding Spurs to the Pious
Endeavors of those who Survive. And that I may the more both suitably and
succinctly delineate those Graces, which though they are gone with him, for his
Comfort, yet stay behind him, for his Honor and our Imitation.

Be pleased to veiw him in the Method of these following Particulars:

First, In his Birth; There we may see great Excellencies descended to him by
his Progenitors. To be born of a good Family, and to be well Descended, is a
Mercy not to be neglected; Nec imbellem progenerant aquilae columbam, says
Horace. You have read of Mr. Philpots zealous Martyrdom; V. 2. Examine. of Mr.
Philpot. Acts and Mon. Vol. 3. Dr. Wilk. H. gl.
being a Knights Son, told his Persecutors, He was a Gentleman. Anabaptistical
parity, and Levelling designs, are ever to be abhord, and looked upon as the
ready way to Rapine, Confusion, and Violence. To be born of Noble Parents, from
a Family that is not stained nor sullied with the foul spots of Faction and
Rebellion; nor tainted with the Seeds of Error, Schism, and Division; nor
basely dirted with the black filth of Debauchery, Atheism, Profaneness, and
Irreligion; (all which is eminently true without Flattery, in this Gentleman's
Escutcheon) questionless, is one of Gods choice Blessings: And to a Mind
inclining to Virtue, it avails much to be born well; Est aliquid clarus
magnorum splendour avorum -- The glorious Deserts of Honorable Parents, is no
small Patrimony -- sed vix ea nostra a voco --

Secondly, Therefore consider him in his own Person: And in that, first his
Outward, and then secondly his Inward Ornaments, Grace, and Perfections. His
Body of exact symmetry and proportion, where we might behold a great share of
Comeliness and Beauty, which God our Creator (the Fountain of all Beauty) had
imparted to this lovely Creature; and in such a measure, as if Mother-Nature
had called a Council, and took a more than ordinary care and cost in its first
draught and lineaments: But when it became polished, by an ingenious and
liberal Education; every step and motion in his Deportment, was a prevailing
Argument to beget both Love and Admiration.

Thirdly, And all this is as far Inferior to his Inward Perfections, as the
shining of the Gold-Ring, in comparison of that luster and splendid Excellency,
which the Artificially Cut and well-set Diamond affords the Spectator. When
first Judgment and the use of Reason began to open and perform its Acts, how
industrious was he to impress good Habits! That that Season might be improved
to Virtue, which in many Children is too prone to Liberty; accustoming himself
to good Manners, before he was fully comprehensive of a greater Knowledge and
Understanding. And when at any time (whilst under my Tuition) any thing seemed
difficult to his obtaining; in that very particular, the goodness of a sweet
Disposition so eminently appeared, That did not Court and Complement an
Indulgence from me, but subdue by Conquest. And ever as His days and years
increased, so did also a most Accomplished model of his Duty toward God and
Man. How often have I (when expecting to have interrupted his Innocent
Divertisements by a sudden surprisal) found, to my great Comfort, this hopeful
and pious Blossom in a Saint-like posture on his knees to God, with two or
three gathered together, tendering his Morning Sacrifice? Nor was it done by
fits, and extorted by Fear, or a severe Discipline; but a constant and
Free Will Offering. Had you seen that pithy and suitable Form of Prayer annexed
in his first Grammar, slubber'd and defaced by his tender hands, with his daily
perusal; it would be no great wonder, that God should so soon remove him to
sing Allelujahs in the Choire of Heaven, that had so early and so well
performed it on Earth. He that had so soon versed himself in the Principles of
Religion, contained in the Church-Catechism, to the delight of his Earthly
Parents, could not long be detained from being made perfect with Gods Children,
to the glory and honor of his Heavenly Father. He, in whom there was such a
fruitful Spring of all imaginable good hopes of doing good in his Generation
among Men, is now glorifying God amongst Angels; as the one, in deep Sighs and
sad Accents of Lamentations bewails our great loss; so the other, as a most
strong Cordial should revive our drooping Souls. Many excellent things might be
communicated unto you, not only for Imitation, but Admiration. St. Paul, 2 Timothy
2.20. tells us, In a great house there are vessels of Gold, some to honor,
some to dishonor. Give me leave to borrow his Metaphor; In this Noble house,
this great Family, He was a choice Vessel. What Eusebius calls his Beloved
Friend, I may well apply unto him; he was Vas Virtutum admirabile, A Vessel
adorned with an admirable variety of Natural Abilities, Moral Virtues, and
Spiritual Graces, every way suitable to his Birth, Quality, and Education. O
that all the Sons of Honor of this Kingdom, and Offspring of good Blood, had
the like Pious and early Inclinations to good Literature and Education! Such
Ambitious Thoughts, to be eminent in Knowledge and Piety! Such Sentiments of
the Universities! Such Revere to the Members thereof! Such value and esteem to
their Parts and Merits! Then I should be in greater Hopes of seeing a
flourishing State and Kingdom: Then would there be more Amicable Overtures
between the Church and State. I dare be bold to say it, That there is nothing
sooner likely to weaken and prevent, if not expose and ruin the flourishing
State of this or any Kingdom, than the want of sound Learning and Exemplary
Lives in the Nobility and Gentry thereof. I cannot omit the imparting one thing
observable in this young Hero, at his first entrance to make his own
Conceptions into Latin; in order thereunto I gave him this Subject, Ignorantia
est sola inimica Doctrinae, i.e. Ignorance is the alone Enemy to Learning;
which made such impressions upon his tender Thoughts, that (in his most free
Conversation with those, that the Hospitable Housekeeping of his Honorable
Parents, gave many and frequent Opportunities for) He daily observed those
Persons, to have the meanest Thoughts, not only of Clergymen, but of all
others whatsoever under any Coat or Garb, if Learned, whose Education and
Scholarship could carry them very little further than to Write and Read. I have
a large field to turn me in, where I might expatiate in his just and due
Character, being gone out like a Taper, that has left a sweet Savor behind
him in the Nostrils of all that knew him: But I am willing to contract my self,
knowing I am contained in the prescribed limits of such Time as may be most
suitable to the Offices of this Nature. And what should I say more? for the
Time would fail me to tell of his Humility, Meekness, Modesty, Courtesy,
Condescending to those of low Estate; the great Aims and Ambition to express
Duty to his Parents, Love to his Friends, Familiarity with his Neighbor,
Immovable affection to his Servants, Lowliness to his Inferiors, Respect to
his Superiors, Kindness to his Equals, and Insuperable Goodness to his dearest
and nearest Relatives. Thus he left the World, having obtained a good report
through Faith, Heb. 11.39. in the flower and first budding of his days, upon
the confines and borders of the 16th year of his Age, at the Feet of Gamallel,
newly placed in a station of good Literature, in a Constellation of Arts and
Sciences, in that Ancient Foundation of Exeter-Colledge, long since Laid by the
Learned and Charitable Walter Stapleton, Bishop of Exeter, amongst the young
Glories of our present state, universally Lamented, universally Beloved, in his
Virgin-purity unstained and unspotted; nowly Espoused (with the joyful
Approbation of Parents on both sides) to a Lady whose promising Excellencies,
not only of a considerable Fortune, but of Virtue, Youth, Beauty, good Nature,
good Parentage, and all such commendable Qualifications, as might have in all
appearing probabilities, rendered them both as happy as our Desires and Wishes
could have expected, and their Worths merited and deserved. O! But that God,
that rules and governs all things by his Wisdom and Providence, the reasons and
causes of the various effects whereof, are Subjects to employ the eyes of our
Faith and Hope, but not to be discovered in Prospectives of Human Reason) sent
an Host of Heavenly Spirits, to attend and recall that Spirit (he himself first
breathed) to the celebration of Nuptials of an higher Nature, with Jesus Christ
the great Bridegroom of departed Saints, in the Beatifical Vision of the all
glorious Trinity, the Father of an Infinite Majesty, the true and only Son, the
Holy Ghost the Comforting and Sanctifying Spirit.

And shall we now either irrationally complain? or religiously murmr and
repine at? or uncharitably envy at his glorious Translation? He is enlarged
from the Prison of this Life, and shall we bemoan his Liberty? He has quickly
weathered through the disturbed Waves in the unquiet Sea of this World; and
shall we in a mistaken Zeal debar him the quiet Haven? Unwise Mortals that we
are! Is there any Earthly Inheritances, Crowns, or Dignities, that could court
him into a Return, or an Exchange, for those Mansions of Eternal Glory, he is
in possession of? No, no; his Gains in his removal, are of such a Nature, both
for Body, Soul, Estate, Place, and Company, as can neither be sufficiently
expressed, or conceived, by Human Wit and Invention: For his Body, that is
stripped of all sinful and natural Defects, the Abortions of Sin, and filled with
all heavenly Contemplations at its reunion with the Soul; of Mortal, it becomes
Immortal; of Corruptible, Incorruptible; of Natural, Spiritual, i. e. not
needing natural helps: There is no use of Meats, Apparel, Physic, Sleep, Beds;
of weak and infirm, glorious: And for his Soul, that is first eased of all the
Rags and Relics of Sin; delivered of Igno rance and Self-love; delivered of
all the Consequences of Sin, Griefs, Fears, Guilts, Accusations: And then it is
filled with the Image of Jesus; then all the Powers and Faculties are advanced
above the ordinary strain of Nature; and his Soul furnished with all the
Attendances of Christ's Image, everlasting Joy, perpetual Peace, a constant
Correspondence and Communion with God and his Holy Angels.

And here we leave him; But it is but for a short time; the Division betwixt
him and us is of a small continuance; we must suddenly cut over the same Ferry,
and meet him on the other side of the Shore; Death's Boat was not appointed to
carry all at once; the Ferry not made to land all at one Tide; stay the return
of Water for our turn: In the mean time praying for a prosperous Gail, and
giving God thanks for all his Servants departed this Life in his Faith and
Fear, beseeching him to give us Grace to follow their good Example, that with
them we may be partakers of his heavenly Kingdom, through Jesus Christ our
Mediator and Advocate, To whom, with the Father and the Holy Ghost, three
Persons, and one God, be ascribed all Honor, Adoration, and Thanksgiving now,
and for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

