A Serious Remembrancer To Live Well. Written Primarily to CHILDREN, And Young
PEOPLE.

Secondarily, to PARENTS. Useful (I hope) for All.

Lastly, Compendious Remarks of the Death of Jonah Lawson, who finished his
Course upon Earth, the 23d Day of the Month called February, 1683. in the 14th
Year of his Age.

Non misere quisquam, qui been vixit, obit. O be wise-hearted, knowing that
beneath We always sail toward the Port of Death.

THO. LAWSON.

London, Printed in the Year, 1684.

A Serious Remembrancer To Live well, etc.
CHildren, and Young People, promise not to your selves many days; you know not
how near your Glass is run out, when you shall be commended to Earthen Sheets,
to your long home.

Let not the Indulgence of Teachers, nor the Example of the Multitude, sunk in
the Mire of Folly, Vanity, Youthful Lusts, Intemperancy, Unruliness of Mind,
Unstayedness, Wantonness, and of Unsavouriness, be prevalent with you, or give
you encouragement to forget the Lord in your tender Years; who made you to bear
his Image, to submit to his Scepter, to live under his Holy and Righteous
Government and Regiment; in a word, to serve him all the days of your appointed
time, in Newness of Life, and not your selves; who Crowns his Followers with
Endless Peace, and Spiritual Consolation, and Enriches them with Durable,
Lasting, yea, Everlasting Treasures and Substance, Superlatively Surmounting
all Worldly Tempting Offers of Fading Wealth, Pleasures or Honors.

It Is a precious thing, when Children and Young People, like Gideon's Fleece,
drink up betime the Pearly Dew of Divine Grace, and Heavenly Virtue, so that
their Spiritual Growth in the Faith tends Heaven-wards, upright and tall of
Stature, Fruitful, always Green and Flourishing, as the Palm Tree, not bowed
down with the weight of the Worldly Spirit, or Earthly-mindedness.

Children, and Young People, promise not to your selves length of Days, he that
gives Life and Breath, can take it when and how he pleases: Read your Mortality
in the Creation; the fair Damask Rose soon withers, the fairest Blossom is soon
blasted, the most fragrant Aromatical Flower quickly fades, the Dewy Morning
hastes away, the Sun (the glorious Lamp of the Firmament) soon sets, the Shadow
is gone in a Moment; Jonah's Gourd presently withered; the Meadows, graced with
Smaragdine Greenness, are quickly naked; the melodious Bird, now here, is
presently gone, the Pearled Dew of the Spring soon ascends, an Hour is but a
short time, or continuance, the bubble of a Brook is soon dispersed, the Course
of a Shuttle is swift, a Writing on the Sand is soon obliterated, a Thought
soon passes away, a Dream is soon gone, the glyding of a Crystal Stream soon
passes by, an Arrow from the Bow of the Mighty is quickly gone, the time
betwixt Flood and Ebb is as no time, the Spiders Web is soon rent, Lightning
from the Sky is soon vanished, a Post is quick in his Course, the Snow quickly
dissolves whem Summer comes: Such is the Life of Man, of short continuance here
upon Earth, soon gone hence, and seen no more: Our Life (says Petrarch) is a
Race unto Death.

What then ought to be the Living Concern of every one? Even to mind the One
thing necessary; To do that which is right in the sight of the Lord, to give
all diligence to make our Calling and Election sure, faithfully to improve
God's Gift, to walk with him as Enoch did, to grow in Acquaintance and in
Favor with him, to finish the short course of Life in the Holy Faith,
Reverence and Fear, in the end to receive the Reward of the Righteous,
Everlasting Blessedness in the Fruition of God.

Children, and Young People, and whosoever reads this, that you may be honored
with the Blessedness and Happy End of the Righteous, take Counsel, and comply
with God's way and means that leads to this Blessedness.

Consider John's Record of the Eternal Word, who said, In him was Life, and the
Life was the Light of Men: Mark this, His Life is the Light of Men: Of what
Men? Of every Man that comes into the World; yea, Light, which is of the Life,
shines in Darkness, in Hearts darkened by Satan, the Captain and Ringleader of
his wretched Captives and Slaves, but Darkness, Satan's Captives, comprehends
not the Light, nor such as walk in it, John 1.4, 5, 9. This Record of John
evidently holds out the Quality of the Light, to be of the Life, a Pure,
Divine, Heavenly and Essential Principle, and the Universality of it, in every
Man. And Paul was sent, To turn People from Darkness, which comprehends not the
Light, nor the Leadings and Operations thereof, nor the Children of Light, to
the Light, which comprehends Darkness, and the Children of Darkness, Acts
26.16, 17, 18.

So Children, and Young People, come out of Darkness, out of defiling Self, to
the pure, divine essential Principle in you; be ye separate from Darkness, to
the Light of Life, then are you Separatists indeed, and shall grow up in the
Saving Knowledge of the Lord, of the Mysteries of his Kingdom, and of the
things that concern your Peace and Everlasting Well-being.

And as you keep to, and continue in, the pure Principle of God in you, it will
show you Sin and Evil, every vain Thought, Desire, Imagination, and Unrighteous
Inclinations, and secretly check and reprove you, when you enter into the same
(for the Reproofs of Instruction are the way of Life) it will kindle you into
desires after Innocence: and beget in you a hunger after Righteousness, and you
will come to be weaned from the vain Ways, Customs, Fashions, Sports and
Pastimes of the World, and being established in Grace, you come to know what
the true Worship is, even in Spirit and in Truth; that Repentance which is
never to be repented of; the pure and undefiled Religion, which keeps out of
the Spots of the World; the Fear of the Lord, which is the beginning of Wisdom,
even that Fear which tends to Life, where strong Confidence is; here the
Fountain of Life is known; here every Evil Way is hated, and the Snares of
Death are escaped.

John bare Record, that Christ lights every Man; and Christ informs us, who
are Lovers thereof, and who are not, Every one that does Evil (says he) hates
the Light, and will not come to it, lest his Deeds should be reproved; but he
that does Truth, comes to the Light, that his Deeds may be made manifest, that
they are wrought in God, John 3.20, 21. Evil cannot be wrought in the Light,
nor Good without it.

Children, and Young People, who are inwardly touched, to make a Good
Confession of the Pure Divine Principle in you; not by Verbal Demonstration
only, but by willing and ready Obedience, and Subjection to its Commands, in
faithful Wrestling against the Evil it manifests, whether Thought, Word or
Deed, and pressing after the Good, Virtuous and Sober Life it calls for;
persevere in this Grace, so shall you be living Witnesses of precious things,
yea, that ye are God's Workmanship.

The Shunamite's Child being dead, Elisha stretched himself upon it, and the
Flesh of the Child waxed warm, and neesed seven times, an evident sign of Life
and Strength; Nature arising to expel Flatulent and Peccant Vapors; he opened
his Eyes, and was embraced by his Mother, 2 Kings 4.

This you shall read, continuing in the Grace of God, living in that which
crucifies the Flesh, though dead in Sins and Trespasses, you shall receive the
Quickening Power; your Hearts shall grow warm, as I may say, a Spiritual
Warmness issues from the Quickening Power: Said not the Disciples, after Christ
was risen, Did not our Hearts burn within us, while he talked with us by the
way, and while he opened to us the Scriptures? Luke 24. Here was a Spiritual
Warming.

This you shall read, as you live in the Grace of God, and become inward Jews,
Worshippers of God in Spirit and in Truth; though you were once Dark, yea,
Darkness it self, yet receiving the Pure Divine Principle in you, you become
enlightened by it, and living in it, and obeying it in all things, a Heavenly
Increase is known; here is a changing from Glory to Glory; once Darkness, now
Light in the Lord, a walking as Children of the Light; and walking here, the
whole course of your Life is a Feast, kindly receive what comes from the Hand
of the Lord, be true to that which secretly Reproves and Judges, remembering
that Zion is redeemed with Judgment, and her Converts with Righteousness; keep
out of the Snares of the Earth, knowing the way of God, walk in it; remember
she was clothed with the Sun, that had the Moon under her feet, Rev. 12. So in
the Faith put on the Lord Jesus.

Children, and Young People, and who-ever read this, Remember that under the
First Covenant, the Law was written in Tables of Stone; but in the New
Covenant, the Law is written in the Heart, in the inward parts; and that the
Lord will be the Teacher of his People, and that he will blot out their Sins,
and remember their Iniquities no more; this Law is Pure, Divine, Essential, and
to be owned and received where it is; and they who do not, are deniers of the
New Covenant, their Names are written in the Earth; it is Satan's slight to
bring Men to neglect Divine Grace, the Royal Law, where it is, and to seek it
where it is not to be found.

That Is it which, in the Closet of your Hearts, shows you Sin and Evil, checks,
and reproves, and disquiets you, when Evil is committed: And moves to
Righteousness; in the Obedience, a daily Mortification is known, a daily
blotting out of Iniquity is witnessed; your Name comes to be written in the
Book of Life; Fellowship with the Father, in the Son, is known.

The Renovation of Man is a gradual Work, the outward Jews divided the Night
into several Watches: They had their beginning of the Watches, Lam, 12.19.
Their middle Watch, Judge. 7. The Morning Watch, Exodus 14. In this, The
Egyptians were drowned: In this, Jesus walked on the Sea, Mat. 14. In these
Watches, the outward Jew saw the Curtain of the Night wear out, pass away, one
succeeded another.

By disobedience a Night of Blindness, Darkness, Ignorance and Infidelity, came
upon Man; herein he was overwhelmed, the Sun of Righteousness being manifest,
he Preached us a Watch of a Spiritual Nature and Tendency, saying, What I say
to one, I say to all, Watch, Mark 13.37.

You owning the Light of Life in you, the pure Principle of God, which shows
you Sin and Evil; if you obey it, you are come to the beginning, the day
dawning, and the Day Star arising in your Hearts, in this Morning-Watch; you
see the Egyptian's Flesh Crucified, with the Affections and Lusts thereof;
Christ walking on the Sea, Waves of Iniquity brought under his Power, he ruling
in your Hearts by Faith: The Apostle read this, who said, The Night is far
spent, the Day is at hand, let us cast off the works of Darkness, and let us
put on the Armor of Light, Romans 13.12. Now Kindreds, Tongues, People and
Nations, Professors or Profane, who deny the Light, and Subjection thereunto,
they are not come to the beginning of Watches, so are far from the Morning.

But you that own the Light of Life in you, and are livingly concerned, that
your Light may shine forth before Men; you that in Faith and Patience, bear
about in your Bodies the Dying of the Lord Jesus, that his Life may be manifest
in your Mortal Bodies: You that labor and wrestle for a part in the first
Resurrection, you have your Senses exercised to the discerning of Good and
Evil, you have the Senses of the New Man, created in Christ Jesus; you have an
Eye to see your Creator, and his name is in your Foreheads; you hear his Voice,
and deny the Voice of the Stranger; the sweet Savor of Christ, as precious
Spikenard, refreshes you; you daily taste that the Lord is Gracious, your hands
handle the Word of Life.

Children, young People and others, who feel a pure divine Principle in you,
moving Heaven-wards, be obedient to it in all things, so you grow from Grace to
Grace in the invisible Life; as you put off what it manifests to be evil, watch
in it, wait in it, to grow up in the living Truth, therein gird up the loins of
your Minds, 1 Pet. 1.13. Let not any inward impediments stop you in your
Heavenly Journey.

In Eastern Countries, they wear long and loose Garments, which-several tucked
and girded up, lest they should hinder them; as, Soldiers, Jewish Priests,
Travelers, Runners, Wrestlers, Table-Servers, to serve more readily.

Now the Apostle brings them to the Inward, to the Spiritual Girding up,
saying, Gird up the loins of your Minds, 1 Pet. 1.13. And it is of as absolute
necessity now, as then, to wait in the Light of Life; gird up the loins of your
Mind, set your Affections on Heavenly things, otherwise you cannot be good
Soldiers of Jesus Christ, to fight the Fight of Faith, neither can you be of
the Royal Priesthood, nor perform the Heavenly Journey, nor run the Race of the
Righteous, nor wrestle so as to obtain the Blessing, nor sit at Christ's Table,
partake of his Blessings, manifold Spiritual Graces; so keep out of the Earth,
growing up in Heavenly mindedness.

Christ said to the Pharisees, who lived in obstinate contradiction to him, and
his saving Doctrine, The Kingdom of God is within you, Luke 17.21. They
slighted the Kingdom of God where it was, and sought it where it was not to be
found, in empty Observations without, as deluded Formalists do now: He also
says, The Kingdom of God is like to a Grain of Mustard Seed, to Leaven, to a
Pearl. Now Children, young People, and who ever reads this, mind the Kingdom of
God within you, the Light of Life, which shows you Sin and Evil; and in
complying therewith, it leads you out of the Region of Death, and ^stablishes
you in the just Man's Path; ^o you read these Parables, and come to ^he end and
fulfilling thereof.

A Grain of Mustard Seed, though little, yet becomes a Tree, in the strange
pregnancy of the Hebrew Earth, Matthew 13. Such is its quality, as to quicken the
Appetire, warm the Stomach, purge the Head, causes Sneezing, cures the
Lethargy, a drowsy forgetful Distemper, etc. So the Kingdom of God within you,
the Light of Life, the Eye of the inward Man, the Talent committed for
improvement; tho little, yet in the improvement becomes great; the Tree of Life
is brought forth, the Healer of Nations, its Virtue, Quality, Influence and
Operation is precious, it begets a hunger and pure desire after heavenly Food,
it kindles a Spiritual warmness and fervency, purges out Corruption, the filth
of Sin, causes a spiritual struggling against what is Hurtful and Offensive,
and cures Man of his spiritual Lethargy, his drowsy forgetful State, wherein
he forgets the Lord, even to have the Lord always in his thoughts.

Leaven was in the three Measures of Meal, before they were leavened, yet
though little, it gradually diffuses its quality, spreads it self thorough the
same, and makes them of its own Nature; so Light shines in Darkness, the The
Kingdom of God is in Men, though Pharisaical Unregenerate; yet you that receive
it, comply with its heavenly Motions, and quench them not, cooperate with its
Inspiration, though little, as I may say, Yet the three Measures come to be
leavened, Body, Soul and Spirit, comes to be sanctified, and preserved
blameless, 1 These. 5.23. thus Compliers with divine Operations, become Bearers
of the Image of the Heavenly; renewed, transformed, changed, from Glory to
Glory: As he is, says John, so are we in this World, 1 John 4.17.

So you that profess Christ, the Pearl of great price, be the wise Merchant,
sell all and buy it, give up your Lusts, Fleshly Desires, Soul-murthering
Concupiscence, Pomp, Vainglory, Ostentation, sinful transitory Pleasures, to
the death of the Cross, that you may read this Parable, know this Pearl formed
in you.

There is (says Wolfgangus, Franzius, and other Naturalists) a Shellfish,
which through Natures instinct, desires warmness in the Spring, thirsts after
the Dew of Heaven, opens and receives it: Hereof is formed the visible Pearl,
said to be Alexipharmical, effectual against Poison, and the Shell which brings
forth this, is called The Mother of Pearl.

Wait in the Light of Life, follow Christ in the Regeneration, to be the wise
Merchant, so this you read; herein you thirst after spiritual Warmness, after
the Dew of Divine Grace; herein your Hearts open, incorruptible dew of Heaven
you receive, Christ the Pearl is formed in you, Gal. 4.9. Here you become the
Mother of Pearl, Whosoever does the will of my Father, says Christ, the same
is my Brother, and Sister, and Mother, Matthew, 12.50 this purges out the Poison
of Sin.

Parents, you who have known the healing Virtue of the Almighty, be vigilant,
circumspect and tender over your Children, by Example and Admonition, for their
establishment in Grace.

You that have known the healing virtue of Bethesda, in the Mystery, by
Interpretation, the House of God, so that of Impotent or Strengthless, you are
become Strong in the Lord; of Blind, you are become clear-sighted in the
Mysteries of the Kingdom; of Halting, Lame, you are restored to Soundness; so
that you can run, and not be weary, in the course of Righteousness; of
Withered, you are become Lively, Fresh, Tender, full of spiritual Moisture: Be
circumspect and tender over your Children, that they may be living Witnesses of
the same healing Virtue.

You that have passed thorough Jordan, in the Mystery, the River of Judgment,
by Interpretation, thorough Judgments have felt and received the Water of Lise,
whereby you are baptized into the one Body, cleansed from the Leprosy of Sin,
Iniquity and Transgression, are come to the good Land, Plenteous in Milk and
Honey, Food of Heaven, necessary to the heavenly Life, you that are come to the
City of Refuge.

You that are come to Christ Jesus, the Ark of Safety, more durable than
Gopher-wood; know your Rooms, your heavenly Places there, so that the deluge of
Iniquity shall not over whelm you.

You that are Green, Flourishing and Fruitful Branches of the True Vine, Christ
Jesus.

You that have known, and know, Christ knocking at the Door of your Hearts, by
Favors, Mercies, Judgments, Chastisements, Ministers, Motions of his good
Spirit, and entertain him, who comes not empty, but with plenty of Grace,
Goodness, and heavenly Treasures, which he communicates and diffuses, for the
enriching of his Garden, his little Flock.

You that are come to the Lord's Table, and are nourished with his Bread,
hidden Manna, Souls Food: O let your Care, and Souls desire be, that your
Children, as Olive-Plants, may sit at the same Table, partake of the same
Mercies, Blessings, Privileges, Favors, and Spiritual Advantages with you,
and be living Witnesses of those precious Experiences, which the good hand of
God has made you partakers of.

Through this gracious frame of Spirit, Abraham obtained a good Report, Shall
I, said the Lord, hide from Abraham, that thing which I do? etc. For I know
that he will command his Children, and his Household after him, and they shall
keep the way of the Lord, to do Justice and Judgment, Genesis 18. Now they that
are of that Faith which gives access unto God, Victory over the World, they are
of Abraham, walk in his Footsteps, and cannot but desire, that their Children,
and all, might grow up in Acquaintance with the living God, so that every
Christian Father, being truly so, he is in his Family an Overseer.

'Twas a Noble and Honorable Resolution in Joshua, who said, I and my Horse
will serve the Lord, Josh. 24.15. As if he had said, O ye Tribes of Israel, if
poisoned with Incredulity, and Ingratitude, you Judge the living God (who has
done Wonders for you, has given you a Land flowing with Milk and Honey,
Vineyards, Oliveyards, Springs, has given you Victory over your Enemies)
unworthy of your Service; take your course, yet this is my Resolution, I and my
House will serve the Lord.

The Holy Men of God, who in their respective Ages, and Generations, walked
with God, felt the sweetness of his comfortable Presence; not as Neutrals and
Temporizers, who change their Religion, as Times change; their living concern
was, that their Children might walk in the same steps. Yea, all the Scriptures
of Truth afford sufficient Testimonies hereof.

Train up a Child (says Solomon) in the way he should go: And when he is Old,
he will not depart from it, Prove. 22.6. In what way should he go? In the
narrow way that leads to Life, in the way of Holiness, in the fear of the Lord,
bearing the Cross of Christ, where the Wisdom from above is received, which
seasons and sweetens unto God, and Establishes in Righteousness, and puts off
the Deeds of Darkness, and honors Man with an Innocent, Blameless and
Self-denying Conversation; Come ye Children, says David, hearken unto me, I
will Teach you the Fear of the Lord, Psalm. 34.11. Who truly learns this Lesson,
'twill minister Comfort, when other Lessons invented by Man will signify
nothing, but be a Burden; Ye Fathers, etc. says Paul, bring up your Children
in the Nurture and Admonition of the Lord, Ephesians. 6.4. Such as are careless
upon this account, it is an evident token they are not truly seasoned unto God;
for they that are, they cannot but desire the Spiritual and Eternal well-being
of their Children.

Now you Parents, truly made alive by the Quickening Word, who Live, Move, and
have your Being in God, be concerned for your Children, that they may witness
the same Travel; when the Keepers of the House shall tremble, and the strong
Men shall bow themselves, and the Grinders cease, because they are few, and
those that look out of the Windows be darkened; in a word, when Old Age has
seized on you, so as you wait for, and expect the Dissolution of your Earthly
Tabernacles, 'twill minister much Comfort and Consolation to you, that you feel
your Children growing up in Innocence, Branches of the true Vine, Christ Jesus;
and in them, after your Bodies are commended to Earthen Sheets, you, as I may
say, Live. Ambrose, in his Funeral Oration upon Theodosius, a Christian
Emperor, said, Theodosius, a great Emperor, is gone from us; but he is not
wholly gone, for he has left us his Children, in whom he lives still: Or if,
according to the good Pleasure of the Almighty, you Survive your Child, or
Children, 'twill be great Comfort and Satisfaction to you, that such a Child,
or Children, in that exercise, in the least measure, feels the sustaining and
comforting Presence of the Lord; so that you have ground to believe, that
Child, or those Children, go hence in the favor of the Lord.

This was my Exercise of late; I had a Son, one only Son, whose name was Jonah,
by Interpretation, a Dove; who in Nature, I believe, much answered his Name;
who though Educated in a mixed School, where his Progress was above what could
reasonably be expected from his Years, was so acted and preserved, as that in
the days of his short Age, I never knew him at variance or strife with any, or
bring any complaint against any Scholar, or Servant I kept; I never, to my
knowledge, found a Lie in his Mouth, or sought to cloak any thing I disliked,
but would nakedly and simply declare Truth: I never heard as much as Mass or
Mary proceed out of his Mouth, or any Oath, too common in many Schools; having
learned his Yea and Nay; in a word, as he was comfortable to us in his Life, so
in his Death also.

He was wonderfully afflicted with the Smallpox; and when we judged he was
past the height thereof, he came to be sadly troubled with Phlegm, with a
Scowring, and great Thirst, which in a few days carried him away; the nearer he
drew to his end, the more he called for my company, and was not willing to want
me.

The Night before he died, I being beside him, John, the Son of Lancelot
Fallowfield, came in, and said, Jonah, How do thou? He answered, I am well
Spiritually, but indifferent in Body; presently after he said, Father, talk
with me; I said to him, Jonah, What shall we talk on? He said, I know not.

Then being afflicted for him, and silled with Love to him, I said, Jonah, thou
know I was never harsh, but always tender to thee; he said, It is so.

Then I said, Jonah, we will talk of another Kingdom: Our continuance here is
very little; think of that City, whose Builder and Maker is God. This World is
but at the best a Bitter-Sweet, but Heaven is nothing but Joy: Have God in thy
Thoughts.

Then he answered, Ay Father, and I hope I have little to answer for; and that
I have a good Conscience; I have abhorred Lying and Swearing, and what I saw to
be Evil; and I am willing to die if it be his pleasure; or to live, to praise
him.

His Sister Ruth weeping beside him, he said to her, Weep not, I hope we shall
meet in a better place.

Soon after, he uttered these words to the Lord, The time thou have appointed
for me on the Earth, give me Grace to praise thy Name. Presently after, as
answered from above, he said, O sweet God.

A little after, I coming to him, he said to me, Father, Pray for me.

His last words, a very little before his departure, were to me, and to his
Sister Ruth, So, so, I am coming, I am coming, I must yield, I must yield.

Though his Affliction was exceeding great, yet he never uttered one word
savouring of Impatiency and Vanity; but such was his Patience, and such things
so tenderly and savourily dropped from him, as wrought me into that Frame of
Spirit, as freely, though dearer to me than all visible and transitory things,
to commend him to the Lord; touched with much Confidence of his future
Happiness: And I wish I may never forget his finishing of his Course; neither
do I remember it, but I am bettered by the remembrance thereof.

I remember what David said to Solomon, in order to the Building the Material
Temple, Up, and be doing, and the Lord will be with thee, 1 Chronicles. 22.16. So
you that read this, Up, arise from Death to Life, be doing, work in the Life,
so the Lord will be with you, to the Building a Temple without Hands, knowing
your Bodies the Temple of the Holy Ghost, you feeding on Heavenly Food, cannot
but desire that others may partake with you. Abraham's Sons and Daughters in
the Faith, are not Nabal's Fools and Churles, but desire that others may feed
of their Morsels, partake of Spiritual Blessings with them; so I conclude with
Joachim Camerarius: Vos virtutis iter gnatis monstrate Parents
Ipsa Aquila ut pullos fida volare docet,
Ut canere alma ocept pullos Philomela tenellos,
Sic gegitor gnatos format and ipse pius.


Which thus I English: You Parents teach your Children Virtue's way,
As Eagles teach their Young to fly, not stray;
As Nightingales do teach their Young to sing,
So Parents Just wash theirs in Virtue's Spring.


After this I had written, looking among his Papers, I found several
Affectionate Epistles written in Verse to one John Hall, Schoolmaster in
Cleeve-Land, his Quondam School-fellow; a thing I never put him on, nor
encouraged him to; and Verses upon several Subjects, most of which his Sisters
knew the time and occasion of writing them; he wrote this following upon Man's
Mortality: Death puts an end to all that do remain,
Or which this mortal wretched World contain.
Croesus his Riches nothing can prevail
Against the Darts of Death, when they assail;
It Is to be moved by no means at all,
Nor any spares, but brings to all a fall;
The lofty Monarch it nothing does regard,
Nor from poor Irus poverty's debard;
It can be shunned by no Man's entreaty,
Of high and low, at length it makes a booty.
The strength of Milo nothing does prevail,
The Streams of Eloquence at length must fail.
What if a Prince heap Silver up and Gold?
Yet he must be interred within its Fold.
What if a Mortal very learned be?
Yet he of Death gets not the Victory.
What if a Poor Man with Entreaty strive?
Those his Entreaties keep not him alive.
He that of Death, to get the Victory,
Contends, he weaves the Web of Penelope;
Seeing it is so, be mindful of thy end,
Thy few Days here in Virtuous Living spend.


Upon another Subject, he wrote thus: Humility the Spring of Virtue is,
Humbling thy self, Virtue thou can not miss;
Delight in Virtue, Vice be sure to shun:
He Is happy that a Virtuous Course does run.


One Night this Winter, some Scholars, in my absence, propounded Questions one
to another; upon which he went to the Table, and wrote these following: A
Virgin rare, that is past compare,
Does in few places dwell;
But always she, a Friend will be
To those that love her well.


After a little season, he said, This Virgin is Wisdom, which comes from above,
which indeed too few entertain; but such as do, she is their Guide and Leader
to Life Eternal.

THE END.

