THE Counterfeits, A COMEDY, As it is Acted at the Duke's Theater.

Vbi voluptas quaeritur, ibi non minus laudis promeretur qui pessime dixit,
quam qui optime, eo quod non minus delectet -- Licensed, Aug. 29. 1678. R.
L'estrange.

LONDON, Printed for Jacob Tonson, at the Iudges-head in Chancery Lane. 1679.

PROLOGUE.
IT is the Fate of Strangers to the Town,
To have the Play and Prologue too their own:
Whilst Writers here for one another sweat,
Clubbing like Carr-men when a Brother's set.
Nay, dull insipid Farce you will commend
For sake of Prologue-writing gifted Friend;
Some gentle follower of the Wits, who thinks
He sucks in Poetry when-e're he drinks.
Since these have left no Formal So or Thus,
I Will bluntly tell you what you will have from us.
Know then our Poet ventures more by far
Then all the blustering Hero's of the War.
For he without a Second does engage
Throngs of a fulsome bawdy scribing Age;
And dares in the midst of cry'd-up Satyr vent
What you will acknowledge nicely innocent.
It Is bold and new, and amongst the r^ffling Toys,
Whose Wit is beastly Impudence and Noise,
He knows he is damned; but would be so on choice.
Ladies, for you he writ, much grieved to see
Your best of Pleasures, harmless Comedy,
Made Bawd to such mean durty Ribaldry
As scarce is known to the Offall of the Gallery.
Should he miscarry, it is in such a Cause
Will challenge Pardon, if not gain Applause.
Be kind, he is young, and on your hands may mend.
It Is something so to write as not to offend.
The Actors Names.
D. Gomez. Mr. Anthony Lee. Don Luis. Mr. Gilloe. Vitelli. Mr. Betterton.
Antonio. Mr. Harris. Carlos. Mr. Medburne. Peralta. Mr. Smith. Dormilon. Mr.
Persivall. Fabio. Mr. Underhill. Crispin. Mr. Williams. Tonto. Mr. Richards.
Boy. Young Mumford. Officers.
Women
Elvira. Mrs. Lee. Violante. Mrs. Price. Clara. Mrs. Barrer. Flora. Mrs. Gibbs.
THE Counterfeits, A COMEDY.
ACT I. SCENE 1. The High Street in Madrid.
Antonio, Carlos. Car. SHe is your Sister, Antonio.


Ant. That Is it that makes my Hell: were she as far from my Blood, as now my
Love, she might, if possible, out-sin her Sex, and never injure me. But to call
me Brother, and be pointed at for Whore, Carlos; were the Lives of all our
Family twisted up in hers, nay, should all Posterity perish with her, she dies.


Car. This Passion puts thee beyond all Counsel: prithee be thy self, and let
me hear the Circumstances of your Story. I am too much a Spaniard, not to
prompt you to Revenge; but would first know why, and how.


Ant. Believe me, thou art blessed, Carlos, who have none of this frail Tribe so
near thy Blood, to rack thy Thoughts. The very Being of the Sex is infectious,
and from the mom^nt of their Birth corrupts their Blood, and leaves them all a
Stain.


Car. This is Raving past hopes of Cure.


Ant. Would you have me tame, when all my Care and future^ Hopes are at once
blasted? Had I not Fondness for her beyond that of Mothers? F^ol that I was, to
trust my Happiness on the treacherous prop^ of a Woman's Faith!


Car. This may still be Jealousy, and founded on the hate of some ^ly Informer.


Ant. Would my Life could buy the least show for Doubt. No, see, see Carlos,
her own Hand witnesses against her self; the only thing wherein a Woman ought
to be believed.


Carlos reads the Letter. -- Vitelli, a Gentleman of Cordova, as he pretended,
with promise of Marriage^ had possession of my Bed^ and, as I am informed, is
fled toward Castile. My Retreat is to a Monastery, where, you shall know when
my Injuries are revenged --


Ant. Do thou not find her more impudent then practiced Bauds? Had he still
staid to feed her Lus^ful flame, I had been ignorant.

Yes, you shall be revenged on your Vitelli; and with the same Dagger, though
thou were professing at the Altar, I Would send thee to keep company with the
Devils like thy self.

Carlos, thou must not trust thy very Thoughts with this Secret. Is there not
something in my Looks may tell the world my Sister's Whore? Hah --


Car. This is Madness beyond Bedlam; be calm, and I Will further your Design. --
But --


Ant. Each Minute's now an Age; but once revenged, thou shall see me calm as
sleeping Children. I was not wont to be thus.


Car. Nor must you be, Antonio; this Passion is a certain Hinderance to your
purpose. How can I assist you, when you will not give your self time to tell
your Story?


Ant. True, Carlos, and thou have named the only thing could teach me Patience
to relate my Shame. Know then, that very night I had concluded the advantageous
Match for this false Woman, with Don Alonso Fonseca, the great Heir, returning
late home, brisk with wine, and overjoyed at the Success, I entered at the
Garden-door, which I found open, and all the House silent as Death. Fear of my
greatest Treasure winged me to her Chamber: where, to my perpetual Torment, I
found that Letter. Oh Carlos! can thou guess the Sighs of Merchants in a
Storm, or utmost Pangs of Parents over their dying Hopes? such was my Treasure,
such my Loss and Grief.


Car. The Surprise must needs be great, and the unlucky Circumstances add much
to the Affliction. But what Account could your Servants give?


Ant. All I could learn was, that she (who you know always governed) commanded
them to bed, and that her Maid should wait my coming home; by which means,
unknown to any, they escaped.


Car. Know you the place of her Retir^ment she speaks of?


Ant. No, I le^t her Shame to b^ her Punish^ent, till I could wreak my
Vengeance on Vitelli, who I judge would choose Madrid, (for of Cordova he is
not,) both for the Solemnity, and likeliest place to lie concealed.


Car. Do you know him?


Ant. No, Carlos, but such an Action must leave some mark upon the base
Offender; and something tells me, my heightened Rage will point me to the cursed
Ruiner of my Honor. -- Methinks I must look him dead.


Car. Our Friendship needs not be confirmed by Talking; Antonio knows how much
Carlos would do to serve him. Nor will I spend a Minute otherwise then in his
Search. Unload thy self, and let me bear half the weight. Thou have too much
Love, and too much sense of Honor.


Ant. Carlos, thou knew'st my Father well: methinks I see him just now
breathing out his last, and with his cold trembling hand delivering up Elvira
to my Care. Take her, said he, Antonio, the Treasure of my life, the Darling of
thy lost Mother: and as thou hopest to meet us both in Heaven, swear never to
marry till thou have settled her. I swore; and when I would have added more, he
only answered with a Smile, and seemed to die o'rejoy'd.

Blessed man! how unsuccessful was thy Care!
And 'twas to perjure me thou made me swear.
We Interest and Honor urge in vain,
Where Lust and Passion absolute do reign. Exeunt.

SCENE 2. A Chamber in the Inn.
Elvira, Clara, in men's Apparel: Elvira like a Knight of Malta. Elv. ARe we
alone, Clara? each step I take I feel a Dagger at my heart. Wretched Woman, how
am I fallen! Oh the blessed time, when innocently we spent our days in pitying
the rest of our frail Sex! Am^ I not a Monster branded for my Infamy? Slave
that I was to perjured false Vitelli!


Clar. For Heaven's sake, Madam, don't weary me with Complaints. I swear the
long-ear'd Devil I rid has laid me up this month. I fansied my self ^lying,
when I whipped and spu^r'd. They may laugh at Scholars, Tailours and Seamen; but
if a Chambermaid in Breeches don't rid^ with the wor^^ of 'em, I Will sell my
Maidenhead for four Grapes, and they are cheap in this Country.


^lv. Thou art still all Mirth: but sooner shall the Sun rest, then I live and
not seek the false Vitelli. Base, cruel man, to leave his poor Elvira so! Oh! I
could curse him, would my Heart give leave; but that belies my Tongue.


Clar. Well, Madam, you know Clara is no Flincher; but I Would sooner undertake to
know a Be amongst a Swarm, then find out a Man in this Crowd whose Name you're
as uncertain of, as you are certain of his Dishonesty. This Will-of-the-wisp of
Love wants Wit as well as Eyes. Aside.


Elv. I Have often heard him say, (and sure all he said could not be false,) that
his Attendance upon the Counc^l of State would be necessary toward the
recovery of an Inheritance; so that I conclude him here: and were he amongst
millions, I have too much reason not to know him.


Clar. The truth is, you have been pretty intimately acquainted. Aside. Not to
fright you, Madam, but prepare you for the worst; (though the truth is, we
Women seldom fail at a pinch) what if your Brother should come to the
Celebration of the Royal Marriage, and find us here? how would you avoid a
certain Ruin?


Elv. It will be impossible for him to make me more wretched. But 'midst this
Concourse, thus disguised, it will not be easy for to meet, much less to know
us. Let what will come, I am too miserable to fear a Danger, and only wander
to find variety of Torments.


Clar. Nay, good Madam, no more Whining. 'Slid, did I knight you for this? or
will a few driveling Tears find your Lover, and escape your Brother's Fury?
Think how ill S^iveling becomes a pair of Breeches. Could I ever mistrust that
You, that had the courage to leave your House and Country to turn
Knight-^rrant, nay more, plainly tell your Brother by your Letter, you had
yielded up your Fort to a strange Cavalier, should come to talk of Danger and
Wretched; things fit for Boys thoughts and Women's fears, not for Knights of
Malta?


Elv. Thy Innocence maintains thy Mirth: but what can wronged Elvira do,
weighed down by a vast load of Shame, that sinks my very Soul?


Clar. There Is your little imp^^tinent Nicety, to call that Shame, Women spend
their lives to purchase. Why, there is not one in hundreds that you meet, that
seem devout and melancholic, but are contriving to throw away that Toy you wot
of: and it is the first Lesson their Mothers teach them, to lose it handsomely.


Elv. But that I know this designed to divert my Cares, thou were past hope of
Pardon.


Clar. Heaven knows how dear I pay for all this Mirth. Aside. Pardon, Madam,
(Sir, I should have said) I expect none, whilst I am in the right.

'Faith, methinks this Cross becomes you. Was It gained by some strange
Achievement against the Musselmen? or is it for fear the Women should run mad
of such Sweetness, that you put this Cross over your Plague-door? Truth is,
the^e may be danger of Swelling for those come near it.


Elv. I shall lose all Patience, and wish you miserable as my self, if you
persist in this Idleness.


Clar. That Is pleasant^ you would persuade me you're Woman too^^ ^ome, Sir, it is
not that Cross shall bear you harmless. I know a Vow may be broke to save a
Maid's longing. Oh my heart! whither do I ramble? Aside.


Elv. All thy Counterfeit cannot ^aise me to a Smile. Alas^ it is already
broke. But that fond Fool dares trust a man, though heightn'd with such Vows as
would make the most perjured tremble, is deservedly lost. Credulous, rash,
doting, sottish Woman! did thou not know him Man? how could thou think him
then to be believed?


Clar. Base that he was, to affront a person of your Honor, one that wears a
Sword, and knows what is what. Did he refuse me, to meet me in the said Field
provided at all points, I Would post him Coward, and hire Slaves to kick him.


Elv. Ah Clara! had thou but seen his pale and ghastly Looks, but heard his
Sighs and Vows. Then would he kneel, and weep, and press my Hand; then ^ise,
and swear again with such dreadful Imprecations, nothing that was Woman could
resist. I Am sure I did not; false to my self and too-too-loving Brother. Would
I had never b^^n Woman: nor would I yet be Man, for I should be still far worse,
and still more false. Yet would I were any thing but what I am.


Clar. I Am like to have a blessed time on it; and all this for the loss of a
Ma^denhead. 'Faith it scares me so, if there be ever a Receipt in Spain to keep
one, 't shall be the first thing I Will purchase: but I Am afraid it is very dear,
and hard to come by.

Enter Dormilon. Oh here is my Landlord: never man came in better time.


Dor. You re welcome, Gentlemen; I hope your Lodgings please you.


Elv. Very well, Landlord, we are quickly pleased, so they be private. But I
fear you will be crowded against this great Solemnity.


Dor. Nothing can disturb you, the House is large, and this the most ret^r'd
part.


Elv. What other Strangers have you?


Dor. Yet only one Gentleman and your selves.


Elv. Do you know from whence he came?


Dor. No, I assure you.


Clar. Prithee, Landlord, see our Dinner be made ready, and our Wine good and
w^ll cooled: as hot as the weather is, I must have one H^al^h to the Royal Pair.


Enter Boy. Boy. Sir, a Gentleman just now alighted calls for you.


Dor. I Am coming. Your Dinner shall be ready with all expedition.


Exeunt Dormilon and Boy. Elv. In the mean time we'll take a turn in the Yard,
and see this Newcomer.


Clar. I Am glad you have so much Woman in your Passion, as to be able to
dissemble before Strangers.

Come, Sir, be brisk and gay, strut like a young Knight new dubbed. So, that
becomes you, and is tempting.

Though the Men false and cruel you may find,
You yet may conquer all the Womankind. Exeunt.

SCENE 3. The Inn-Yard.
Vitelli, Dormilon. Dor. WIll you please to see your Chamber?


Vit. Not yet; I Will stay here a while for my Servants that are coming.


Dor. Are they much behind?


Vit. I guess, not; for coming early this morning from Iyescas, my man left my
Portmantue behind him, and brought in stead of it a Stranger's that supt with
me. But before we had got a league from thence, we found the Error, and I sent
them both back to change it. I hope they may speed, for the Gentleman was not
stirring when we set out.


Dor. Is he coming this way, Sir?


Vit. No, he came from hence.

[ Within Tonto.] Hostler, take in our Mules, and get 'em some fresh Straw.


Dor. It Is like these are those you expect.


Enter Tonto and Crispin with a Portmantue. Crisp. Never tell me, he must ride
upon some Devil bridled and saddled.


Ton. Would he would take him into his possession then; he has brought us into
a fine condition.


Crisp. 'St, there is my Master. Well, Tonto, that hanging Look of ^hine always
foretold ill.


Vit. Have you brought back the right?


Ton. No, Sir, one much lighter in it^ stead.


Vit. Curse on you both, Slaves! I am utterly ruined, without hopes lost^ Why
did you not pursue him? Dogs!


Crisp. Whither, Sir?


Vit. To Valentia, Rascals.


Ton. Why, Sir, he was no more going to Valentia then you back to the Indies;
but, as a Shepherd told us, took the upper way hither. Some Robber, Sir, on a
Gennet got by the Wind: had he strid any thing else, we must have reached the
Town before him.


Vit. Careless Slaves! your Lives shall be some little Recompense.


Enter Elvira, Clara. Elv. Hold, Sir, this were a Punishment too great, and
most unworthy of your Sword.


Crisp. 'Twas not our fault: your coming out so early occasioned the Mistake.


Vit. Dog! but mutter toward an Excuse, and I Will silence thee for ever.


Elv. Pray, Sir, give me leave to advise: it is not your Passion will recover
what is lost; rather think which way you may retrieve it.


Dor. If he be once housed in Town, 'twill be as difficult to find him, as an
Honest woman in an Embassadour's Liberties. Your only way will be, to send to
watch his coming: it is likely he is yet upon the Road.


Vit. Thanks, Gentlemen -- Tonto and you go several ways; and if you hope for
Pardon, bring some tidings of him.


Crisp. Here, Landlord, take care of this. Exeunt Ton. Crisp.


Dor. Your Loss must certainly be great, that makes you thus concerned.


Vit. There was in it to the value of twelve thousand Ducats in Gold and Jewels.


Clar. A Loss sufficient to undo a Banquer.


Dor. This is a course Welcome to Madrid.


Elv. We cannot blame your Passion, caused by such a Misfortune.


Vit. The Wealth is much below my care, could I but recover some Papers, which
I would redeem with twice the sum.


Elv. They needs must be of great import, to merit such a Ransom, and of too
near concern to admit a Stranger's inquiry.


Vit. No, Sir, that Cross you wear declares your obligation of succouring the
Distressed: and if you will so much relieve my Sorrow, as to hear my Story, I
would beg your Company in my Chamber.


Elv. I willingly shall wait you, Sir, and beg you will not scruple to admit my
Friend.


Vit. No, Sir; two such Counselors may in some measure ease my Grief, and
prove necessary to one so much a Stranger in this Court and Kingdom. --
Landlord, show a Room.


Enter Boy. Boy. [ To Dor.] Don Luis desires to speak with you.


Dor. Take this, and show the best Chamber. Gives him the Portmantue. I Will wait
you immediately, Gentlemen.


Exeunt all but Dormilon. To him enter Don Luis. Luis. How fares my honest
Friend Senior Dormilon?


Dor. Ever ready to serve the noble Don Luis.


Luis. Have you any news yet of my Nephew Peralta?


Dor. None, Sir: for though I cannot pretend to know him by his Face; I should
soon guess him by his Discourse, were he amongst my Strangers.


Luis. He has orders to trust himself to your care. I my self should ^carce be
able to challenge him by his Looks, it being thirteen years since he le^t
Madrid for Flanders.


Dor. His killing the Ensign was unlucky; especially in this nick of time,
whilst it deprives him of so fair an Estate as his Brother has left him.


Luis. I Will venture mine to procure his Pardon, and make a Composition with the
Widow; which I do not much doubt of, if he escapes those that watch his coming
into the Town.


Dor. Her knowing of his coming is strange.


Luis. It Is certain, and that she has so far prevailed with the Corrigidor,
that he has commanded all his Alguazills to apprehend him, if possible, at his
arrival. Which is the reason I wrote him word to Valentia, where he has lain
concealed, to come to your House first; mine being continually beset ever since
he left Flanders.


Dor. As soon as he comes, you shall have notice; and here he shall be safe as
in S. Isidor's Church.


Luis. Senior, I thank you. I am now going to meet the Widow at the Palace
about the Reconcilement, judging much easier to buy her off before he is in
Custody.


Dor. Fortune attend you, Sir. Money is a prevailing Advocate.


Luis. When that once fails, we must submit to Fate.


SCENE 4. Vitelli's Chamber.
Vitelli, Elvira, Clara; Boy with the Portmantue. Vit. BOy, leave us. Exit Boy.

Sir, I am d^scended of the ancient Family of the Vitelli from whence I took my
name. My Father, of no mean Fortune, has long since contracted a strict
Friendship with one Don Gomez Aranda; and here in Madrid lived with greatest
expressions of mutual Love. At last forced to part, Don Gomez set up his
Residence in this Court; and my Father past the Seas to Mexico, where he has
ever since been: and I in that great City of the New World first saw Light.


Elv. Was you never, Sir, in Spain till now?


Vit. Never: And the Occasion of my coming is to consummate a Match (formerly
agreed on by our Fathers, that this way they might seal and propagate their
Friendship) between the only Daughter of Don Gomez and my self. The Painter
makes me believe her fair and charming, and I arrived with all the Expectation
of a longing Bridegroom; but after a long Voyage find my self wrecked on Shore.


Elv. Your Loss can be no hindrance to this Affair.


Vit. Yes, much; my Letters are all gone I brought her Father from my own; and
I have no reason he should believe me on my ba^e Word, without farther Evidence
to confirm him.


Clar. Does he expect you, Sir?


Vit. That he has done these six months.


Elv. He cannot doubt the truth of your Relation; or at least will so long
suspend, till you can send to Cadiz, where I suppose you landed, and give him
farther Testimony of being what you say you are.


Vit. Your Counsel cannot be disputed; I Will immediately go seek him out.


Clar. I should think it well advised to open this Portmantue; it is possible it
may discover who has put the Change upon you.


Vit. If any thing can be thought true a Villain says, he is called Vitelli.
'Twas ^ur being of the same Name that began this un^ortunate Acquaintance. But
this I hope will evidence the contrary. 'Twould add to my Affliction, to have
a Rascal justly claim the Name of my Family.


Elv. Would to Heaven I Would been a Stranger to that fatal Name, that like a
Plague infects the air it is mentioned in.


Vitelli breaks open the Portmantue, and Clara helping him empty it, among
other things finds some Letters, and Elvira' s Picture. Clar. Heavens! what is
here? a Broker's Shop?


Vit. There can be nothing worth the search amongst such Rags.


Clar. See, Sir, here are Papers, and a Lady's Picture.


Vit. A Moor to my Goddess; throw the Trif^e by.


While he looks on the Papers, Clara knows the Picture to b^ her Lady's, and
shows it her. Clar. Do you know this, Madam?


Elv. Oh my Heart! the very same I gave the false Vitelli.


Clar. Never whine, but remember you a^e a Woman, and to dissemble, or all is
ruined. We must be nigh a Discovery. Aside from Vitelli.


Elv. The Trial is too great.


Vit. You seem concerned; does that Picture cause it?


Clar. I was saying, Sir, there is something in this Look that seems strangely
unfortunate.


Elv. And I, that the Eyes had such a yielding Easiness, as might be betrayed
by false Vows: and that here me thought the Painter had expressed such a
languishing Cast as spoke the height of Love.


Vit. 'Faith, Sir, I am not curious; but may pronounce the Lady miserable
enough has fallen into the hands of this Ruiner of my Fortunes.


Elv. Did the Beauty you adore much exceed this?


Vit. As this an Indian; her very Figure was enough to make all men love, and
its Loss to make all men die.


Elv. This is not so despicable a Face, that a Lover ought to be ashamed of
Constancy. Sure I am, as bad a one has often been sighed for.


Vit. By some fond Fools that never knew a Beauty; but this is all Cloud to my
Brightness.


Clar. This will come to a Quarrel if not prevented. The disparaging a Woman's
Beauty turns the tamest of the Sex to a Scold.

Aside. Pray, Sir, what Papers are those? this seems much from your Design.


Vit. True, but entered on the discourse of one I love, I lose my self and
Business. They are Letters. This to the most excellent Duke of Ossuna; this to
the Regent of the Council of Aragon; this to the Marquis of Velada.


Clar. By these he should be a man of Fortune and Repute, and not a Robber.


Elv. The best way is to open one, it is probable you will find his Name and
Quality.


Vitelli reads. To the Marquis of Velada. My Lord,
The Bearer of this is Don Manuel Peralta, Captain-Lieutenant of my Regiment,
who for killing an Ensign on the Guard (though highly provoked) is compelled to
leave this Place, to prevent the Governor's Severity; and flies to your
Lordship's Protection, by whose favor I doubt not he will obtain a Pardon,
which I earnes^ly desire; as that of your Lordship for this Trouble given you
by,

My Lord, Your Lordship's most humble Servant and Kinsman,the Earl of
Pontilliana.


Elv. This has made all plain: the only means is, to have present recourse to
the Marquis, declare your Loss, and beg his Assistance in the Recovery.


Clar. 'Twould require Haste, lest he prevent you with some new Cheat.


Vit. I fly, and something like Hope gives me a good Omen.


Elv. We shall wait your Return with impatience.

Sure I am, my Happiness depends upon your Success. Exit Vitelli.


Clar. What do you think of Vitelli now, Madam? Peralta I should say. You see
he steals other things besides Maidenheads.


Elv. But nothing of such Value, or so much past recovery.


Clar. 'Faith, Madam, were that all, 'twer^ nothing. For my part, I think the
Principal well sunk, so one can secure the Use: troth is, to lose that too, is
something no Woman can well bear.


Elv. Nothing but thy known Fidelity could secure thee from my Anger.


Clar. What? I warrant you would be grave, and thinking again; Oh the fine
Gentleman upon his Gennet! how gracefully he bowed! the tempting Serenades,
passionate Letters, Complements beyond resistance; and when possessed, all over
Pleasure! and then he kissed, and vowed, and left me full of Hopes, that equaled
all but present Joys.


Elv. But disappointed, makes all Pl^gues and Death a Blessing. And it is from
these Thoughts the wretched Elvira falls to be a Lump of black Despair.


Clar. By my faith, this is pleasant: neither well f^ll nor fasting. All the
way we came; Oh Clara, were it possible, nay did I b^t think it so, e're to see
him, thou should find me cheerful as in my Innocence: Now it is more then
probable we shall see him; The Trial is too great, and I Am a Lump of black
Despair. Believe me, Madam, it is unnatural for a Woman to fear in extremi^y.

Though Men with Counsel and with grave Debate,
May better War, and judge Intrigues of State;
In Exigences We the Rule have got.
No Woman e're could want Excuse or Plot. Exeunt.

The End of the First ACT.
ACT II. SCENE 1. The Inn-Yard.
Fabio solus with a Portmantue. Fab. THis Master of mine is as unaccountable as
a breaking Merchant. To steal from Valentia through ways scarce known to a
Foot-pad; alight at the Town's end just a noon, when the Heat makes the Streets
empt^est, to avoid being snapt by the Officers; and yet at the sight of the
first Vail, forget all Dangers, and think himself as secure as a Confessor in
a Church.


Enter Elvira, Clara. Clar. Now I am confirmed it is he. For Heaven's sake,
Madam, to your Chamber; it is downright Madne^s to make a double Venture.


Exit Elvira. Fab. Certainly when the Devil wou^d show his Masterpiece, he
puts on a Petticoat; and when he is not at l^^su^e, a Woman may save him the
labor, and supply his place. [ Sees Clara.] Here Is a fit Vermin to be trapt, a
smug Youth, that the Trail of a Wench may lead as far as a Fox a pack of Hounds.

Clara sings. [To her.] It Is a merry world with you, Senior.


Clar. Troth, Sir, he that can be sad with good Clothes on his back, Money in
his purse, and his Mistress Smiles, may he be condemned to the Galleys till he
laugh.


Fab. To curse him home, may he meet with such a Master as I have; and if he
never laugh till he give him cause, I Am sure he must die a Slave.


Clar. Is yours such a Turk?


Fab. Oh! the Great Turk, Sir; and has by much a larger Seraglio: for all the
use he makes of the whole World is to keep his Wenches ^n't.


Clar. Pray how do you call your Hercules?


Fab. Since you will have it so, Hercules Vitelli.


Clar. With what confidence the Rogue lies! Aside.

By his Name he should be of a great Family.


Fab. I am not Herald enough to know the greatness of his Ancestors, but to my
knowledge his Issue is large; about as numerous as the I^ws, and of my
conscience as much dispersed.


Clar. I have an Acquaintance here, a Knight of Malta, that would make a rare
Companion for him.


Fab. A Knight of Malta? if he loves his Life, let him avoid him, for he has
vowed Destruction to all Pretenders to Chastity. You Will scarce believe it, but
the sight of a Nun through a Grate, though he thinks her chaste upon force, puts
him into an Agony.


Clar. You are much deceived, Sir, a Knight's Vow is but what forbids the chaste
use of Marriage, and leaves him at liberty to all the world besides.


Fab. Nay, if he has a new way of interpreting his Oath, it may be ^hey may
fadge.


Clar. Methinks --


Fab. No more, I beseech you, Sir, I expect him each minute; and ^f I have not
provided a Room before his coming, shall pay for this Prating.


Clar. I lodge in this House, and when you are at leisure shall be glad of more
of your company.


Fab. Adieu, Senior.


Clar. Poor Elvira, a Town-bull would have proved as constant a Lover. Aside.


Exit Clara. Fabio knocks, enter Boy. Fab. A Chamber, Boy.


Boy. Will you please to walk this way? I Will carry your Portmantue, Sir.


Fab. No, Sirrah, I had a wise Father, that taught me to trust my self: by the
Weight there may be the Indies in it.


SCENE 2. The High Street.
Peralta, Violante, Flora veiled. Per. I Do confess, Madam, I have been Cock of
the brisk Fools, that set up for Wits with railing against Love. But I now
recant; and my Pain has been so exquisite, since I had the honor to see you,
that it may equal years of Sighs and Verses.


Viol. I should not sooner know a practiced Beggar by his Cant, then I do you
for a formal repeating Woer; one that takes notes from Plays, practices with
his Glass, and concludes the next Woman he meets will be fond of studied
Nonsense.


Per. It Is barbarous to murder him with Wit, who has already yielded to your
Beauty; the Power of which you know too great to suffer a Dissembler.


Viol. Sure you think me Daughter to the Knight of the Sun; or my Beauty could
never warm through this Cloud.


Per. It does not extinguish the Fire, Madam, to hide the Flame that kindled
it, that still burns and consumes.


Viol. That Is in the road again: could we but persuade you Gallants to forswear
Fire, Sun, Flame and Fate, you would court with as much Silence as the Turk's
Attendants wait.


Per. You shall bind me to any thing, so you will reward my Diligence, and
understand by Signs. --

He courts her with affected Gestures and Signs. Let these then speak for me.
--


Viol. A pretty Puppet-show, which when I am best at leisure, it may be I may
throw away some few Rials to see again. Now I Am in haste. Violante runs out.


Peralta holds Flora. Per. Nay, 'saith, though your light F^igat has gained
the Port, I Will make bold to seize the Tender, till I know of what Country you
are.


Flo. You Will find a smart Resistance. She struggles again.


Per. Now you're mine; but some kind Answers to half a dozen Questions frees
you. [Struggles still.] Come, it is but what thourt bound to by thy Place. --
Your Mistresse's Name, and where she lives: Quickly, quickly; thou wilt be turned
away for letting her lose a Gallant.


Flo. Sure you think your self in the Suburbs, or Ambassadors Liberties, to
take this freedom. I Would have you to know my Place is what is honest and
honorable.


Per. And shall be so still for me, dear little Fury! But can thou do any
thing more honorable then to promote an honest Love? Is it not pity a
Gentleman should be ruined for want of two Words? a Charity your Sex is seldom
sparing in.


Flo. I so perfectly hate you, I would lose that pleasure of Talking, did I not
know, (if you are truly in Love, which Heaven grant!) what I have to say will
rid the world of you. Learn and despair then. This Lady is just now to be
married. Who she is, you shall never be told, that you may die for an unknown
Mistress, and make the better subject for a Ballad.


Per. Truth is, this Anger does become thee; but for variety, and to show the
rest of your good Qualities, put on a relenting Look, and discover. -- Thou art
out of thy Calling to pretend to Secrecy. -- By this thou shall be kind. --
[Gives her gold.] Though you design to make me Miserable, I know you will not
make me a Forsworn wretch.


Flo. You show so noble a Constancy, that if I were to die, I cannot forbear
now. Oh, my Lady were a happy woman, could she hope for such a Lover. I vow,
Sir, I did but try you; and I Will assure you, in my eye you are the properest,
most accomplished Gentleman.


Per. Now thou flatterest; I can never reward such Kindness -- Prithee on.


Flo. In short, Sir, for I shall be mist,

Her Name is Donna Violante, sole Daughter to Don Gomez Aranda, who lives in
this House. What will make your Pretenses fruitless is, her Quality, and that
she is already contracted to a Gentleman she never saw, and whom she every
moment expects from India.


Per. It Is ill, but not desperate, if you promise your Assistance.


Flo. As far as I can serve you without endangering her Honor, and my own
Honesty, which I Will assure you, Sir, I stand upon, you have made me yours. Exit
Flora.


Per. This is one of the true Breed: some few that prove otherwise are of
another Species. You may as well call a Wolf a Lamb, as her Woman that waits,
and can keep a Secret, or resist a Bribe. -- Well, the Devil does owe me a
Spite, and has taken an opportunity of paying it. Certain it is, this Woman
must be had; but how, I fear's a Qu^stion will ne'^ be answered. Exit.


SCENE 3. Peralta's Chamber in the Inn.
Fabio solus. Fab. I Have a true Mule's life, Burden and Provender. He was
certainly bewitched that first debased himself to Serve: but the downright Devil
was in him that chose a Wencher for his Master. The wandering Jew is a staid
Housekeeper to him: it is odds but the next Petticoat he meets carries him for
Turky^ and there he may take a fresh one for the Indies. I have often wondered
at two things; one, what this Master of mine is made of: to my knowledge he has
given away and lost more Hearts then our Kings have sent to people the New
World; and yet of my conscience he has such a stock left, that were they well
marshalled, they might fight the French King this next Campaign. The Other is,
what could possess me to be Shadow to this termagant Turk, whose only Religion
is to conquer Women. Why should not Don F^bi^ sound as well as Don Peralta? I Am
sure Historians impose upon us, or else the Family of the Fabii have been
famous. And shall be again, good Don Fabio. -- Don Fabio. I have the advantage
in the sound of my Roman Forefathers. Beso 'oste las manos. -- muy criado de
su merced. Excellent! now will I walk in as much state as a Grandee, and with
the Wisdom of a Privy-councellour: and when Affairs of State prove too heavy
for me, my Boy and Musician shall divert me with a Song. But in the mean time,
till my Retinue is settled, I will vouchsafe to be Boy and Musician to my self.

SINGS.
Hang slavish Fear:
The names of Man and Master is a Chea^^
It Is Dog-like to be rated here and there.
I will resolve, and shall be Great.
I set my self at Liberty:
We Are all by nature Free.
It Is only Law that makes us Slaves;
Law first obeyed by Fools, and made by Knaves.
He that will be a Don,
Follow me, he is one.
He that will not his Freedom restore,
Was got by a Jew, and nursed by a Moor.
Humh! what a nick of time does this Master of mine choose! Now do I see the Don
running from before my Name, and leave poor Fabio to shift for himself; and
feel all my Privy-councellourship trill down to my very Heels. But Fate still
takes pleasure to ba^^le vast Designs. Thus when the Wheel of Fortune turns,
Oh Spain, thy great Escurial burns.



Enter Peralta. Per. What Company's in the House?


Fab. None of note that I hear of, but a Knight of Malta.


Per. Where Is my Landlord, Senior Dormilon?


Fab. Abroad, otherwise I had acquainted him with your being here.


Per. It Is lucky that you mist him, for I must yet be concealed; therefore on
your life dissemble my true Name.


Fab. So, the Devil and my Master have been juggling on some new Design. Aside.


Per. The great Hazard that I run is, lest my Portmantue should betray me.
Where is that was left in its stead? That may discover who made the Exchange,
and contribute to its recovery.


Fab. Here, Sir, may the Worth answer its Weight, and I cannot be less then Don
for the lucky Mistake. Fabio opens the Portmantue.


Per. Open and search it. What Is there?


Fab. Why, Gold and Jewels, Sir, without count. The Gentleman has paid dear
for an old Suit and dern'd Linen, and some few Bills that should have been
discharged. Here are Letters too --


Per. How Is this? To Don Gomez de Aranda? the Father of my adored Violante; and
this no doubt the Indian they expect.


Fab. A Lady's Picture, Sir.


Per. The same: By Heaven her Picture too! Hah! Why am not I then the true
Vitelli? for that is the Name. I well remember began our Acquaintance; and that
he told me the hopes of a fair Wife brought him to Spain. He that loves cannot
want Impudence, and these Evidences must stand the nicest Search. It Is
resolved. -- Put all up again, and make it fast.


Fab. I think you resolve well^ this Country's hot^ and Company troublesome.
Besides, you're used to Flanders. The Mules shall be ready, Sir; Gold's no
Burden.


Per. What Is that you mutter, Rascal?


Fab. A Journey, Sir, would be necessary, and healthfull^ this Crowd may breed
the Plague. To be plain, let me beg of you to fly with this Treasure. In a
short time you ^ay purchase your Pardon in spite of this dissembling Widow,
and never trouble your Fri^nds to petition for it; and in the mean while, by the
strength of this live as Great as the Governor.


Per. No, Villain, I have Business of gr^ater consequence in hand; and when
that is done, will return it to the Owner. Mean-spirited Rascal, to guess I
would enrich my self by such base means!


Fab. Will you but wink till I run, Sir? I have ventured Hanging in your
Service e're this for six ^^ivers a day, with the Appurtenances of Poor-Jack
and Biscuit.


Per. No more, Slave; make it up, I say.


Fab. And the Picture too? --


Per. That I shall have occasion for.


Fab. Here Is one Doblon, Sir, I am strang^ly smitten with. May not I have that
for Contemplation?


Per. Not a Rial, Dog; take it up and follow me. And know from this time
forward I am Vitelli, lately arrived from Mexico, and that you are now come
with me from Cadiz. And upon these hints improve thy faculty of Lying. Exit.


Fab. Yes, I am an Indian, and am forced to value Gold at as little rate as
those Fools. A pox of Honor and Hon^sty, it is as impertinent to a man and
troublesome as a Maidenhead at fifteen, and as necessary to be parted with at
the first good occasion. Exit with the Po^tmantue.


SCENE 4. A Parlour in Gomez house.
Violante, Flora. Flo. HOw could I do less, when I had taken the retaining
Fee? Besides, Madam, he spoke with such a prevailing Earnestness, that I, that
never had an aversion to a proper Gentleman, could not help it.


Viol. A proper Gentleman! one of the forward pretending Fops, that have half a
dozen fine things to say, and when they are done, prove as dull as an outworn
Poet.


Flo. This Railing with us Women is as certain a sign of Love, as Huffing with
the Men, of Cowardice. -- But it shall go hard or I Will find it. [Aside.] -- In
earnest, Madam, the Gallant dresses well. Did you mind his Fre^dom and court^y
Mean?


Viol. Dresses well? so does a Tailour's Prentice: and what you call Freedom is
only Impudence picked up by keeping Ill company; such sort of Wit as a man of
sense takes more care to avoid, then such Triflers do to con it.


Flo. This confirms me. --

Aside. You Will allow his Person manly and agreeable?


Viol. I confess I have seen some few in a Crowd less desirable: but put him
altogether, he is one of the last men I should choose.


Flo. You may be persuaded to see him again for all this Aversion.


Viol. Yes, if you can assure me I may do him a Mischief by ir. -- I wish I
had never seen him -- Aside.


Flo. Since you are so nice, I hope your Mexi^an will prove one made of Wax,
without a Fault or Blemish.


Viol. You're always disturbing me with things I hate. I tell you, I will have
nothing to do with Mankind either of the Old or New world. But of all things
never name this Stranger more.


Flo. I hope I may rally a little on him, for that I designed at first, only I
feared it might offend you. I Will try you this way. -- Aside.

By my troth, Madam, I wished you with me, for certainly never any thing was so
worth laughing at. Besides what he said to you, he has not Language enough to
ask what is a clock, or commend a S^it of Linen. It Is as raw a Fool as ever
came out of a Nursery.


Viol. Thou art always in extremes; I could not perceive so much Simpleness: I
should have guessed he had been a little at least conversant with the World.


Flo. Right. -- No, believe me, Madam, he sn^akt like a Boy before ^
Mother-in-law; and I am apt ^o think we are the first Women he ever adventur^d
to speak to, and he threw me this Purse merely for fear I should have jear^d
him. I was about teaching him to hold up his Head, and make a Leg^ but the^ he
ran fort.


Viol. This is impossible; all he said to me was consistent and courtly, his
Address gentile, and Shape becoming. But you a^e still finding fault with what
you have not wit to understand.


Flo. Am I so, Madam? and I am now your Aversion, for abusing this Stranger.
Could you in agi^e your Cunning laid so deep, that one of your own Sex could
not see through it? All the harm I wish is your Ind^an may prove half so
taking. But I have done, and here come^ one will plague you enough on that
^ubj^ct. Exit Flora.


Enter old Gomez. Gom. I warrant you Girls have been tal^ing of a Husband, and
I cannot blame you. I made my Wife confess she thought of nothing e^^e. -- That
Look will not do, Vil. -- I know it longs, and so forth. Come, come, your Mother
tells me you're a Woman, and so forth. -- That Is enough, Vil, --


Viol. We had Discourse that was much more se^ious, Sir.


Gom. Nay, by my troth, Vil. thou art fit to be married now thou can
dissemble so well. -- But do thou know, Girl, he is coming? -- hah -- does it
not move, affect, and so forth? -- A word to the wise, Vil. --


Viol. Sir, I know nothing but my Duty.


Gom. That Is right, take the India's then. Oh, if he be like his Father -- Vil.
-- I Will say no more. But for a sparkling Eye and Wit, we were the same, and
carried it; knew all the Poets and Players, and writ Prologues; nay, I had once
the credit to be named for a Lampoon. Time is, time was, Vil.

Here it is, Vil. -- [Shews a Letter.] Each minute I expect him, and shall take
it ill not to see a young Vitelli in a twelvemonth.


Viol. I hope, Sir, it will be no breach of Duty to ask some time to consider.


Gom. Consider? -- why, thy Mother and I were smitten, bargained, and so forth,
before you could pluck up a Veil.


Viol. I must not be accounted disobedient; but yet --


Gom. Nay, that Toy of Modesty becomes thee, etc. but I Am your Father, Vil. and
though merry, know what is what, Vil. -- I give you leave to make up your mouth,
etc. -- But when he comes, expect a Courtesy, and, I thank you, Sir.


One knocks. Enter Flora. Flo. What a cursed thing is this not to have my Q --
Aside. Sir, here is a Gentleman would speak with you.


Gom. Has he no name, and so forth?


Flo. I never saw him, Sir.


Gom. Retire, Daughter. -- If it be the man you wot of, go in and twitter, you
shall be called.


Flo. Whatever this Stranger means, I wish he had all my Bribe to be fairly rid
of him. Exeunt Viol. Flo.


Enter Peralta, Fabio with the Portmantue. Fab. Your right leg foremost, Sir.


Per. Sir, when I tell you I am Don Pedro Vitelli, and come from India, I hope
I may beg a Welcome; this I know, my Father g^^e me some assurance of it.


Gom. Don Pedro Vitelli must challenge Welcome as long as I am Don Gomez, etc.
And how does the good Gonzalo, my old Friend, your Father? Thou make me weep
for joy. Just such was he, when we began our first Acquaintance. -- I should
have known thee in the Street, thou art so like, the very shape and face, etc.


Per. I was always thought like him, Sir.


Fab. Yes, as a Bear's an Elephant. The Old man's as fond of the Cheat as my
Master of the Wench. Aside.


Per. This Letter I was commanded to deliver from my Father, with Thanks for
the great Honor you designed his Son.


Gom. Honest man! -- Yes, yes, this is the old Hand and Style to a very tittle.
He reads.

You are doubly welcome --. Let me embrace you: my Joys are so complete, I
scarcely can contain my self. Embraces him.


Fab. Not so hard; he is weak in the back since the last Cure.


Gom. He tells me he had once thought to come with these Gallions; but then I
had been too happy.


Per. Yes, Sir, he did, but some unexpected Business has deferred his purpose
till their next return. In the mean time, Sir, he has sent me as a Pledge and
Token of his ancient Friendship.


Gom. And trust me, a welcome one. Nay, my Daughter shall tell you so too --
Flora. -- By Saint Isidor I was so overjoyed to see you, I had forgot to give
her notice of your Arrival.

Enter Flora. Tell Vil. the happy Minute's coming, bid her put on her best
Looks, and so forth.


Per. Sir, I beg you would let this be disposed of in your Closet, about twelve
thousand Ducats in Gold and Jewels, what I could bring conveniently from Cadiz;
the rest will be sent.


Gom. I Will be your faithful Steward. Flora, show the way where it may be laid,
and hasten your Mistress.


Flo. [ To Fabio.] Come, Sir, if you dare follow.


Fab. I never refused a Challenge from a Woman.


Exeunt Servants. Gom. Fie, fie, this Girl makes me out of patience. --

Enter Violante. Oh here she comes. -- Come hith^^, Vil. this is he; Look and
like, Vil. it is thy Father's Choice, and a wise one, though I say it. -- I know
you young people have some fine things to say to one another, etc. therefore
I Will leave you, and talk a while with your Man about the Affairs of the New
World and the like. Fabio returns.


Per. He will be able to say something, though you can expect no perfect
account from one of his Breeding: -- at leisu^e I shall satisfy you, Sir.
Gomez and Fabio at a distance.

Now, Madam, I hope you will allow me more Freedom then when you cruelly
shunned my Addresses; and one that leaves the world he was born in, merely to
serve you, may justly expect some kind of Welcome.


Viol. This Encounter is more strange then the former: and I can scarce
imagine, the man that took so long a Journey for a particular Mistress, would
make so zealous a Court to the first he meets. The Lady in the Veil has the
promise of that Heart to my knowledge.


Per. And to mine too, Madam, or else this deceives me -- Shows the Picture.
Could you imagine one that had spent a year in Contemplation should not know
you at the first glaunce?


Viol. And yet you bribed my Maid to learn my Name.


Per. True, only to take an opportunity of giving something to one I knew I
must be beholden to.


Viol. Your Trial of me was not too kind, Sir.


Per. I confess, Madam, there is something extravagant in what is past: but I
hope Curiosity and your Goodness will excuse it -- Nor was it fit I owned my
self, till I could produce such Letters and Treasure as might secure me from
being thought an Impostour for the future. --


Fab. Yes, Sir, my old Master studies night and day: he is just now writing a
Book, and intends to dedicate it to you.


Gom. Then he has outstript me; I could never arrive farther then a Madrigal,
etc. -- And how is Mexico to Madrid?


Fab. Catch me at Descriptions, and I Will hang for it. Aside.

What Is more wonderful then any thing in the Old or New World, he is a great
Poet, and yet vastly rich.


Gom. What kind of Court does the Viceroy keep? is the Palace magnificent?


Fab. 'Faith, Sir, I think I may venture to tell you, it is whispered my old
Master knows no end of his Wealth.


Gom. Are the Streets large and fair? what garb do the Indians keep? etc.


Fab. My young Master, Sir, may be worth -- let me see -- a million of Ducats;
and when his Father dies --


Gom. This Fellow's mind is all on Money: a shallow Rascal. -- But these
Answers are to my purpose: for if he be Rich, etc. let the Woman run the rest
of the Hazard, and the New World be as 'twill.

Aside.
Fab. I am sure I have kept to windward of the Law, let my Master look to the
upshot.


Gom. This I like, this looks as Man and Wife; and may ye be as happy, etc. as
Gonz^lo and I can wish you. To Peralta.


Per. Sir, there can be nothing less then Happiness accompany the Poss^ssour of
so much Goodness. And if she think me worthy of her, I must go into a Third
World, to learn something new to wish to make me more blessed.


Gom. See you there, Vil. that is a Flight: many one of them, and such like,
have I had in my Youth. Old Gonz^lo still! -- Well, Son, your Father and I were
Wags, etc. in our young days.


Per. Each thing you say reminds me so much of him, that were not I thus doubly
blessed, I should think of Mexico.


Gom. Well, Vil. for a Man and Wealth thou art fitted; and she that looks for
more must die, etc. This World I Am sure affords nothing -- Come, Son, we'll go
in, you're weary, and I long to discourse you: for this Man of yours is none
of the great Intelligencers. Exeunt.


Fabio, Flora, stay. Fab. It Is ten to one but we shall play the old Romantic
trick, and while the Knight and Lady are at work, the Squire and Damsel imitate.


Flo. I shall like you well enough, if you have another Romantic trick too, of
drowning or hanging your self, if you see me displeased. For the truth is, you
have a Face I would fain be rid of. Exit.


Fab. Not so willingly as I would free my self of this House. -- What a-Devil
can come of a thing built upon a Quicksand? This they may call Love and
Adventures: but he that can foresee a good End of them need never despair at
the Gallows. But so it is -- When for a Wench our Voyage is designed,
We boldly sail against both Tide and Wind. Exit.



The End of the Second ACT.
ACT III.
SCENE continues. Peralta, Fabio in disorder. Fab. ON my life, Sir, it is he;
the very Vitelli whose Portmantue we have -- I see him with Don Gomez.


Per. Cursed Fortune! in the very minute? two Hours had possessed me of her.


Fab. What do you think of a fair and honorable Retreat? -- This is the way
out. --


Per. Dog! I Will think of nothing but Victory; and will be, and am Vitelli, Son
to Gonzalo. Think me any thing else, and I ll cut thy throat.


Fab. You may be what you please: but I hope you will allow me still to be Fabio,
and to think my self in great Danger. I know it nothing concerns you.


Per. Coward! no Flinching; but follow my Example, and lie like thy self, we
will still carry it. In the mean while let us retire, and contrive to meet the
worst.


Fab. There needs no great Contrivance, it will meet us. -- For my part, I Will
lurk hereabouts for Intelligence. Exeunt.


Enter Gomez, Vitelli. Gom. But, prithee Friend, have I so silly a Face, and so
forth, that you could pick no body else out so fit to put a Cheat on? Good
faith you're deceived in old Gomez, he understands Trap, etc.


Vit. I cannot yet understand why you mistrust me; I Am sure I expected ^uch
another Welcome from one I looked upon as Father.


Gom. I Will say that for thee, you are a pleasant Fellow, and have as lucky a
Count^nance to conceal a Cheat as one would wish to purchase. But this is a
little too gross -- and how came we to be so nigh of kin?


V^^. The Respect I bear you keeps me from taking any thing ill; nor can you by
the worst of words force me into a Passion with the Father of Vi^lante, whom
Gon^alo made m^ believe I should at my arrival from the Indies call Wi^e.


Gom. And so you shall, if you can lay any just Claim. But you ^ay with the
same Considence pret^nd to the Kingdom o^ Spain, etc. and with much the same
Success, believe me -- Violante? -- ha, ha, ha. --


Vit. That you are Don Gomez you your self assure me, nor am I less Don
Vitelli. That Violante is your Daughter you own, and Gonz^lo your Friend, for
whose Son you have designed her. Why then does all I say seem Riddle? Is it the
custom of Spain to mock those they style Friends? if so, the Indians are much
less barbarou^.


Gom. The Devil take me, and so forth, if this Fellow have not a pretty
wheadling confident way with him. I Will confound him a little. --

Aside. Well, Sir, since you will be Vitelli, I know you have often heard your
Father speak of me, and how we spent our time when young.


Vit. No day, Sir, but your Friendship is his subject; and this he bids me
imitate. Tells how you vied in Arms and Arts; often wishes (though blessed with
Wealth) he had never left Spain, but still enjoyed your Company.


Gom. V^ry fine. -- I Am much beholden to him, etc. Did he never enter into
particulars of our A^fairs?


Vit. Yes, I Have heard him say, when Fellow-students, you had one Purse; that
the same Books, the same Company pleased you: and that your Fancies kept so
even pace, that you often joined upon the same Subject without the difference
of the Style perceived.


Gom. I wish this Fellow's Shoes were off, that I might see whether he has
cloven Feet or no. How could he possibly know this else? Of what Age, what
Stature and Complexion is he?


Vit. In all agreeable to you, and what he says so like your way of Speech,
that sure I must call you Father. One think remarkable and private too is a
S^ar on his right Side, by a Wound received in a Duel wherein he was your
Second: and you, Sir, as he told me, was then run through the Thigh, being on
the same day you should have married.


Gom. This Truth startles me. Aside.

Do you know to whom?


Vit. Yes, Sir, Donna Beatriz Cruz^d^, whom you first saw at Saint Isidor's
Church, and that a month after your Marriage was consummate.


Gom. It Is a clear case, I am not Gome^, nor this my House, nor he within
Vitelli; no, no, all is a downright Mistake. -- Friend, do thou know whether
there be two Gonz^lo's, and two Vitelli's, that love and know by Sympathy? or
art not thou som^thing of a Spirit, and so forth? ha?


Vit. The Gentleman's distracted. Aside:

Sir, this I know, that I am the man I pretend to b^, and grieve to ^ind you
thus.


Gom. Where you pick up these Truths, is b^yond my power to guess^ but. I can
demonstrate you f^lse and coun^^^^^it. For if true, where the Jewels, and so
forth, you wrote you would bring with you? show my Daughter's Picture I sent,
your Father's Letters, and all that.


Vit. That Is my Misfortune; this very morning I was robbed of all: but if you
will have patience to wait --


Gom. This I knew would tickle you. Let old Gomez alone to find out a Cheat,
and so forth. Stole from you? yes by the right Owner, who brought them to me.


Vit. To convince you, I know to a Rial what is in the Portmantue, each
particular Jewel and Paper.


Gom. This is some Confidence of another World, and almost distracts me. --
Within, call Don Vitelli.


Vit. Use not my Name to such a Villain; for so I dare pronounce and justify
him.


Enter Peralta, Fabio. Fab. Never fear, I have overheard all, and can help you
in a stress. -- To Peralta entering.

Don Fernando, Sir. Aloud.


Per. This is argument of great Kindness, to make such haste from Cadiz to be
at the Wedding of your Friend. Welcome, dear Fernando; for so I dare bid you to
the House of him has given me leave to call him Father.


Gom. New Riddles still!


Vit. Steeled Impudence! -- how can thou with confidence pronounce so damned
a Forgery?


Fab. We got well hither with our Treasure, to which I believe your good Wishes
contributed.


Vit. Slave, the Place secures thee. --


Gom. You're acquainted then, and so forth. --


Per. The only Friend I had in Mexico; we were Neighbors, School-fellows, and
in the same Ship arrived at Spain: nor can any one give you a more perfect
account of my Father or his Affairs; for I know nothing I have concealed from
him.


Gom. He has hardly used you like a Friend, without Cheat, Villain, etc. are
signs of Love amongst you. -- Nay, with Confidence he endeavored to face me
out he was the true Vitelli.


Vit. And with the same honest Assurance stand here to make it good.


Per. This is like thee, always driving on some piece of Extravagance. -- But
trust me, Fernando, this is so unseasonable, as to break our Friendship, if
persisted in.


Vit. I scorn thee, am, and always was a Stranger to thy Friendship; and here
pronounce th^e Cheat, Thief, Murderer. Beware, Old man, you warm a Snake will
leave a fatal Sting.


Per. Could I believe you were in earnest, I should be ang^y, Sir; but for this
once forgive.


Vit. I demand nothing but Justice, and by Heaven will have it.


Gom. What can he design by all this?


Fab. Why, Sir, you have had experience enough to know the World's wicked, and
Love powerful.


Gom. Yes it is, always was, and always will be, etc.


Fab. I have had long a Jealousy that he was not right. For when my Master
produced his Jewels, and showed his Treasure, he would so eye and sigh; and at
the Picture cast such wanton amorous Glances, that I fear that is the true
ground of his haste from Cadiz, thinking to prevent us. Then I minded he caught
at each Story that might seem very particular; as one my Master was the other
day telling of a D^el, and a Wound you received in the Thigh. Nay, he was so
inquisitive, that he would count the Money and Jewels.


Gom. I have no Doubt left; there it is I warrant. This Devil of Love invents
more Tricks then a Jew ready to starve.


Fab. Then, Sir, he has a plaguey wheadling Tongue, and such a set Look, that he
was made to deceive.


Gom. So he has, and by my troth had deceived me, if he had come first. But
bless my Stars, etc. that shall suddenly be prevented.


Per. If nothing will do, from henceforth you are my Enemy, and as such I shall
next meet you.


Vit. Dare but quit this House, and no other Sanctuary shall protect thee.


Gom. Desperate Villain, be gone, etc. or else an Alguazil shall provide you a
Lodging.


Vit. Was ever Age thus blinded? Stay but my returns from Cadiz before you
conclude.


Gom. No, this very night shall consummate the Match with the Noble Vitelli.


Vit. No, Don Gomez, you throw her away upon a base Deluder; who is indeed a
Soldier of Flanders, fled hither to gain a Pardon for Murder.


Gom. This sounds like Forgery. You have no choice, but quit the House, or to
Prison.


Per. See how wild his Story is, and how quick Passion makes his Invention. Be
gone, or this shall force it.


Vit. I Will go, because my being confined will render me absolutely incapable of
Remedy. -- But I shall expect you have so much Honor left as to meet me in the
Prado.


Per. I will, and with my Sword chastise this Ins^l^nce. An hour hence let it
be.


Vit. Agreed. But I shall scarce fight such a R^gue, till I have secured my
Mistress. Exit.


Gom. Well, Son, this Adventure is so extraordinary, that were your Father and
I as when time was, the Players should not have wanted a Comedy, nor an
Audience, etc. though I say it. -- What, melancholic? --


Per. You must give me leave to reflect a little on the Loss of one I thought
my Friend, nay doted on, and would have yielded all things up to satisfy his
very Curiosity, but Violante. --


Gom. Come, an ^ll thing's better lost then found: the World grows worse and
worse, etc.

You have reason to b^ satisfied, you have so timely found his Falsehood.


Fab. Let me beg you would urge that; for no man loves with such Truth, nor no
man grieves with such Sincerity.


Gom. For shame, Son, I shall think you repent your Voyage. Let Us in, and my
Daughter will make amends with true Affection.


Per. The name of such a Remedy makes me forget my Disease; and she is now my
only Friend, as well as Mistress.


Exeunt. Manet Fabio. Fab. Bating some odd hundreds, and so forth.

Enter Flora going over as in haste. [To her.] You can never be in such haste
as to refuse the profers of a sincere Lover.


Flo. The very name of Love from one I hate adds wings to me.


She strives to go. Fab. Not so fierce, good Damsel; though I have no
Portmantue of Jewels, I have some Treasure about me I brought from the Indies,
you will like much better.


Flo. I warrant some petty Shells and Baubles, things I scorn as much as I do
you. My Mistress were miserably provided, were the Master and Valet alike.


Fab. Come, ^ine Sentences are not for people of our quality. To have and to
hold's the word; and the licking of the Posset-bason when they have done will
save charges, and yet look Princely.


Flo. No, Valet, next to you I hate nothing more then what has been palled.


Fab. Except a Petticoat, and that of sixteen removes; yet must be thought to
look new, like the Chambermaid after being paum'd by the whole Family.


Flo. Still fresher then a Suit that after three generations in the Indies must
be new turned for the Wedding.


Fab. Come, 'faith never deny't, if thou have pawned thy Utensils for Lees of
wine and Chippings, or art contracted for Gizzards, and the fifth quarter of a
Hen called the Guts, I desist: otherwise, which is the top of your Hopes, I
offer you Flesh unblown, Fabio the sound and trus^y.


Flo. To convince you of my Aversion, I had rather live a wrinkled Maid of
sixty, and then be burnt for a Witch, then have any thing to do with thee.


Fab. This looks so like the Courtship of our Form, that it is no less then an
evident token of Love -- which thus I seal. --


Offers to kiss her. Flo. And thus I deliver. --


Gives him a box on the ear, and runs out. SCENE 2. The Inn.
Elvira, Clara, Vitelli. Elv. to Clara. I Am now resolved; therefore without
disputing about what I commanded you. -- Exit Clara.


Vit. I have told you all in short; and he that is more miserable must meet
something yet unknown. To be outfac'd, rejected for a Villain, tied up by
Nicety and Respect from Revenge, without a prospect of retrieving my Right, is
what the most patient must want temper to bear.


Elv. Wherein I can serve you, you may with assurance command, and I am apt at
present not to think my self altogether incapable.


Vit. I da^e promise my self any thing from so noble a Succor. -- Bless me
therefore with something like Hope.


Elv. The means how, I beg you will not inquire into; but I have some reason to
be confident of a Design will defer the Marriage till you can hear from Cadiz:
whither I advise you would immediately send post.


Vit. This would secure my Happiness, and a little time gained certainly
discover the Cheat.


Elv. To prevent all Danger, if he comes out according to appointment to fight
you, prepare Alguazills to seize him for the Robbery. It cannot be
dishonorable thus to treat so base a man, and vindicate your self. Before he
can procure his Liberty, your Post will be return^d, and all be cleared. This
requires dispatch, therefore haste; within half an hour I Will meet you.


Vit. I have just reason to suspect him too false to keep his word; my greate^^
confid^nce is your Conduct. Exit.


Elv. What this will come to, is as impossible to guess, as that it could ever
come to this. But I Will in, and hasten Clara. -- Once on the Ground, I can no
lower fall:
And venture nothing, though I venture all. Exit.



SCENE 3. The High Street.
Carlos, Antonio. Car. SInce you have reason to despair of finding one in a
Crowd, whose person you have no knowledge of, make this Tumult a Diversion; at
least defer these melancholic Thoughts. Thou art now something more
extravagant then Love could make thee. Nay, would I curse a man, I Would wish him
as nice a sense of Honor as Antonio.


Ant. I know my self to blame: but all I see of this great Preparation has so
much unaccountable, taudry Gallantry in it, is so far from what I think, that
to me Sickness would prove greater Pleasure then that the rest of men seem fond
of. Carlos, I am not what I was; all my Ambition, Dotage of youth and Beauty,
make but one entire thought of Hatred and Revenge: and could I satisfy this
Passion, I should die with more delight then assured Mar^yrs suffer.


Car. In earnest, Antonio --


Enter Clara half veiled, in Women's clothes, who seeing them pulls it over her
Fac^. Ant. Ha! that Face I have seen. --


Cla. Now cannot I move a step; my masculine Spirit with my Habit leaves me. I
have nothing but my Woman's Cunning to trust to.


Aside. Ant. It Is she, Carlos; the very Clara, Pimp and Confident to Elvira. --
Baud! -- Antonio goes to Clara.


Clar. You cannot think your self in Spain, or that you talk to one of Quality,
to treat me thus. Nor could any thing but your M^stake of the person persuade
me to forgive this Insolence.


Ant. Impudent Strumpet! would I had never had cause to know thee. Unveil, or
I Will tear it and thee to pieces.


Clar. Stranger, you will repent this horrid Rudeness. Know, people of my Rank
cannot want Revengers of their Honor.


Car. What do you mean, Antonio? it is dangerous to force a Veil in Court: you
may mistake.


Ant. I tell thee she is my Sister's foul Associate, and Seller of her Honor.
-- Discover, or by my Father's soul --


Antonio lays hold of his Dagger. Clar. Hold, Sir; it is I. --


Ant. Base Devil! thou should not live, were it not to tell me where Elvira
is.


Car. Be moderate, Antonio, your Threats will fright her from the Truth.


Clar. That, Sir, Heaven be my witness, I am as ignorant of as those that never
saw light.


Ant. Confess, or each minute shall invent new Punishment to rack it from thee.
Thus with little Tortures I Will begin -- and let out some of thy loose Blood.


Car. This is a Transport unworthy of thee.


Ant. Should I trust a Rock I have already split on? Confess, or by --


Clar. Be not so cruel, and I Will tell you all.


Car. Give her time to think, Antonio; this Encounter may prove most lucky.


Clar. But this time, dear Invention! and let me die a Fool. --


Aside. Ant. About it then, and I will be patient.


Clar. That fatal night we left your House, I waited on her to the Convent of
Molbietro, where your Aunt is Abbess; who entertained her with no small Grief,
when informed of the Accident that drove her to that Sanctuary; whence she
dispatched me to this place in search of he^ f^^se Vitelli.


Ant. Of Hell, then which this Lie is falser.


Car. To me this Story seems probable.


Clar. So Heaven and you afford me Mercy as it is true.


Ant. When came you hither?


Clar. Not three hours since I alighted in this Inn, where I found --


Ant. Whom?


Clar. Vitelli.


Ant. Vitelli here? Oh let me fly to my Revenge! On, good Clara. I can almost
forgive thee.


Clar. As I came out, he left his Chamber in search of a Servant he is sending
out of Town, and cannot be far off.


Ant. If this prove true --


Clar. Why should you suspect me false, when it is my Lady's intorest you should
find him? But to leave no Scruple, I Will conduct you to his Chamber, and produce
unquestionable Testimonies. This you must remember, it is no longer Vitelli you
pursue.


Ant. More tricks yet? who then?


Clar. What I shall discover will convince you. It Is Peralta, a Captain fled
from Flanders for a Murder, and took Valenti^ in his way. All this I learnt
from Papers of his left in his Chamber, which I thought I was bound to search,
when I knew they belonged to him; that I might give a good account to her that
sent me.


Car. This news is beyond our expectation or hope.


Ant. It Is what I Will improve to his certain Ruin.


Car. First by fair means (which you have often promised me, if he was a
Gentleman) you must retrieve her Credit, by offering him to marry her. They
whisper.


Clar. Indian, you must pardon me, since to secure my Mistress, her Lover and
my self, I expose you to the first shock of Antonio's Rage: and good faith,
Charity begins at home.


Ant. Come along, and direct us to this Chamber of Discovery.


Clar. This way, Sir. -- Can I but get clear of you, and give my Lady timely
notice, -- discover what you can.

Aside.
Car. I must preserve Peralta, if possible, for the fair Elvira's Safety: For
that depends on his, and if He dies,
She too must fall nice Honor's Sacrifice. Exeunt.



The End of the Third ACT.
ACT IV. SCENE 1. The Inn-Yard.
Vitelli, Crispin booted. Crisp. THe Horses are ready, Sir.


Vit. Take this then, [Gives him a Letter,] and show your Kindness to your
Master by your quick Return. -- One thing more.


While Vitelli whispers to Crispin, Enter Antonio, Carlos, Clara. Exit Crispin^
Ant. This looks like truth.


Clar. For more certainty see where he stands. Points to Vitelli.


Ant. Is that my Enemy?


Clar. That Is Vitelli, or Peralta, which you please, or both. -- I hope this
Shift may free me, and I Will still about the dispatch of my Message. Aside.


Antonio goes to Vitelli. Ant. Your Name's Peralta, Sir?


Vit. I neither own the Name nor Temper of that cursed Villain. What I really am
I dare speak, which is, Don Vitelli.


Ant. You Are a Villain under both Names, and as such I Will use you.


Vit. I can scarce think my self born of a Spaniard, to meet such Rudeness as
my nature perfectly abhors.


Ant. Damn your Sentences -- and know your Forgeries and you are discovered.


Vit. To none that dare name my Actions so, and know me.


Ant. Yes, Villain, Elvira's Wrongs and mine shall proclaim them And if thou
have so much Valor to defend thy self against the Brother, as Cunning to
betray a wretched Woman, draw, and know it is Antonio heightened with a just
Revenge that bids thee.


Vit. This world is all Madness and Mistake. -- Could I but think you were not
deceived in the Person, and had not too good reason to know the true Peralta
deserves all this, I should not thus tamely dispute the Wrong.


Ant. What, Coward too? and think to conquer me as my lost Sister by Words? --
Draw, or by Heaven I Will do the act of Justice, and rid the world of a perjured
Slave. --


Vit. Provoked thus, I must be more, or much less then Man to suffer. They draw.


Carlos with his Sword interposes to part them. Clar. What will this come to?
-- Those Officers at the gate shall determine the Quarrel. Clara runs out.


Ant. Friendship's a Name, Carlos, when it stands in competition with Honor
and Revenge. -- What, must Antonio live and see (good Heavens!) the Ravisher of
his Sister safe? -- By all --


Car. What I urge is your Promise, and her Honor. And if he will make up this
Breach by Marriage, you create a new Enemy to refuse so just Terms.


Vit. Little Hecks! do you think with a seeming Quarrel to force me to the
keeping of a Whore, and take off your stale Goods? No, show your selves for
Cheats, and both assault me; whilst the innocent Vitelli dares thus undauntedly
oppose you.


Enter Clara with Officers. She points to Vitelli. Clar. That Is he, -- seize
him. And at your own peril be his escape. -- I have too much kindness for
Vitelli, to let him perish for Peralta: a little Confinement will break no
squares. The Officers seize Vitelli.


1. Offic. Seized by us the Devil cannot escape.


Vit. More Accomplices? Thieves! Murth^rers! lose me, or --


2. Offic. No, Sir, Murderer falls upon your own head, and it is the Ensign's
blood you shed in Flanders that calls for Vengeance.


Ant. Let him at liberty, and I Will revenge it bravely, and save the dull
Ceremonies of Law.


1. Offic. You owe us Thanks that you are not confined; this Quarrel deserves
it.


2. Offic. If you consult your own Safeties, away.


Car. Come, Antonio, you must know the Town too well, not to understand a
Retreat necessary in this case. Antonio, Carlos retire.


Vit. What can you mean, Gentlemen? I never saw Flanders nor Spain till this
last Flota from the Indies^


1. Offic. This will not do, Sir, we are told of Writings in your Chamber will
convince you, whither we intend to carry you, and thence to Prison.


Vit. Cursed Peralta! now thou have secured thy Designs. Gentlemen, I hope I may
beg leave to speak with a Knight of Malta in the house before my Confinement.


1. Offic. No, Sir, we must and will prevent a Rescue: only take your Papers
with us, and then secure you.


Dormilon enters. Dor. What means this Disturbance in my House?


2. Offic. Only the Seizure of one Peralta for a Murder.


Dor. Peralta? this will be sad news to Don Luis. -- Aside. I Will be his Bail.


1. Offi^. The Crime admits of none; along, Sir.


Exeunt Officers with Vitelli. Dor. The Widow has been too cunning for us; and
that Don Luis must speedily understand. Exit.


SCENE 2. Long Street.
Antonio, Carlos. Ant. CLara escaped, and Peralta secured from my Sword?
something must and shall be done. Nor is it fit the Law punish a single
Murder, whilst mine and my Sister's Honors remain unrevenged. I Will arm him my
self, and in his own Chamber fairly kill him.


Car. Yes, and suffer in his stead, while milder means may dompass your
Designs. And if Antonio dare trust me --


Ant. Trust thee, Carlos? yes, with Life, with Honor, All, I freely do. I find
I am not fit to guide my self. Henceforth thy settled Judgment gives me Laws;
but still remember my Sister's Wrongs, and where Peralta is. -- Oh that Name!


Car. Pray, no more, your hasty Rage has already proved Clara's loss, whose
recovery will be necessary to our Affairs. She cannot yet be far; therefore let
us round this Street: half an hour hence I Will visit the Prisoner, and doubt not
to get more by Fair words and Promises, then your Sword could extort.


Ant. Should he accept your Offer, the cause of his Imprisonment brings his
certain Ruin with my Infamy.


Clar. There Is no danger on that side: a sum of Money prevents the Prosecution,
and gains his Liberty. For it is as great a Miracle for a Rich man to be hanged,
as a Poor man to escape. Exeunt.


SCENE 3. Chamber in the Inn.
Elvira in Women's clothes, Clara very rich. Elv. I Am much too miserable e're
to hope to make thee amends.


Clar. You make your self so with fine Speeches. Let me learn you what Dangers
Resolution and Cunning may avoid. Think now of nothing but a ^it Story to
wheedle old Gomez, who will instantly be here.


Elv. Had I but thy Courage, I could not fail^ but as I am, something thrills
through my Blood, and makes me tremble. How can I think to impose upon him with
a false Story, who so steadily repulsed Vitelli's true one?


Clar. And so easily believed Peralta's, that was as false as yours. I tell
you, Madam, he has a believing Countena^ce^ and looks like one of our politic
News-mongers, who are sure to entertain a Story for being strange, and of
themselves find out Reasons to make it probable, then conclude it true.


Elv. How did he receive my Message?


Clar. Like a Gentleman; and when he read a Lady's Honor was concerned, told
me, he would defer the greatest Business of his Life, which was the Marriage of
his Daughter, till he had waited on you.


Elv. This was courtly.


Clar. There Is no doubt of him; had I that Face and Clothes, I Would undertake to
cully half the Dons in Madrid with a Li^ ten times more unlikely. -- There it is:
That Cast, and a little Assurance, is infallible.


Elv. This Mirth would conquer any body's Misery but mine.


Clar. One thing I foresee, that the Seizing of Vitelli must something alter
your Design. -- St. One knocks.

This must be the Don. Clara goes ^o the door.


Enter Don Gomez. Gom. Is this your Lady?


Clar. Yes, Sir. -- Don Gomez Madam.


Elv. Your Looks, and the Character the world gives you, speak you so much a
Gentleman, that I shall need the less Excuse for this Rudeness.


Gom. Ha! what a Prize was this for one of twenty, and so forth? -- Aside.
Madam, the world at the worst must say, Don Gomez always loved his Friend, and
took pleasure in serving Strangers. And he that deserv^s this Character must be
proud of the Commands of so fair a Lady. -- By my faith she is, she makes my
old teeth chatter, and so forth. --


Aside. Elv. Sir, what I have to say is strange and startling, yet so fit for
me to speak, and you to hear, that this Trouble is but necessary.


Gom. The very style I love too -- Pray, on, Madam.


Clar. The Old man listens as earnestly as a Bird in a Cage to a whistling
Cobbler.


Elv. I can scarce believe one of your Experience and Wisdom would throw away
an only Daughter, fair and virtuous, on a Perjured man.


Gom. Heaven forbid! I Would rather bury her in a Nunnery, and so forth: and let
the Family of the Gomez^s perish.


Elv. Yet such is the false Vitelli, whom you design your Son-in-law.


Gom. You startle me indeed; Vitelli my Son-in-law, false and perjured?


Elv. Yes, Sir, if breach of strictest Oaths and solemnst Contract deserve such
terms. Too sure I found him so.


Gom. Then I am lost. Pray, good Madam, methinks I should, yet Heaven knows how
unwillingly I believe you.


Elv. In short, for it is grievous to tell a Truth to the Disadvantage of one I
can never hate; you see here the miserable Mariana, whom treacherous Tears, and
such Oaths as the most j^alous could not but trust, betrayed to Love. It Is too
plain, all men must be false, when after such Vows Vitelli can prove so to me
-- wretched Woman!


Gom. Trust me, Madam, I can weep, and so forth, at your Misfortunes -- But
hope you mistake the Person that is their cause. For this Vitelli I have
entertained, has not been long enough in Spain to make a Contract, scarce see a
Lady.


Elv. No, Sir, 'twas Mexico first gave me life (nor can my Fortune or Relation
shame Vitelli,) and there my Heart was stole with fair bewitching words, and
such tempting shows of real Love as might dispell a settled Hatred. -- Yet can
you think it, Sir, this kind protesting man, this Vitelli could prove false?
false, oh my Heart! to Mariana that so loved him?


Clar. Brave Woman, she almost makes me believe her.


Gom. You will not think it rude, if I take leave in a Business of such weight,
to clear some Doubts. etc. before I give full credit.


^lv. So far from that, you will oblige me by your Questions, the nicest of
which I know I can satisfy you greatest Curiosity in. For, alas! Sir, that and
its Circumstances take up all my Care and Thoughts.


Gom. I ask then, did his Father know any thing of his Love? and by what means
did you arrive?


Clar. No, that he still kept concealed, for Reasons I could never guest. Till
finding my self forlorn and left, that very morning we had appointed for our
Marriage, by diligent search I understood he was gone for Spain, to Marry your
Daughter. -- Armed then with Love, which emboldens the most fearful,
disguised, I pursued him in another Ship, and a day after him landed at Cadiz;
whence I am now come to beg Relief in such a Cause as must concern every man's
Honor that pretends to be generous, much more Don Gomez, and the Father of
Violante.


Gom. Base Vitelli, thou can not be Son of good Gonzalo, nor e're shall call
me Father. -- What a Escape was here, and so forth! --


Aside. Elv. That he is the Vitelli that I challenge, this will witness; given
with such moving Passion and such Charms as has ruined the poor Mariana. Shows
Gomez Peralta's Picture.


Gom. This I know all true, and this the very same I once thought to call mine.
-- But if --


Elv. What I beg is, you would endeavor to restore an unkind Husband to the
most unfortunate of Women. For, false as he is, I can forgive, whom I find I
must ever love


Gom. If there be Laws, Justice, etc. in Madrid, I here engage to see you
righted: nor is it more then the great Obligation this Discovery lays upon me
may justly challenge.


Elv. I would, if possible, avoid Severity, for I must suffer when he is
punished. Let him but he persuaded to come hither, and I have some hopes he will
not refuse to own me.


Gom. That, Madam, shall speedily be done, and my Daughter brought to wait upon
you to my house. For this public p^ace is not fit for your Quality.


Elv. Heaven must reward such Goodness, Sir.


Exit Gomez. Clar. This is right, and the Old Trout rarely tickled. Nor was
there any other means of getting Peralta from his house, before the designed
Marriage was consummate -- I Would give half my Maidenhead, to her how the Don will
teaze him, and so forth.


Elv. Something w^ still want to make our Plot successful, the Release of the
true Vitelli from Prison; which must infallibly ^uine Peralta's Pretenses; and
to give my Brother timely notice, that thus awed I may secure him.


Clar. I Will undertake both, and in my old Disguise to the Prison, where it is
odds but we find some Expedient. As for your Brother, his Lodgings are so near,
he may be soon sent for. But how convenient that will be, knowing his hot
Temper, must be consider^d of.


Elv. This I resolve, I Will be Peralta's Wife,
Or to my Brother's Rage expose his Life. Exeunt.

SCENE 4. A Room in Gomez house.
Peralta, Fabio. Fab. NEver had Mischief such Success: for certain you were
wrap^ in your Mother's Smock, and that a fine one too. The Old man is so
confirmed, he wreaths himself into the Toil, as if he resolved never to get out.


Per. What may come of it hereafter I cannot guess, but I am sure to enjoy the
Woman, and that will recompense twenty such Hazards. All that seems unlucky is
Don Gomez hasty Business, which defers a while our Marriage. But I resolve not
to stir to answer Vitelli, till Violante's mine past recovery: for though I
have no aversion to Fighting, I love a fair Lady much better.


Fab. By my troth, the ugli^st would carry my Affections from that; and
certainly man was made to increase the world, not to destroy it. But under
favor, Sir, I hope you won^t be so unfashionable to duel for your own Wife.


Per. No, Sot, I duel to kill Vitelli, whose mouth once stopped, who lives in
this world to contradict me? And within a year, which is the soonest I can be
discovered, I question not but with a Trick I have so to please the Lady, that
all will be reconciled.


Fab. This was a Master piece beyond my dull reach; and now I dare pronounce
you happy, for it is a sweet one.


Per. 'Twas pleasant to see, when the Old man would be offering at Questions,
how the present of a Jewel diverted him; and the story of a large Stone (which
for all I know may be an Indian Pebble,) that I told him was one of the famed
Jewels of the great Montezuma, sealed up his inquisitive Humor, and delivered
him mine.


Fab. Yes, Sir, I observed then he hugged, and called you dear Vitelli, Picture
of Gonzalo, and only one he would call Son. I Will swear I have seen a whole
Comedy his had less Sport in it.


Per. Is the Priest ready?


Fab. Yes, yes, and has nothing to do this half hour, but contrive a tolerable
Leg not to be laughed at.


Per. It must do, without some Devil-Intelligencer owes me a spite: if so,
this is his time to nick it.


Fab. Doe^ the Devil has not Cunning enough, were you his Enemy, to prevent
it. I went into the Kitchen, and the Cooks are as busy as a new Politician
employed on guess: followed Flora up stairs, and found an experienced Matron
making the Bed to the best advantage.


Enter Gomez, Violante. Per. Here comes my Father and my Life. Now I venture to
call you so, since my Joys are certain.


Gom. Never in worse time. Know, Sir, he that is once perjured, and so forth,
must be trusted by Fools, not old Gomez; mark that.


Fab. Here Is a Shower in the midst of Sunshine. Aside.


Gom. Come, you study for some paltry Excuse^ but be assured I have found you
base and treacherous.


Fab. Would I had a Musket on my shoulders in Flanders.


Aside. Per. You Will give one so perfectly innocent leave to be amazed at so
great a Turn.


Gom. Must Gomez be picked out of all men to be abused? or is this Maid an
object ^it for so base a Design? No, Sir, I shall provide you a Wife more
suitable, and take care to secure you from the Danger you were running headlong
into, and so forth.


Per. I can dread no Danger but your Displeasure, and the Loss of her I so
in^irely love.


Gom. You give a great proof of it, whilst you thus contrive her Ruin.


Per. I have done nothing but what a violent Passion forced me to, nor is my
Quality so mean.


Gom. I know your Quality, and so forth, and grieve a Gentleman so nobly born
should with such Baseness shame his Family.


Fab. Heaven grant he don't shame that, and the Family of the Fabii at the
Gallows.


Viol. I shall forgive the Injury, if you return that Passion you speak of, to
her you have quitted to impose on me. -- Assure yours^lf henceforth you are
more then a Stranger to Violante.


Per. Elvira's Wrongs discovered too? cursed Portmantue! this is past hopes.
Aside.


^om. Your G^ilt may well silence you.


^er. The unthought-of Charge well may, with the greatest w^nder.


Gom. That will soon cease, when you shall see the fair and virtuous Mariana,
whom you called Wife in Mexico; and has thence pursued you hither.


Per. 'Sdeath, I had laid Snares for my own catching.


Aside. Fab. Bear up, Sir, the wind veers fair again: this must be a gross
Mistake, and at worst give us leave to run for it.


Gom. The mention of her Name may well disorder you, and so forth. If it be
Remorse for deserting her, it may make some small Amends. Poor Heart! she must
forgive, though she has but little cause to love. And were she my Daughter, and
so forth. --


Per. I can scarce think I want a Pardon, when I am a Stranger to my Crime. And
all Womenkind may as justly lay the same Claim as Mariana, whose very Name I
never was yet acquainted with.


Gom. That you are Vitelli, Son to Gonzalo, and so forth, I am fully satisfied,
nor am I less, that she speaks truth, from whose own mouth I heard it.


Per. Is not her Discourse wild, and she justly to be suspected to be beside
her self? Pray, Sir, consider how unlike this is the Son of that Gonz^lo you
call Friend.


Fab. I have waited on my Master ever since he could think toward Man; and let
me beg your Pardon, Sir, have ticed him to Women, for fear he had no sense that
way: but when he saw this Lady's Picture, he was convinced, for the very first
week he would gaze and kiss; so that I left off Persuasions. -- But ne^r as yet
heard of any Mariana -- or any other, was she never so beauteous, in Mexico,
that could divert his Thoughts. -- This, Sir, I offer my self to swear.


Per. Though this Witness may be of proof, yet so much do I trust ^y Innocence,
that all I beg is, you would let me see this Lady. If she can so much as name
me with Assurance hers, which is the greatest Cu^se, here I relinquish all my
Pretenses to what I dote on.


Gom. This I like, though I have little reason to believe you willingly
undertake. Come, Daughter, put on your Veil; we'll go to Dormilon's, the Inn
you say you lighted at, and there expect you. -- Yet his Treas^^e secures him
from running. Aside.


Viol. I wait you Sir, -- and thank my Fortune, this suspicion has l^ss'ned my
growing Love. Aside.


Per. Adieu, dear Mis^riss, till the next Meeting shall approve me constant.
^x^unt Gomez, Violante.

[ To Fabio.] Where am I, Fabio? within these few minutes, I would have quitted
my Pretenses for the very hopes of Liberty.


Fab. By my troth, Sir, for once take a Fool's advice; and now you may have it,
never pretend more. For though this is some forsaken Virgin follows the true
Vitelli; yet true Stories laid together will grow too strong for Lies never so
well wrought.


Per. Thou art always Coward in the very nick of Victory. Is it not much easier
to persuade him she is some common Jilt, hired by Vitelli to disappoint our
Marriage, then to outface the true Vitelli?


Fab. All I say is, Sir, with your Assurance I should have made an excellent
Servant. Now I know my self modest, and so not capable. --

Well, it is hard when a Master takes ones calling from him, and incroaches on
the very Secret of Lying that maintains him.

Aside.
Per. He Is doubly cursed is foundred near the Shore:
Fortune the Rudder guide, I Will pull the Oar. Exeunt.

The End of the Fourth ACT.
ACT V. SCENE 1. A Prison.
Carlos, Vitelli. Car. BElieve me, Sir, so much a Friend to Honor and Justice,
especially in a Lady's Quarrel, that nothing but Confinement could secure you
from Revenge.


Vit. Believe me, Sir, to understand so much of Honor and Justice, that
nothing but my Restraint should bear these Injuries: and be assured I am as far
from knowing the Lady you speak of, as what you are; I will not say Trapans,
for that may look like Railing and Cowardice thus disarmed. -- But --


Car. It Is a Phrase belongs so properly to none as such deny their Names. And
were I Peralta, no Hazard should so unman me to disown it.


Vit. I have scarce Patience under such Su^ferance to deny that once again. --
Hell take the true Owner; and were I again amongst the barbarous Indians, I
would spend my Life in railing at what you think Civil.


Car. All this and more might pass, did I not know it counterfeit^ and what I
urge, to the Advantage of one of more Fortune then you can pretend to. You too
well know Elvira.


Vit. Is a Strumpet to be imposed on Fools; nor am I so dull, tha^ the fear of
a false Imprisonment should marry me to a Whore.


Car. One more such word, and by Heaven the Laws of Honor cannot secure thee.
Strumpet and Whore, to one I name otherwise, though so, were Death.


Vit. I as little fear your Threats, as understand your Niceties of Honor: but
this I dare boldly urge, she that will court an Acquaintance can be little
better. -- But should I allow her Virtuous, what is she to me? or why must I
needs be sixth upon by the Name of one I have such just cause to hate? Or why
should you mistrust a Story that must seem probable at least to the most
prejudiced?


Car. This seems an honest Confidence, and the Maid might be a Dissembler.
Aside.


Vit. Once more I tell you I am Vitelli, a Stranger to Spain^ that I was robbed
by this Peralta, both of my Treasure and Mistress, and have nothing in exchange
but those Papers and old Clothes, on which you ground this Mistake. And were I
at liberty, my Sword should make the Villain confess this Truth.


Car. These strong Denials make me begin to doubt; and should you prove what
you say you are, I have reason to beg your Pardon, though my just Concern for
the Lady and her Brother will very much excuse this Earnestness.


Enter Luis. Luis. Which is the Prisoner?


Vit. My being disarmed may soon resolve you.


Luis. This frees you. [Shews him a Pardon.] And now thou art so, I can joy to
see thee^ -- Why so strange? must not the Pardon tell thee, it is thy Uncle that
has obtained it? And though thou art a Stranger to his Face, yet methinks the
Kindness should make thee conclude me Don Luis, whom you have so long converst
with by Letters.


Vit. Gentlemen, if you have designed to ruin me, do it some more manly way.
It Is too cruel thus to prolong my Torment. Old Gentleman, your Age secures you
from Abuse.


Luis. Hah! what is this? Ruin, Torment, Abuse? what can Peralta mean thus to
return so great a kindness as his Liberty? especially to one he knows loves
him, and on that account with greatest difficulty and charge has purchased it?


Vit. I know no Pardon I want, nor does that Dog that owns the name of Peralta
deserve it.


Luis. Be not so severe against your self: other Young men have been guilty of
as great Faults; besides, you killed him fairly.


Vit. Leave, or I Will study some greater Curse then Madness ever could invent,
and make it my only Prayer it may fall upon you.


Luis. You are much altered since you writ last from Valencia. -- Pray, Sir,
can you guess the cause of this Distraction? it makes me weep. To Carlos.


Car. Faith, Sir, I am much a Stranger; unless it be his fear of Revenge for
the Wrongs he has done a Lady persuades him to conceal himself, I am wholly
ignorant. I found him much in the same Humor, and began to give credit to him
till your coming.


Luis. Dearest Peralta, be thy self; if my Life or Fortune, which is no small
one, can serve you, thou art safe. By thy Father's Soul I beg, who left thee to
my Care.


Car. This must be he. -- Come, Sir, you know I proposed most honorable means
of Reconcilement to Antonio; and if you marry Elvira, whose Beauty and Fortune
are too considerable for the proudest to despise --


Vit. Hell take you both: or may you live to meet Miseries like mine^ Do you
not think Confinement plague enough, but must I be thus rackt with Lies and
Nonsense?


Luis. Oh, Sir! had you known him when young, for since I have not s^en him,
this would afflict you. To Carlos.


Clara comes in with man's cloaths^ Vitelli seeing her speak^. Vit. Oh, I have
still one Friend left: welcome, Sir, for never was Wretch so timely succored.
Alas, I have suffered past the Cruelty of Turks betwixt these two Tormentours.


Clar. That Is Antonio's Companion, or I mistake; but this Disguise protects me.
-- I wish it were in my power to ease you, or in my Friend's, the Knight of
Malta, at whose desire I now wait on you.


Vit. They swear me down that I Am Peralta. The man, you well know, deserves my
utmost Hatred, and by Heaven shall feel it. -- Tell me Stories of one Elvira I
have wronged, of Murder I have committed: nay, the old Gentleman fawns and
cries, and calls me dear Peralta, and offers me my Pardon and my Liberty mee^ly
to abuse me. Is not this Sufferance beyond Patience, when I know all false and
counterfeit?


Clar. This is an Opportunity not to be lost. -- Aside.

Truth is, you act it brav^ly; but the Danger's past, and you may safely own
your self. Aloud.

[ To Vitelli apart.] Be Peralta, nothing else can gain your Liberty, and this
to my knowledge secures your Mistress.

Gentlemen, you may think what you have heard strange, but the necessity of his
Affairs I dare assure you made it requisite.


Car. Prodigious! what may not a man do with this Impudence? But his Liberty
will be good news for Antonio, whom he must prepare to answer.


Clar. Pray, Sir, let me undertake the Business, who thoroughly understand the
Affair; and will engage, if you bring Antonio to Dormilon's, either fully to
make up the Breach, or that Peralta with his Sword shall give him Satisfaction.


Car. That Is all I wish; I Will i^mediately go find him. -- We shall expect you,
Sir.


Vit. Where?


Clar. At the Inn whither you are going.


Vit. I will not fail. [ To Luis.] Whither if you please to accompany me, which
I am apt to hope, since you have so much Goodness to forgive me, I will unfold
my whole Story.


Luis. I can forgive him any thing I so truly love, and am confident some
weighty Reasons urge you to this Denial of your Name.


Clar. That you will be assured of when you know each Circumstance, but now
'twill be too tedious; besides, his Business yonder requires dispatch.


Luis. Along then, I have already discharged your Fees.


Vit. I wholly commit my self to your Management.


Clar. Which with this unexpected Success cannot possibly miscar^y. Exeunt.


SCENE 2. Elvira's Chamber in the Inn.
Gomez, Elvira, Violante, Flora. Gom. It Is no more then what I promised, Madam,
and was bound to perform.


Elv. This is too much Honor, Madam, and I am so perfectly a Stranger, that I
must despair of a Requital.


Viol. Your Acquaintance would doubly recompense, could this be thought an
Obligation.


Elvira and Violante talk, Elvira' s back toward the door, where enters Peralta
and Fabio. Gom. Come, Sir, now I hope you will prove your self a Gentleman,
honest, and so forth.


Per. I never was charged for otherwise by any one that understood me, and
question not but to unravel this Mistake.


Gom. Here Is your Vitelli, Madam, and I am thus far discharged of my
Engagement. Elvira turns toward Peralta.


Per. Elvira? this is a Rock must split me.


Fab. It Is not in the power of Impudence to save us. Aside.


Elv. Have I once more met thee, cruel, false man? it shall be hard to fly me.
Elvira lays hold of Peralta.


Viol. How strangely fond she is!


Flo. It may be the Custom in Mexico.


Per. Madam, if my being like the man you are so well acquainted with disturbs
you, I had best remove the Object; it is unseemly to use a Stranger thus.


Elv. No, Vitelli, for by that Name thou won'st me; thou too well know the
wronged Elvira, and those many Oaths that seal^d thy treacherous Love, e're to
disown me. Can thou forget Valentia? those Tears that made me thine? Is this
the Recompense of too great Tokens of the ^ondest Dotage? He flings from her.


Gom. What can all this mean?


Per. Heaven knows, I am perfectly ignorant, nor to this time e'r^ beheld her
face. Had I, Sir, could you think me so cruel to despis^ such Beauty?


Elv. Can thou forget, when languishing at my feet you lay, and dying vowed,
thence never to stir till I had granted your Request? wone then, I easy Fool
believed, and p^rished.


Gom. There must be truth in this, no Woman e're could counterfeit to such
height.


Per. Truth? all is an evident Ch^at. You see she talks no more of Mexico and
Mariana, but of Valentia and Elvira, names I Am a perfect Stranger to.


Gom. Lady, this sudden change of your Story is enough to give me ground of
Suspicion, and so forth.


Flo. What can you believe, Madam?


Viol. Nothing, but I naturally pity the poor Woman.


Elv. Consider, Sir, I had no other means but this Pretense to get him from
your House, and save your Daughter from Ruin. I freely confess I am not
Mariana, nor a Mexican: nor is he Vitelli, or an Indian; but Peralta, a Captain
of Flanders, who in his Journey hither stopped at Valentia, merely to destroy the
wretch'd Elvira.


Gom. This is something of the Story the pretended Vitelli told, and so forth,
is it not?


Per. Now you have hit it, the same; and she without question one of Fernando's
Dependants, hired by this Counterfeit to defraud me of my Mistr^ss. Does not
this sound probable?


Gom. Most likely; nay, I knew I should smell it, were it to be found above
ground. Let old Gomez alone for Discoveries, etc.


Per. I hope, Sir, no unlucky Accident can now disturb my Joys, but you will
once more tell me I shall be blessed.


Gom. Yes, yes, we'll about it presently. Come, Vil. a little Opposition makes
the Victory more welcome. It will be no Rudeness to leave you alone, Madam; I
suppose you will quickly ^ind your Companion.


Per. No question, Sir, she has plenty.


Elvira. Base man! re^lect upon my Honor too? Stay, Sir, for H^aven's sake
stay. Here Is one can witness all I say is truth, that has been the constant
Messenger of our Loves. Speak, dear Fabio; thou were once all Honesty: I Will
treble all thy past Rewards.


Fab. You need not bribe me to speak Truth.


Gom. This is Trifling, and so forth; but let us hear him.


Fab. I know you expect nothing but Truth from me.


Per. Dog! will he betray me yet? Aside.


Elv. Nothing else, dear Fabio; this may at last be some Remedy. -- Tedious
Clara. --


Fab. Why then, Sir, upon the word of an Honest man, I never before so much as
heard of Valentia or Elvira; and to my certain assurance, my Master knows
nothing either of them or Flanders. This is what I can declare in short.


Elv. Slave! were I but a minute Man, thou should not outlive this Lie.


Per. You find, Sir, how she studies Delays, though it be to create Witnesses
against her self. The Rogue lies with more con^idence then the boldest of
others can speak truth.


Aside. Elv. Since I am thus basely used, tremble at Antonio's Rage, who shall
bravely revenge my Wrongs, and teach you what it is to scorn a Woman's Love.


Per. This must be some Player that has been used to act a Passion, she does it
with such Art.


Gom. By my troth, her way of Speech and Action pleases me much. And were not
our Business earnest, and so forth, I would stay to hear her.


As they are going, she stops^ Violante. Elv. As for you, Madam, whose Ruin I
foresee equal with my own, let this Sea-mark warn you, and learn of her that
teaches by Experience, not to trust those Angel-like bewitching Lips which with
such power move, they might entice a Nun professing at the Altar; yet are full
as false and treacherous as you think me.


Viol. It Is Custom rules me, and a Father's Will, not my own Choice. Were it in
my power, he should be still yours, if he was ever so.


Elv. No, no, I know you must love, and fondly dote; I Am sure the wretch'd
Elvira did. Alas! his Words are Charms, and each Action carries such Persuasive
Eloquence, that were he not fal^e --


Flo. W^ll, Madam, I am confident the Lady's wronged.


Viol. So far it works on me, as could I, to defer the Match a while, --


Elv. Blessed Tongue! but are you so much more then Woman, to withstand his
well-weigh'd, insinuating Vows? cannot Protestations made by subtlest art and
dying Postures move? for he used such to me, and such must conquer. But I am
troublesome, and you will cur^e me for speaking ill of one I should still hate
her that railed on.


Viol. So much your Passion moves me, that, propose a way, and, if possible, I
will serve you.


Elv. It Is Impudence to beg so great a Treasure. It may be he will prove true to
you, and 'twas Elvira only that was born to be thus miserable.

Enter to them Clara, Luis Vitelli. Elv. to Clara. Oh Clara, still more
wretched! with a ^ixt Confidence he denies me, and obstinately says he is the
Indian Vitelli. Is there the least show of Help? speak, dear, dearest Clara.


Clar. You make me mad to be thus passionate, when there is almost certainty of
Relief.


Per. to Gomez. You see how fond she is of Men, and how well they are
acquainted.

While Gomez and Don Luis talk to one another^ Elvira addressing her self to
Vitelli speaks. Elv. Yes, Sir, you see here the unfortunate Elvira, who in the
Disgui^e of a Knight of Malta followed yon false, barbarous man. --

Pointing to Peralta. My Misery makes me past all shame. Aside.


Vit. This doubles my Hatred.


Clar. No Whining, but have confidence of a Remedy. A little Patience and your
Brother's coming must clear this Deceit. I Will go try to wheedle that Rascal
Fabio.


Gom. None is more then my self a Servant to the good Don Luis Pacheco.


Luis. I must always be happy to see Don Gomez.


Per. That should be my Uncle by his Name; if he knows me, I Am compelled to
yield. Aside.


Clar. to Fabio. Is your Master, which you so commended, turned Indian since I
last saw you?

Fab. Friend, I have some serious Affairs, which are not to be disturbed by
impertinent Questions.


Clar. Good, grave Sir, give me leave. -- There was a Rascal Fabio I have seen,
that strangely resembled you, who pret^nded a smattering after a Damsel hight
Clara; have you met with such a one in your Travels?


Fab. Pert Sir, I am at present mela^cholick, and will know no body.


Clar. Since you are so surly, it shall go hard but I bring you acquainted with
the Gallows.


Gom. Your Nephew that -- Pointing to Vitelli. my Son-in-Law here tells me is
one Fernando, was bred up with him at Mexico. Was It not so?


Per. Right, Sir, and till this just Breach between us --

Pox on it, I have spun my thread too fine. Aside.


Luis. Assure your self, my Nephew is an absolute Stranger to the Indies. Till
thirteen I bred him here in Madrid, and since he has spent his time in
Flanders; where unfortunately killing an Ensign, he was forced to sue out his
Pardon, and not an hour since was releast.


Vit. Believe, Sir, though I was glad to accept my Liberty on any terms, I never
yet saw Flanders, nor was e're in Spain till my landing at Cadiz. There stands
your Nephew, if you think fit to own one so base; who is the Robber of my
Treasure, the actual Ruiner of this Lady's Honor, and great Designer on her I
have a just Pretense to, might my Story gain credit.


Elv. to Luis, and pointing to Peralta. And if you call him Nephew, as
certainly he is, you must own me for Necce, for ten thousand times he has
called me Wife. Nor could his Ambition rise higher then my Fortune, which
should have been entirely his, had he spoke truth.

Gom. Good faith, had not I a stayed Judgment, and so forth, this would half
distract me.


Lui^. It Is all Riddle to me, but I guess at a way shall unfold it.


Enter Antonio, Carlos. Car. Remember your Promise, and keep your Temper: this
I justly challenge from you, and exp^ct.


Ant. I am nothing but what you will have me.


Elvira and Clara kneeling to Antonio. Elv. Thus low I do implore a Brother's
Pardon, but my Fault has found already too severe Punishment.


Clar. I hope, Sir, you will forgive the exact Duty I owed a Mistress I so
dearly loved. -- It Is Clara begs it, Sir.


Ant. You have made me too much a Stranger to your Affairs to think me
concerned. But the Love I always paid Elvira scarce deserved so great Neglect.


To Carlos. I think I keep my word.

To Vitelli. As to you, Sir, (for I hate long Stories,) either be honorable,
and repair this Lady's Wrongs by Marriage, (I will not call her Sister,) or
prepare to die; so base a Cause can hope no other Success.

Vit. Still the same Error? would you have me marry one I am a Stranger to,
and as Woman never till this minute saw? But know, I am so far from thinking
wrong, that this shall never be drawn sooner then to serve her. Points to his
Sword.


Ant. By Heaven, these petty Shifts --


Car. Antonio. -- [ To Vitelli,] That you are Peralta, you at our last Meeting
owned; when this which now proves Clara engaged you should make a
Reconcilement. What means then this new Pretense?


Vit. By that I purchased Liberty, and now persist in my first Truth.


Elv. Believe me, Sir, there stands the false cruel man, the treacherous
Peralta. Points to Peralta.


Clar. That Is the base Wretch, for so I dare call him; and with This will
revenge my Lady's Wrongs.


Lays hold on her Sword. Per. to Gomez. You see, Sir, how they drive on their
Conspiracy. A little more Impudence will persuade me out of my Name too.

Gom. So much they persuade me, that I Will ^^'n home. -- Come, Vil. this
Design's at an end, for I Will never marry thee at Uncertainties, and so forth.
-- Here Is two Vitelli's, two Peralta's, Fernando's, Elvira's, Mariana's, the
Devil and all; and yet neither Vitelli, nor Peralta, etc.


Vit. This Delay is all I entreat to gain my Mistress, and a few days hence my
Messenger's return from Cadiz will assure you I am Vitelli.


Ant. I Will kill them both, and that makes sure of my Enemy. --


Luis. Then I Will try my last means; and it is what I solemnly swear, from this
minute never to call him Nephew, nor possess him of a Rial of my Estate, that
does not immediately own me.


Fab. to Peralta so^tly. 'Sli^e, Sir, will you lose a hundred thousand Ducats
for the hopes of a Wench? -- nay, no hopes?

Luis. Nay more, this Lady's Story touches me so near, that if she be a
Gentlewoman, he forfeits my Love in refusing to right her.


Ant. He that questions that must be ignorant she is my Sister.


Per. I have no reason to expect Forgiveness, who have been the general Abuser
of the whole Company. But if Love can cover Faults, I have great Pretenses.
First then, [ To Luis.] I humbly beg your Pardon; and if you will receive that
Nephew you have taken such care to preserve, here Peralta entreats.


Luis. Truth is, Nephew, this was a little too high driven; but if you can
reconcile your self with the rest, I must forgive one I love. And now I more
earnestly view you, I dare conclude you the Son of my Brother.


Gom. Well, I will never trust Age and Experience more, etc.


Per. to Elvi^a. Your Pardon, Madam, which I have greatest cause to beg, I
scarce dare ask: but if you forgive this Sally of Youth, and my Uncle consent,
I am for ever yours. --

To Antonio. Sir, this I hope you will yield to, and honor me with a permission
to call you Brother.

Car. to Antonio. Refuse, Antonio, and you break your vowed Engagement.

Ant. I yield to any thing is just, and if you behave your self worthily, shall
make no small increase to your Fortune.


Per. to Elvira. Can you once more think me true?

Elv. I must think any thing you will have me.


Per. To take off all ^cruple, I openly confess the Portmantue I brought you
was mine by mistake, and upon that I grounded all my Pretense. But I shall
sufficiently make Amends, by yielding up that, and this a much greater
Treasure. Bowing to Violante.


Vit. Had I designed a Quarrel, the Interest you have in this Lady would make
us Friends. -- And thus emboldned I dare call you Father, and my self this Fair
one's Servant.


Gom. It Is strange that I should not know thee, for by my troth thou have
Gonzalo's Cast, and so forth: and I will think of no Unkindness, since I am
thus assured.


Ant. My Journey to Madrid was well designed, and I can once more call my self
Antonio.


Gom. You shall all to my House, etc. for I love Weddings, and resolve to laugh
at this Adventure.


They talk together. Fab. Nay, Mistress Clara, I was not altogether so false as
you think; for Fabio the Indian courted her, but Fabio the Spaniard was always
constant.


Clar. No more, my Don of the Netherlands, Clara will not pretend to hold so
slippery an Eel, and she that will may take you for better for worse in best
Capacities.


Fab. You have your liberty, they that quarrel for you must strangely love
Fighting.


Luis. Why then all is agreed, and this little Noise may make a lasting
Friendship.


Enter Dormilon. Dor. I have overheard so much as to know you merry. -- What do
you think of calling the Getano's in, who are just going by to Saint
Hieronimo's?


Gom. By all means call them in, etc. I will have one merry day after all, let
the rest look to themselves.


Dormilon returns with the Spanish Gypsies. A DANCE. Gom. Very well, very well.
But this loses time: let us to the Church^ and so forth. For fear new Scruples
should arise,
I Would rather be Resolved then Wise.



FINIS
EPILOGUE
spoken by Mrs. Barry. IF any of you have a mind to ^ight,
Let him affront our pretty Female-knight.
For though her rambling Errantry is done;
Since she is in danger of your damning Frown,
Here as her Squire a Challenge I proclaim:
Declare your Weapon, Time, and Place, and Name.
When you shall own with shame, upon your knees,
You fail much oftener then our Sex, to please.
Perhaps her Servant by the Ladies may
Be censured, that he basely ran away:
But few, when they would attained so much, would stay.
Yet now the Power's by Marriage in her hand,
Who may at leisure due Revenge command.
For if he goes this year to the Campaign,
A Friend may in his stead at home remain.
Gallants, I needs must pray for some of you,
Who with such heat to the Low Countries go,
That when you come again, if e're you do,
You may be welcomed with the loss of some rich Friend,
Who Is made you Heir to all he left behind.
And be assured we'll prove exceeding kind
To those who come with Scars of Honor home,
If to inherit good Estates they come.
'Faith then, to us be favorable now,
That we hereafter may be so to you.
For those who mean to stay within the Nation,
Let all new Plays now have their Approbation,
Considering shortly comes a long Vacation:
Against when, we shall no more reserve new Play,
Then Vintner stock of French-wine till May Day.
Books Printed for, or sold by, Jacob Tonson, at the Iudge's Head in
Chancery Lane, near Fleet Street.
THE Heroin Musquetier, or the Female Warrior; in Two Parts: Containing many
true and delightful Adventures of a French Lady, in the late Campagnes of
1676. and 1677. The Third and Fourth Parts, concluding the Work, are in the
Press.

Sir Patient Fancy, a Comedy, Acted at the Duke's Theater, and written by the
Author of the Rover.

Friendship in Fashion, a Comedy; written by Tho. Otway: Acted at the Duke's
Theater.

Mr. Rimer's Examination of the Plays of Rollo, Duke of Normandy, the King and
no King, and the Maids Tragedy; in a Letter to Fleetwood Sheppard, Esquire.

The Art of Making Love, or a Guide for Ladies and Gentlemen in the affairs of
Love. Price 1 s.

Pleas of the Crown. Written by Sir Matthew Hales, late Chief Justice of the
Court of King's Bench.

An Historical Discourse of Parliaments in their Original before the Conquest,
and continuance since: together with the Original, growth, and continuance of
these Courts following, ( viz.) The High Court of Chancery, King's Bench,
Common Pleas, Exchequer, Duchy, and other inferior Courts. Price 1 s.

Brutus of Alba, or, the Enchanted Lovers, a Tragedy, written by N. Tate: Acted
at the Duke's Theater.


