LEATHER-MORE: OR ADVICE CONCERNING GAMING: The Second Edition.

Faelix quem faciunt aliena pericula cautum. Licensed,

November. 4th. 1667.


LONDON, Printed in the year. 1668.

LEATHERMORE'S Advice; CONCERNING GAMING.
GAming is an enchanting Witchery, begot betwixt Idleness and Avarice; which
has this ill property above all other Vices, that it renders a man incapable of
prosecuting any serious Action; and makes him always unsatisfied with his own
Condition; he is either lifted up to the top of mad joy with success; or
plunged to the bottom of despair by misfortune; always in extremes, always in
a storm.

Hannibal said of Marcellus, that Nec bonam nec malam far potest, he could be
quiet neither Conqueror nor Conquered: Thus (such is the itch of play)
Gamesters neither winning nor loosing can rest satisfied; if they win, they
think to win more; if they lose, they hope to recover.

One propounded this Question, Whether men in Ships at Sea were to be accounted
among the Living or the Dead, because there were but few inches betwixt them
and Drowning. The same Quaere may be made of great Gamesters, though their
Estates be never so considerable, Whether they are to be esteemed poor or rich,
since there are but a few casts at Dice, betwixt a Person of Fortune (in that
Circumstance) and a Beggar?

But speculation in this particular will not be convincing, unless we show
somewhat of the modern practice; we must therefore lay our Scene at the
Ordinary, and proceed to our Action.

Betwixt twelve and one of the Clock a good Dinner is prepared by way of
Ordinary, and some Gentlemen of Civility and Condition ofttimes eat there, and
play a while for recreation after Dinner, both moderately and most commonly
without deserving reproof.

Toward night, when Ravenous Beasts usually seek their Prey, there comes in
shoals of Hectors, Trappanners, Guilts, Pads, Biters, Prigs, Diverse, Lifters,
Kid-Nappers, Vouchers, Mill-kens, Pymen, Decoys, Shop-Lifters, Foilers,
Bulkers, Droppers, Famblers, Donnakers, Crosbyters, etc. Under the general
appellation of Rooks, and in this particular it serves as a Nursery for Tiburn;
for every year some of this Gang march thither: One Millard was hanged in
April. 1694. for Burglary, and others since.

When a young Gentleman or Prentice comes into this School of Virtue, unskil'd
in the quibbles and devices there practiced, they call him a Lamb, then a Rook
(who is properly the Woolf) follows him close, and engages him in advantageous
Bets, and at length worryes him, that is, gets all his Money, and then they
smile and say, the Lamb is bitten.

Of these Rooks some will be very importunate to borrow Money of you, without
any intention of repaying, or to go with you 7 to 12, half a Crown, and take it
ill if they are refused, others watch, if when you are serious at your Game,
your Sword hang loose behind, and lift that away; others will not scruple if
they spy an opportunity, directly to pick your Pocket, yet if all fail, some
will nim off the Gold Buttons of your Cloak, or steal the Cloak it self if it
lie loose, others will throw at a sum of Money with a dry fist (as they call
it) that is, if they nick you, it is theirs, if they lose, they owe you so much,
with many other Quillets; or if you chance to nick them, it is odds they wait
your coming out at night and beat you, as one Cock was served in June, 1664.

Blaspheming, Drunkenness, and Swearing, are here so familiar; that Civility is
by the rule of contraries accounted a Vice. I do not mean Swearing when there
is occasion to attest a Truth, but upon no occasion, or rather all occasions;
As God Damm me, how do? What a Clock is it by God? etc. Then before two hours
are at an end, some one who has been heated with Wine, or made Choleric with
loss of his Money, raises a Quarrel, Swords are drawn, and perhaps the boxes
and Candlesticks thrown at one another; and all the House in a Garboyle,
forming a perfect Type of Hell.

Would you imagine it to be true? that a grave Gentleman well stricken in
years, in so much as he cannot see the pip's of the Dice, is so infatuated with
this Witchery, as to play here with others eyes, of whom this Quibble was
raised, That Mr. -- such a one plays at Dice by the Ear. Another Gentleman
stark blind, I have seen play at Hazard, and sure that must be by the Ear too.

Late at night when the Company grows thin, and your eyes dim with watching,
false dice are often put upon the ignorant, or they are otherwise cosened with
topping, or slurring, etc. And if you be not vigilant, the Box-keeper shall
score you up double or trebble Boxes, and though you have lost your Money, dun
you as severely for it, as if it were the justest debt in the World.

There are yet some gentiler and more subtle Rooks, whom you shall not
distinguish by their outward demeanor from persons of Condition: and who will
sit by, a whole evening, and observe who wins; and then if the Winner be
bubbleable, they will insinuate themselves into his acquaintance, and civilly
invite him to drink a glass of Wine, wheedle him into play and win all his
Money, either by false dice, as high Fullams, low Fullams, 5, 4, 2, s. etc. Or
by Palming, Topping, Knapping, or Slurring; Or in case he be past that Classis
of Ignoramusses, then by Crossbyting, or some other dexterity, of which they
have variety unimaginable; Note by the way, that when they have you at the
Tavern and think you a sure Bubble, they will many times purposely lose some
small sum to you the first time, to engage you more freely to Bleed (as they
call it) at the second meeting, to which they will be sure to invite you.

A Gentleman whom ill Fortune had hurried into Passion, took a Box and Dice to
a side Table and there sell to throwing by himself, at length swears with an
Emphasis, -- Damme, now I throw for nothing, I can win a thousand pounds; but
when I play for Money, I loose my Arse.

If the House find you free to the Box and a constant Caster, you shall be
Treated below with Suppers at night, and Cawdle in the morning, and have the
Honor to be styled, A Love of the House, whilst your Money lasts, which
certainly will not be long; For as the Lamiae destroyed men, under pretense of
kindness, so it is here.

In a word, this course of life shall afford you so many Affronts, and such a
number of vexations, as shall in time convert both your Soul and Body into
Anguish, and Anguish in some has turned to madness. Thus one Bull, a young
fellow not many years since, had by strange Fortune run up a very small sum
to fifteen hundred pounds, and put himself into a Garb accordingly, could not
give over, played on, fortune turned, lost it all, run mad, and so dyed.

If what has been said will not make you detest this abominable kind of life,
will the almost certain loss of your Money do it? I Will undertake to
demonstrate, that it is ten to one you shall be a loser at the years end with
constant Play upon the square. -- If then 20 persons bring 200 l. apiece, which
makes 4000 l. and resolve to play; for example, three or four hours a day for a
year, I Will wager the Box shall have 1500 l. of the Money, and that 18 of the 20
persons shall be losers.

I have seen (in a lower instance) three persons sit down at twelve penny Inn
and Inn, and each draw 40 shillings apiece, and in little more than two hours,
the Box has had 3 l. of the Money, and all the three Gamesters have been
loosers, and laughed at for their indiscretion.

At an Ordinary you shall scarce have a night pass without a quarrel, and you
must either tamely put up an Affront, or else be engaged in a Duel next
morning, upon some trifling insignificant occasion, pretended to be a point of
Honor.

Most Gamesters begin at small game, and by degrees, if their Money or Estates
hold out, they rise to great sums; some have played first all their Money, then
their Rings, Coach and Horses, even their wearing Clothes, and Perry-wiggs, and
then such a Farm, and at last perhaps a Lordship. You may read in our
Histories how Sir Miles Partridge played at dice with King Henry the 8th. Stows
Survey. p. 357.
for Jesus Bells, so called, which were the greatest in England, and hung in a
Tower of St. Paul's Church, and won them; whereby he brought them to ring in his
pocket: but the ropes afterward caught about his neck, for in Edward the
sixths days he was hanged for some criminal offenses.

Consider how many persons have been ruined by play, Sir Arthur Smithouse is
yet fresh in memory, he had a fair Estate, which in a few years he so lost at
play, that he dyed in great want and penury. Since that, Mr. Ba -- who was a
Clerk in the six Clerks Office and well cliented, fell to play, won by
extraordinary fortune 2000 pieces in ready Gold; was not content with that,
played on, lost all he had won, and almost all his own Estate, sold his place
in the Office, and at last marched off to a foreign Plantation, to begin a new
world with the sweat of his brow: For that is commonly the destiny of a decayed
Gamester, either to go to some foreign Plantation, or to be preferred to the
Dignity of a Box-keeper.

It is not denied but most Gamesters have at one time or other a considerable
run of winning, but (such is the infatuation of Play) I could never hear of the
Man that gave over a winner, (I mean to give over, as never to play again) I am
sure it is rara avis; For if you once break bulk (as they phrase it) you are in
again for all. Sir Humphry Foster had lost the greatest part of his Estate, and
then playing, as it is said, for a dead Horse, did by happy Fortune recover it
again, then gave over, and wisely too.

If a Man have a competent Estate of his own, and plays whether himself or
another Man shall have it, it is extreme folly: If his Estate be small, then to
hazard the loss even of that, and reduce himself to absolute beggary, is
direct madness. Besides it has been generally observed, that the loss of one
hundred pounds shall do you more prejudice, in disquieting your mind, than the
gain of two hundred pounds shall do you good, were you sure to keep it.

Consider also your loss of time which is invaluable, and remember what Seneca
says -- Nulla major est jactura, quam tempor is amissio.

Lastly, consider the great damage the very watching brings to your health, and
in particular to your eyes, (for Gamesters wor^ most by night) consirm'd by
this Distick,

Allia, vina, venus, fumus, faba, lumen and ignis,
Ista nocent oculis, sed vigilare magis.

FINIS.
A penitent Sonnet, written by the Lord FITZ-GIRALD (a great Gamester) a little
before his death, which was in the year 1580.
By loss in play men often forget,
The duty they do owe,
To him that did bestow the same,
And thousand Millions more.
I loath to hear them swear and stare
When they the Main have lost,
Forgetting all the Byes that wear,
With God and Holy Ghost.
By Wounds and Nails they think to win,
But truly it is not so,
For all their frets and fumes in sin,
They moneyless must go.
There is no Wight that used it more
Than he that wrote this Verse,
Who cries peccavie now therefore,
His Oaths his heart do pierce.
Therefore example take by me
That curse the luckless-time
That ever Dice mine eyes did-see
Which bred in me this crime,
Pardon me for that is past
I will offend no more,
In this most vile and sinful east,
Which I will still abhor.
FINIS.

