AN APPEAL TO THE PARLIAMENT, CONCERNING THE POOR, That there may not be a
Beggar in England.
IN the midst of many and great Undertakings, let not a Settlement for the Poor
be forgotten, but revive, ad, and execute all wholesome Laws, and encourage all
good Means, to Supply Poor People with Labor and Relief, and so prevent the
ill Breeding, wicked Life, and bad End that many Thousands have fallen into
through Idleness; To this End, give Order that the ensuing Platform may be
fully executed: Although this thing be warrantable, yet if there be not an
absolute Necessity laid on them (whom it does concern) to Execute their Office,
this Work may fail and come to little or nothing, notwithstanding the Means
may be sufficient; but if Carried on as it ought, the Cure is certain, no
Beggar in Israel.

The Platform, or Way how Poor People may be Supplied with Labor, and Relief.

EVery Parish, according to the various Places and Employments, and as their
Poor are increased, agree with some Able Man, or Men, that rightly
understands their Work, that may Undertake, and by the Parish be Assisted;

I. To take Notice how many Old, Impotent, and young Children be in the Parish,
and Supply them by Collection; and also Help such whose Labor is not
sufficient to yield them Maintenance: But if any in the Parish want Employment,
that are able to work, set them to work according to the wholesome Laws of the
Nation.

II. To take the most Orderly way for the manner of doing, according to the
variety of Places, and kinds of work; If there be Twenty Persons in a Country
Village that want employment, then the Parish agree with some Clothier, Stuff,
or Stockinmaker to furnish them with so much Work as they can do: So in great
Towns, and places of Clothing, one Clothier take 10, another 20, being brought
in by Authority; for though there may be work enough, yet the Idle will not
come for it; to have work, and want Government, is as if they wanted work; some
Parishes have Means enough, and yet the Poor want Work, Food, and Government.

So in great Cities, where is much Trading on Silk, Wool, Hair, VVinding,
VVeaving, Button-making, etc. every Parish, or Division, agree with some
Tradesman, or men, to provide for 10 or 20 as aforesaid, and so may rise to
Hundreds or Thousands by the same Rule: So in Parishes where the Poor are much
increased, and have no Trade, or where some great Trade is wholly decayed,
there some other is to be sought for with discretion: In Parishes where are no
Poor, their Account is soon given, and they fit to help others: Some near
London, said, They had not a Beggar dwelling in their Parish, and yet have had
30 Traveling Beggars in one week.

III. To settle a Poor man's Office, First, Where Handy-crafts-men and Laborers
that want Work, and such as want Workmen, may enquire: Secondly, Where Boys
that would, or are fit to go Apprentice, may enquire of Masters; and such as
want Servants in City or Country, or whom they have spoken to, may enquire:
Thirdly, Where Maids that would, or are fit to go Apprentices, or
Covenant-Servants, or some that want such, may enquire; But none to be put to
Service until they be first Taught to Spin, Knit, Sew, learn some Trade, or way
of livelihood; who else are neither fit for Service, nor can in aftertimes do
any thing for themselves, Fourthly, Where all Poor People that are in distress
or danger of Perishing, may make their Conditions known, that Means may be used
to Supply their wants.

IV. That all Persons whatsoever, may have free Access and Acceptance without
mollestation, to give in true Information concerning any neglect of the Poor to
any in Authority, Justice of the Peace, or any in Power, as there may be cause;
and that every one that neglects his Duty, restore to the Poor so much as
they have done them wrong; and that Distress be made if they refuse to Pay
presently.

V. That all Judges of Assizes and Sessions, lay open the sad condition of the
Poor in their Charge, and what the Law provides, and take Account what is done;
and receive all true Informations concerning any Neglect of the Poor, and see
the Penalty justly executed: The Law is made for the Lawless and Disobedient.

VI. That no Poor People be denied their former Liberty, nor strict Course
taken against them, until some good Means be used to Supply their wants.

Much might be added concerning the Means how there may be Work enough; how to
Order things to the best advantage in Cities, Towns and Villages; how to take a
List, or the just Numbers in great Cities, Out-streets and Alleys, Tenants,
In-Tenants and In-mates, where may be many Perish, many idle hard to be found,
and settled in Order; how to encounter with the great Charge this may amount
unto: But honest Labor and good Government, may save the Rich from Charge, and
the Poor from Hunger. And to speak to Particulars, may be more seasonable when
this work is come into practice; and more suitable to the diverse Places,
Persons, and various kinds of Trading: If any Object the Trouble: To have such
Multitudes of Beggars in this fruitful Kingdom, Is not that trouble? To hear
them cry and not give, is not that trouble? To hear their cry, and give, is
trouble also; not knowing whether it does good or harm: But if every Parish
keep to their own, the Condition of the Poor may be known: I have Considered of
Cities, Towns and Villages, but no Place have I found where this Platform may
not be suitable, with little or no alteration; although it be short, it
concludes enough to effect the work, and with little trouble or charge in
comparison of some Proposals concerning the Poor, and being faithfully
executed, there may not be a Beggar in England, which is the desire and hope of
one that has no intention of evil to any, but wishes the good of all, who,
having been many years exercised among the Poor, and much desired their good,
and through long Experience have seen the ground of their Misery, the easiness
of the Remedy, and the benefit.

T. L.
POSTSCRIPT.
THis Work of Charity does not concern Parliament men, and Officers for the
Poor only, but all other in Authority to exercise their Power in their
Respective Places for the General good: And all not in authority also; Rich men
to encourage it every way, being best able; and the Middle Sort do their
endeavor, lest they like small Iron Creeppers in a Chimney, who bear the
burden and heat of the Fire, until they be wasted to Sinders; and the Poor to
avoid Idleness, which is oftentimes the Cause of Begging; and hearken to the
Counsel of the Wise man, Ecclesiasticus 40. My Son, lead not a Beggars life,
for better it is to die then to beg, verse 28. The life of him that depends
on another man's Table, is not to be accounted a life, verse 29. Begging is
sweet in the Mouth of the shameless, but in their Belly there burns a fire,
verse 30. That this Platform, or some other, may be put in Practice when the
Days lengthen is likely, because of the Necessity, and cannot safely with good
Conscience be wholly omitted: But that all join in the Execution there lies
the stress; many good Things have been began, but men being selfish, careless
and unconstant, the Work has failed: I have in some measure unloaded my own
Conscience in this thing, and laid it before others, that all might be clear
from the Cry of the Poor; But he that stops his Ears at the Cry of the Poor,
he also shall Cry and not be heard.

T. L.



London, Printed for Robert Wilson, at the Black-spread-Eagle and Windmill, in
Martins Le Grand, 1660.


