MITHRIDATES King of Pontus, A TRAGEDY: Acted at the Theater Royal, By their
Majesty's Servants.

Written by NOT. LEE.

Hi motus animorum atque haec certamina tanta,
Pulveris exigui jactu compressa quiescent.
Virgil. Georg. l. 4. Licensed March 28 1678. ROGER L'ESTRANGE.

LONDON: Printed by R. E. for James Magnes and Rich. Bentley, in Russel Street
in Covent Garden, near the Piazza's 1678.

To the Right Honorable CHARLES, Earl of DORSET and MIDDLESEX, One of the
Gentlemen of His MAJESTY'S BEDCHAMBER, etc.
My Lord,
When I call to mind what I have observed of your Wit and Judgment, the truest
and most impartial I ever knew, my thoughts of writing after my loose manner to
your Lordship are a little dashed, and the meanest of 'em has the sense to tell
me, I ought to be as curious and correct in a Dedication to one Man, as in that
of a Play to a whole Nation. There is no doubt a Transport in every Poet who
writes an Epistle, but for the most part they are dazzled with the Eminence of
their Patrons, and at best we can but call it an Awful Delight. But I profess,
what those to whom I am disagreeable, will impute to want of Modesty, I make
this Tragedy an Offering to your Lordship with as much freedom, pleasure, and
perfect satisfaction, as ever Mithridates received when he found himself in the
Arms of his Fairest Mistress. You stand Equal with the Greatest, and your
Quality should cause a Dread in the hardiest Writers: But on the other hand,
there is such an innate sweetness of temper, such a most remarkable goodness in
all your Actions, a Character peculiar to you more than any man alive, that the
meanest, modestest of Poets may approach you. Methinks I feel a sort of
cheerful springing Pride, when I see your Lordship stand forth to this last
Birth, which sure if I had ever any lovely, is much the Fairest Child. Happy
Fortune must attend it, and Heaven and Earth be pleased where you approve. I
accost you, my Lord, without Formality, and would appear before the severest
Judge in the plainest Garb, or rather nakedness of thought; as some, and those
not of the least courage, go to the most bloody Test of valor, all unarmed. An
over-care in things of this nature does often turn to affectation, and what was
meant a Guard, proves an Encumbrance: We may stiff'n our imaginations with
making 'em too quaint; and polish, till we are nothing else but gloss: I am
infinitely pleased, to be as plain as I can, nor care I how it pleases others,
tho I am sure it does, that I have laid this Play at your Lordships feet. All
my Acquaintance that wish me well applaud my choice; for I may safely affirm by
the judgment of the Town, without being censured for a Dawber, there is not a
man whom all men love but you, you are beheld in all the Company you Honor, as
if you were the Genius of that Prince who was called the Delight of Mankind,
and are adored with all the love and admiration which e're the Noble Titus
found in Rome. Ziphares is an imperfect Figure of your self; I cast him in your
Mould, and fashioned him as well as my weak Fancy could, to that Perfection the
Court so universally allows you: When I designed to draw him for the Ladies,
endearing, soft, and passionately loving, I thought on you, and found the way
to Charm 'em. And it is most certain, he who obliges those Fair Critics to be
of his Party, has the surest Cards that ever Poet played: I cannot but own the
Honors they have done me, and entreat your Lordship to secure 'em my Friends.
There is yet a greater Honor I would beg of your Lordship, and so important, I
cannot name it without apprehension: Mithridates being in your hands, desires
to be laid at the Feet of the Queen. Her Majesty, who is the Sublimest
Goodness, and most merciful Virtue that ever blessed a Land, has been pleased to
grace him with her Presence, and promised it again with such particular
praises, the effects of her pure Bounty, that should he not express his
Gratitude almost to adoration, he would deserve another Fate, when he is next
represented, than what he has hitherto received.

I have endeavored in this Tragedy to mix Shakespeare with Fletcher; the
thoughts of the former, for Majesty and true Roman Greatness, and the softness
and passionate expressions of the latter, which makes up half the Beauties, are
never to be matched: How have I then endeavored to be like 'em? O faint
Resemblance! As Pizarro says of the Mexicans,

-- And those who now remain,
Appear but as the Shadows of the Slain.
It may be objected, I broke the Scenes in the beginning of the Third and Fifth
Acts; those who are so nicely curious to be offended at this oversight, may
for their satisfaction leave 'em out, and the Play will be entire. I apply my
self to your Lordship, as Montaign does to his Reader in his Chapter of Books;
I will, says he, love the Man that shall trace me! For I have many times found
fault with an Expression, as I pretended was in a Play of my own, and had it
damned by no indifferent Critics, tho the immortal Shakespeare will not blush to
own it. But I am confident your Lordship will find me out, and I desire to be
so found a Refiner on those admirable Writers; the Ground is theirs, and all
that serves to make a rich Embroidery! I hope the World will do me the Justice
to think, I have disguised it into another fashion more suitable to the Age we
live in; for if I could persuade my self there were nothing of mine
extraordinary in the Play, I would not have dedicated it to the best of Men.

-- Mediocribus esse Poetis,
Non dii non homines non concessere column.
Here you must give me leave to tell the World, that Pillars and Altars too
ought to be raised to your Lordship, if the greatest Genius of Poetry deserves
em: Your thoughts in some select Poems I have seen, are rich and new, as the
Golden American World, your Expressions justly strong, your words Emphatical,
as chosen men for an Enterprise of Glory: As it was observed of the Army of
Alexander the Great, every Soldier looked like a Commander, and every
Commander like an Alexander; so in your admirable Draughts, all things are so
excellent, we know not where to fix; we stand on Hills of so vast a breadth,
that the Valleys are not seen; it looks like Heaven all about us, and Fancy is
lost in the infinite Beauty of the Prospect: Your Writing dazles with clearness
and Majesty; you draw, like Holbin, without Shadows.

-- Qui Genus humanum ingenio superavit and omnes
Praestrinxit stellas, exortus uti Aetherius Sol.
Your Images are so great, we look like Dwarfs beneath you; and then so lively
represented, tho of dead, low Objects, animated by your Genius,

-- Credas simulacra moveri
Ferrea, cognatoque viros spirare metallo.
What e're you stamp is Royal, other Pretenders to Satyr but file and wash,
they live by the Clippings of your Wit, and dip their Silver in your Bath, to
make it pass for Gold. Self-preservation bids me say no more of your Lordships
Poetry, lest I dam my own, who aim at nothing so much as the Honor of being
thought by your Lordship,

My Lord, Your most Humble, Obedient, and Devoted Servant, NOT. LEE.

MITHRIDATES, King of Pontus.
ACT I. SCENE I.
The outer-part of the Temple of the Sun. A noise of Music and tuning Voices
is heard.
Enter Pharnaces, Pelopidas.
Phar. TO Night, to Night, this fatal Moment, now
Our dreadful Father's Nuptials are preparing,
And I must lose bright Monima for ever.
Ambition too is barred, Scepters and Crowns,
And all the golden Quarries now are lost.
Zphares, O Ziphares! happy Brother,
Thou have dislodged me by thy late Exploits,
And now usurp'st my Father's Breast alone.
Cursed be the Power that blessed thee on thy way
To overthrow Triarius; cursed the Stars
That glittered round thy Head, when by thy Arm
So many Tribunes and Centurions fell,
As made Rome groan, and broke Lucullus heart.

Pelop. Hear me, my Lord. --

Phar. This Morning, on a Mountain
Above the Clouds, his Triumph was performed
And I assisted at the Sacrifice.
Why gave I not this Body to the Flames,
To be devoured among the tortured Slaves,
Rather than lived to see his Conquest Crowned?
I saw it; O, Pelopidas, these Eyes
Saw Mithridates, with a Torch, give Fire
To the vast Pile, which like a Pyramid
Stood high upon the Hill, as that on Earth.

Pelop. Will you but give me leave?

Phar. I saw the blaze
Of his immortal Honor, heard the shout
Of all the Court, which did torment the Air
To that degree, that Birds fell round us dead;
And that thin Region, where we scarce could live
When first we did ascend, became so fat
With the rich Steam of Blood and boiling Gold
And flowing Gums, that we were forced remove:
Nay, I believe, the glutted Gods themselves
Were almost choked, with the prodigious Odors.

Pelop. Yet have you done?

Phar. To the green Neptune then,
Because at Sea old Archelaus had
Been Conqueror with my Brother, in their Names
An Offering was decreed; a Chariot all
With Emeralds set, and filled with Coral Tridents,
Was with a hundred Horses, wild as Wind,
From off the top of that most dismal place
Plunged to the bottom of the slimy Deep.

Pelop. Let me entreat you call your Reason home,
And listen to your faithful Servant's Counsel:
You cannot hate your Brother more to Death,
Than I his Friend, the General Archelaus.
'Has got the start of me in the King's favor;
And tho, without being vain, I think my self
The better Soldier, he by Polities
Has pushed me from the Dignities I bore:
The Lion's outed by the Fox.

Phar. But with full cry
Let us unkennel him; rather rebel,
Than bear it thus: it is mine, it is thy concern:
Nor let the Name of King, or Father, awe us.
A Mistress, and a Throne! most specious Titles.
The God of Battle rages in my Breast;
And as at Delphos, when the glorious Fury
Kindles the Blood of the Prophetic Maid,
The bounded Deity does shoot her out,
Draws every Nerve thin as a Spider's Thread,
And beats the skin out like expanded Gold:
So, with the meditation of the Work
Which my Soul bears, I swell almost to bursting.

Pelop. In all the many changes of my Life
I have not known one equal yet to yours;
At other times so moderate, so true
A Sovereign over your self, you seemed to want
Those Passions for your Slaves who Lord it now.

Phar. I Am hushed if thou have ought of comfort, speak.

Pelop. This Night your Father has decreed to Marry
The Daughter of Palemon.

Phar. What can hinder?

Pelop. Nothing; yet mark: my Brother Tryphon is
High Priest of the Sun, whom all the rest obey:
Him have I wrought, that when the Nuptial Rites
Begin, some strange presages shall fall out,
Disorders unexpected, to foreshow
The Gods are much offended at the Marriage.
How this may work with one of mighty Faith
In holy Fables, one of various humor,
Whom every day new Beauties set on Fire,
Be you the Judge.

Phar. Methinks it has a Face;
But yet there is wanting what I could have wished:
Had it been Janus-like, backed with another:
When Mithridates frighted from his Queen,
Warned by false Oracles, should have retired
Perplexed, yet struggling with the pangs of Love;
Then to have laid a Beauty to his longing,
Some fair unknown, proud of her gaudy Bloom,
TO have quenched his thirsty wishes, that had been
A Masterpiece! But let him Marry her,
Sure Death shall wait upon his laughing Hymen;
And when the God has given her to his Arms,
Fate with unerring force shall part 'em ever.

Pelop. Yet raging? It Is as you have said, and more!
More than excelling Mischief could invent,
That is not best. We have already raised him;
Andravar, my Lieutenant General,
Scorned by your Brother, whom he therefore hates,
First formed the Plot: Old Archelaus's Daughter,
The fair Semandra, Mistress to Ziphares,
Is destined to be made your Father's Prey.

Phar. Excellent Engine! now thou work'st indeed;
Thou have hit the Vein, the Lifeblood of his Heart:
I cannot see ought in the extent of Art,
Or Nature, that can mend it. O Ziphares,
Still Conquer; rise with Triumphs, high as Heaven,
So such a Bolt as this be sure to wait thee.
Enter Andravar. But see the brave Lieutenant! come to my Arms,
And tell me, shall Semandra be the King's?

Andr. I think, my Lord, that I may safely swear it.

Phar. Thy bluntness merits praise, and says, you are fit
To serve my best revenge, Love, or Ambition.

Andr. Great Mithridates, whom I well have studied,
Tho he has weathered forty Winter Fields,
Yet rises in his vigor, ventures more,
Nor feels decay of strength; none Learned as he
In Nature's Garden; whence to his Constitution
Most excellent, he adds such helps by Art,
That by his looks he might be thought Immortal.
The World, too, knows he is as Amorous now
As when the first Sighs heaved his youthful Breast,
And his first Tears bedewed the Shrines of Love.

Phar. The Consequence?

Andr. He often has been pleased
To make me honored with his private thoughts;
Whereon my General and I agreed,
Knowing your love to Monima,
And hatred to your Brother, with one blow
To drive the business that should Crown your wishes.
Therefore I daily filled your Father's Ears
With praises of Semandra, raised his wonder,
Described her dress, and each particular grace;
Her Eyes, her Hands, her Lips, with all their beauties;
And have so fired him, that there only wants
A view to perfect all; and that will be
To Night.

Phar. How know thou that?

Andr. I learnt it all
From a She-slave that waits upon Semandra,
Who told me that Ziphares, with consent
Of Archelaus, would beg her of the King,
When he this Night should Monima Espouse.
[Soft Music. Nor doubt, but when he once has seen Semandra,
The Charms of his new Queen will vanish. Hark,
The sacred Music sounds! -- The King and Queen are coming.
Enter Archilaus, Ziphares, Semandra. See, your Brother, Semandra and her
Father.

Phar. O my laboring Breast! how hopes and fears
Toss my wracked Heart, like a poor Bark, about!
But soon the Calm will come, or I must perish in the Tempest.
Exeunt Phar. Pelop. and Andr.
Ziph. By Heaven, my Love, thou do distract my Soul;
There Is not a Tear that falls from those dear Eyes
But makes my Heart weep Blood -- O my Father!
All is not well: I found her in the Morning,
Not like a Bride, with all her Maids about her,
Half-smiling, now half-serious with her thoughts,
Of what must come; nor warm, nor bright, nor blushing;
But, Oh the Gods! I found her on the Floor,
In all the storm of grief, yet beautiful,
Sighing such breath of sorrow, that her Lips
Which late appeared like buds, were now o'reblown,
Pouring forth tears at such a slavish rate,
That, were the World on Fire, they might have drowned
The wrath of Heaven, and quenched the mighty ruin.

Arch. Nothing, my Lord -- it is all but Virgin's fear:
Marriage to Maids is like a War to Men,
The Battle causes fear; but the sweet hopes
Of winning at the last still draws 'em on.

Sem. Alas, my Lord!
[Weeping.
Ziph. What, but alas? no more? when by the Hand
I led her to the Temple, thus she sighed,
And hung upon me. If thou truly love me,
If I may credit my Semandra's tears,
Think 'em not drops of Chance like other Women's,
The Weather of their Souls, The Crystal bubbles
Which they can make at will; Oh satisfy
The longings of my braest, and tell thy sorrows.

Sem. That I do love you, Oh all you Host of Heaven,
Be Witness? that you are dear to me,
Dearer than Day to one whom sight must leave,
Dearer than Life to one that fears to dye;
O thou bright Power be Judge whom we adore,
Be Witness of my Truth, be Witness of my Love!
But yet I fear --

Ziph. That fear, give me that fear, Semandra;
Produce it in the ugliest form it has,
If ought that is deformed can come from thee.

Sem. I shall, my Lord; since you are pleased to hear me,
Uunfold my doubts, the cause of all my Tears.
First then, I must complain of my hard Stars,
That did not dart kind Luster on my Birth;
For tho at present, while your young Blood boyls,
Your Reason cannot get the Rein of Passion,
Yet it will come, when long possession cloyes you,
Then you will think what Queens you might have had,
With Kingdoms for their Dower; perhaps you may
Prove so unkind, to tell me of it too;
Or, if you should not, yet your Eyes would speak --
[Weeping. Enough to break the heart of poor Semandra.

Ziph. Why do thou stab me with the tenderness
Of thy false fears, and melt me into mourning?
It Is most unseasonable on our Wedding Day
To be seen thus: I know thou can not doubt me.
No, thou most lovely of the fairer kind,
Think not a Crown can ever change my Virtue.
Ah, who would leave the warmth of this loved Bosom
For the cold cares which black Ambition brings?

Sem. Spite of ill-boding Dreams, unlucky Omens,
You must, you shall, you ought to be believed.
And, if I weep again, it is for joy
That I this Night shall be your happy Bride.

Ziph. Oh Mithridates, mighty as thou art,
Before whose Throne Princes stand dumb as Death,
With folded Arms, and their Eyes fixed to Earth;
Dishonor brand me, if I would not choose
A private Life with her whom my Soul loves,
Rather than live like thee, with all thy Titles,
The King of Kings, without her.

Arch. Pray, my Lord,
Defer till Midnight these strong Ecstasies,
Fate yet may put a bar betwixt our hopes,
And then the loss wilt be more hardly born.

The Scene draws, discovering the inner part of the Temple. Mithridates holding
Monima by the Hand; his Queens, Concubines, Sons and Daughters attending. Three
Roman Captains, L. Cassius, Q. Oppius, and Manius Aquilius bound in Gold
Chains, with many other Slaves standing at distance.
Mith. Not yet, O Rome, great Tyrant of the World,
Have thou subdued the Asian Emperor.
In thy despite I hold my glory still,
Still tread upon the Necks of conquered Kings,
Still make thy Consuls tremble at my Name;
And, in one mightiest Word to sum up all,
A Word which, like a Charm, might raise the Ghosts
Of Pyrrhus, and the experienced Hannibal
To envy, and be dazzled at my deeds;
A Word, a Name, that comprehends all Honors,
All Titles, Riches, Power, all Majesty,
In spite of Rome, I Am Mithridates still.

Aquil. The Nations must confess, that Alexander
Could not more dreadful to the East appear,
Than you: even Rome would buy her peace with joy,
Could you at reasonable rates afford
Your Royal Friendship, tho by your command,
Most dreadful to Italian Memory,
In one dark Day, damned in the Book of Fate,
A hundred thousand murdered Romans fell.

Mith. Dare thou, fomenter of these Wars, to talk?
Thou, purple Source of all these bloody streams,
Which have for more than thirty years o'reflow'd
The Asian Banks, and died Euphrates red?
Dare thou, Commissioner in chief, to put
The Earth in Arms, and set the World on flame,
Once think of Peace? Now, by the Fire-rob'd God,
Thou shall have punishment that fits thy Crimes.

Aquil. The bravest must submit when Fortune frowns.

Mith. Desire of Wealth, the Lust of shining Dirt,
And Palace Plunder, caused thee with Armed Legions
TO invade a King, whose Father was Rome's Friend.
But, by the asserted Justice of my Cause,
The help of Heaven, and of my own Right Hand,
I conquered thee, and thou art now my Slave.
Guards, strait convey him to the Marketplace,
Take off his wealthy Chains, and melt 'em down;
Then, for a terrible Example to
All sordid Wretches, Souls made up of Avarice,
Pour down his Throat the rich dissolved Mass,
And gorge his Entrails with the burning Gold.

Mon. Not, my dear Lord, upon your Nuptial Day.

Mith. On any Day, my Queen, to do a Justice
Which all the Gods, and all good Men must like.
For Lucius Cassius, and for Quintus Oppius,
A milder Destiny's in store. Away with him.
And now proceed we to the sacred Rites.

Aquil. Yet, e're you join, hear me, proud Emperor,
Hear what the Fates have put into my breast:
I see my Death, by Roman Arms, revenged;
And what Lucullus had so well begun,
Pompey shall end; Pompey, thy glory's ruin.
This hour that gives me Death, shall be the last
Of all thy quiet: swift domestic jars
Shall overtake thee; thou shall add more blood
To that already shed from thy own Bowels:
And when at last subdued in all thy Wars,
Spoiled of thy Queens, thy Sons and Daughters slain,
Thou seek'st some corner of thy conquered Empire
To hide thy abandoned Head in; then the load
Of all thy woes shall come, one whom thou least
Shall fear, long nourished in thy impious breast,
Shall stab thee to the heart, and end thy days.
That this, all this, and more may light upon thee,
I pray the Gods; and so the Furies seize thee.

Mith. Away, to Death with the Prophetic Fool.
[Ex. Guards with Aquilius. Tryphon, begin, and let the Altar smoke
With such rich Victims, to the well-pleased Gods,
That they may smile from Heaven, and give us joy.

Here follows the Entertainment: after which, the King and Queen return from
the Altar to sit in state. An Image of Victory descends with two Crowns in her
hands; but on a sudden the Engines break, and cast the Image forward on the
Stage with such violence that they dash in pieces. Mithridates starting up.
Mith. Ha! whence? how fell this out? Now, by my Arms,
Our Nuptials are not pleasing to the Gods;
It Is for some fault of mine, O Monima,
That Heaven denies thy beauties to my bosom:
Thus, when we did approach the hallowed Vault,
A Prophesying Priest, with start-up Hair,
With rolling Eyes, and Nostrils wide as Mouths,
Stopped us in the way, and said we were no Match.
As well the noblest Salvage of the Field
Might tamely couple with a fearful Ewe,
Tigers engender with the timorous Deer,
Wild muddy Bores defile the cleanly Ermin,
Or Vultures sort with Doves, as I with thee.
It Is a cross thought, and much disturbs me here.

Mon. Command me dye, e're give your Majesty
Cause of the least disturbance, O, my Lord!
Think you that I would lie within your Arms
To hear you sigh, and give me Tears for Love?
Or think you, it is to Empire I aspire?
Rather dismiss me from your Breast, the Haven
Where I had hoarded all my happiness,
And cast me out to a wide Sea of weeping.

Mith. How e're the Powers above shall deal with me,
Racking my heart with what they have set down,
Thou art our Queen.

Mon. O, it is an empty Name,
A senseless sound, except I am your Love:
I find, I find that I am lost for ever.
I have but slept, charmed with a golden Dream,
And now am waked to beggary again.
Why did you take me from my Father's Wing?
Who, tho a petty Prince, was yet a World
Of warmth to me; why did you tempt me forth
With burning Love, and the bright Comet Power?

Mith. Fright not thy tender heart with false suspicions;
I will be ever thine: But give me leave
A little to digest with serious thoughts,
The anger of the Heavens -- Andravar.

Andr. My Lord?

Phar. They whisper, General.
[To Pelop.
Ziph. coming forward. Stars, by your leave;
Ill Omens may the guilty tremble at,
Make every accident a Prodigy,
And Monsters frame where Nature never erred;
May the feared Conscience start at falling Meteors,
And call the schreme of every hooting Owl,
Or croaking Raven, Fate's most dreadful Voice:
For me, I laugh at 'em, should now the Heaven
Flame with a thousand Fires, never seen before,
And Thunder beat the Winds from every corner,
Not for the Calm of all the Universe
Would I put off my Joys a moment longer.
Stand back, my Love; and, when I call, come forth:
A minute makes us blessed, or wretched ever.
[Comes to the middle of the Stage, and kneels.
Mith. Is there in all the space of our wide Empire
Ought of that most inestimable value
To make Ziphares kneel?

Ziph. There is, my Lord,
Thus to adore you.

Mith. O, Celestial Powers!
Mark me your Subject out for all misfortunes,
The Curses of the Roman Manius fall
Heavy upon me; Fortune's giddy Wheel,
Which we have fixed with our Majestic weight,
Turn round with me, when I deny him ought
That he can ask with Honor: Rise, my Son.

Ziph. rising. Since on the great Request which I shall make
The peace or trouble of my Life depends,
The torment or the pleasure of my Soul,
Eternal griefs, or everlasting joys,
I would recall to your remembrance, Sir,
The toils and hardships which my early Valor
Has undergone, the many Fields I'have fought,
And Conquered too; and as of old the Romans
Who sought the Consulship, made bare their breasts,
Laced with long Scars, and studded over with Thrusts,
The Noble Wardrobe of the Scarlet War;
I would, with bolder mention of my deeds,
Display my Wounds to move your Royal Favor,
And offer, to the blood which I have shed,
All my heart holds for sealing of your promise.

Mith. O, had thou fought so poorly as thou speak
Thy Actions, all the Laurels which lie green
Upon thee, strait would wither, and be dust.
To mention but thy last, thy last of Wars,
Which even the breath of Majesty makes vile,
So much below thy Valor is all Language --

Ziph. The glory of that Battle is your own.

Mith. To thee we owe the day, our life and Empire;
When six Centurions bore me from my Saddle,
And laid me grovelling, for the violent Horse
To tread my Soul out; how did my brave Ziphares
Break through their walls of Steel, leap over the Ramparts
Of the dead bodies that had fenced me in,
On his own Courser mounting me to life.
Pious even in the mouth of Slaughter, while
On foot himself, he with his Battel-axe
Bore down the Legions, drove whole Troops before him,
And brought their Eagles drooping from the Field!
Demand, I say, ask me most Royally,
I will be lavish to thy vast Ambition,
And Crown thy wishes like a giving God.

Ziph. In thankfulness I bend me to the Earth,
Once more fall prostrate to your Majesty,
And pray the Gods to give you length of days.
Come forth, come forth, my Fairest; break, my Day;
Appear, and Charm, dazzle the whole Assembly.
[Semandra comes forward.
Mith. A wonder! Ha!

Ziph. She is, my Lord, the Boast,
The lovely Chance-work, Masterpiece of Nature,
Who blushed to see what her own hands had made;
As if, mistaking Moulds, she unawares
Had cast Semandra in a Form Divine.

Sem. These praises, breathed from any Lips but yours,
Lord of my life, and Idol of my love,
Would make me sink with shame, or scorn the Flatterer;
But as they come from you, from that loved Mouth,
The tender Off rings of your fond Desires,
I take 'em all, and die upon the sound:
To the driven Air my flying Soul is fastened;
Each word, each syllable you spoke is mine;
Yes, I am fair, a Queen, a Goddess, any thing
That my dear Lord is pleased to have me be.

Mith. She talks --

Ziph. And with so good a Grace,
That nothing but her Wit can Charm beyond it,
Late in the Camp I languish'd with a Fever,
And sure had died, but for this fair Physician;
Who in the midst of all my fiery pains,
When Art was at a loss, and I lay gasping,
Would quite beguile my sufferings with her Songs,
Her welcome Pity, and her soft Endearments:
Now, laying her chaste Cheek, cold with her Tears,
To mine, she would abate the raging fire;
Now, with warm sighs kindle my fading spirits,
And when I fainted with a Kiss recall me.

Mith. By Heaven she weeps, and I could drink the Dew.

Phar. He takes the poison, fast as I could wish.

Pelop. And Prince Ziphares forces her upon him.

Arch. Hold, you have gone too far; speak to the purpose.

Ziph. Ambition therefore was not my Request;
In Colchis or in Bosphorus to Reign:
Leave to my Brothers all your Empire; and
To me, this only Beauty for Reward.

Mith. Reward! Were thou on Mithridates Throne,
Possessed of all his Kingdoms, were thine eye
Like his who guides the day, and thou could call
In all thy Journeys what thou saw thy own;
Her eyes would match thy luster: all thy glories
Would be but shadows, when this Face appeared.

Ziph. They would, my Lord.

Mith. They would, my Lord! Yet more;
By all my Royalties, a God might wed her,
And be a gainer by the beauteous Bride.

Ziph. Such as she is --

Mith. Not Heaven it self can mend her.
Had I as many Tongues as I have Languages,
Skilled in all Speeches of the babbling World,
And could at once speak to as many Nations,
With such a grace as might make Athens blush.
By Mercury, and by the Father of
The Muses, I should never speak Semandra.

Mon. O, he is gone! his vowed fidelity
Is gazed away!

Mith. Tell me her Birth, Ziphares:
She must be more than Royal.

Ziph. Fate, thy worst:
Let me be dumb for ever from this moment.

Arch. In me your Majesty may please to read
Her Father: what I want in Dignity,
Be pleased to fill up with my Services.

Mith. Thy Daughter!

Arch. Yes, my gracious Lord, my Daughter.

Mith. O pity that so fair a Star should be
The Child of Night; that such a stream of Crystal
Should have her Spring so muddy!
Thou dy'st, thou saucy old ambitious Dotard,
Who dare to match thy Lees of blood with ours,
And daub the Throne of the Immortal Cyrus.

Ziph. Hold, hold, most awful, give Ziphares death,
Impale me, burn me, bury me alive,
But do not wrong this innocent old man;
These hairs, which were made Silver in your service,
O the good Gods! whom fear could never shake,
Your bitter words have caused to tremble: see,
With the disgrace, he weeps; his Springs of life
Which had been dry for fifty years, this last
Affront has watered:
Oh my poor Father!

Mith. Ha! that Name again,
Thou art no more my Son. For thee, Semandra,
Thou shall attend our Queen; to Court, my Fair,
Where I must learn you to forget Ziphares,
And match you equal to your birth.

Sem. My Lord -- Ziphares -- Father.

Mith. Look not back.
Conduct the Queen, Pharnaces. O, Semandra!
It Is to your Tears I sacrifice my Justice;
To them, your Fathers life I Will not deny,
Who, for Ambition, did deserve to die.
Exeunt all but Ziphares and Archelaus.
Arch. Dotard! and saucy! nay, the Lees of blood!
Now, by the Gods, it is sprightly as his own:
O, it is too much to bear. Forgive me, Prince;
It breaks the very neck of Loyalty:
Perhaps, he Whores my Daughter too. But first,
Rather than see him wear my glories Spoils,
Thou, my good Sword, that has so often been drawn,
And died thy self in Roman bowels, to
The very Guard, for this ungrateful King,
Be faithful to me, as thou still have been,
And pierce the heart of thy dishonored Master.

Ziph. Oh, Archelaus! Oh, my kinder Father!
If you are stirred thus at an angry word,
What should I be; I who am lost indeed,
I who am stunned, I who sustained the stroke
Of all the anger of the Fates at once?
Semandra, O my Love!

Arch. Restrain your grief,
As I my rage, and let us think apace.
Tho for my Daughters Virtue I would stake
My Immortal part, my Fame so dearly bought.
Yet force, which he may use, will have its way:
Consider that.

Ziph. Consider! how should I
Consider, who grow mad with crouding thoughts;
Where every one endeav'ring to be foremost
Stops up the passage, and will choke my Reason?

Arch. Once more speak humbly to him,
Perhaps, it is but a sudden short-lived fit,
A gust of Passion that may soon blow over:
But if you find it rooted in his heart,
Eat your way through him, to your happiness;
Or perish, like your Brother Mithridates.

Ziph. By Heaven, I think it greatest happiness
Never to have been born; and next to that,
To die: for who that wears his flesh can bear
The curse of Accidents, a Change like mine?
I who, some moments past, would not have changed
Condition, with the blessed Gods themselves;
Now, in all probability, am lost,
And stand upon the very brink of ruin.

Arch. Your Destiny's uncertain; Fate, as yet,
Holds the Scale doubtful: let us haste to Court,
Where we shall learn which way the Balance falls.

Ziph. Not half an hour ago, methought secure
I hugged my self, and almost could have wept
In mere compassion to the hard-fated World,
Thinking how much my state was happier.

Arch. Yet all the while you did not spy the danger
Which crept invisible, and undermined you.

Ziph. Alas, I did not; without fear I stood:
Like one who, on the Beach, discries from far
A laboring Bark, with which the Billows war;
Pities its state, wishing the Tempest gone,
But views not the near Sea come rolling on:
So did with me my unseen Fortune play,
Till the Waves came, and washed me quite away.
[Exeunt.
ACT II. SCENE I.
Enter Pharnaces, and Pelopidas.
Phar. I WILL hear no more; get me a hundred Horse
To be our Guard, I Will bear her hence to night,
And Ravish her, by all the fire that acts
This fearless frame, I will. Declare the difference?
Is not the Blood of Queens and Princesses
Like other Women's? Souls alike infused;
Their Banquets richer, and the Drinks they taste
The very Spirits of the Purple Vine?
Yet we must think 'em cold as candid Ice,
Not a thought starting, free from warm desires,
As the bleak Girl upon the Mountain's top,
Covered with Snow, beat'n with constant Winds,
That feeds on Herbs and Roots, and drinks the Dew.

Pelop. What, would you have her fall like mellow Fruit
Whom yet no Sun has shone upon, no warmth
To ripen? 'bate a little of this fire.

Phar. Pelopidas, I often have told you, that
She knew my love, before she saw my Father;
For in the Plunder I first lighted on her:
Tho afterward he took my beauteous spoil,
As now he does my Brother's. I alleged,
As late I led her weeping to her Chamber,
My constant passion, and his breach of faith,
All that a love most violent could put
Into a Lover's mouth, like mine; but she unmoved,
Insensible replied, the King, 'twas possible,
At last might kill her with his cruelty;
Yet to the utmost moment of her life
She would adore him with such spotless love,
Such most Romantic faith, and such a deal
Of whining grief, that in a rage I flung
Away, and left her talking to her self.

Pelop. And do you think this haughtiness will carry't?
He that will win a most exalted Beauty,
Must bend his Soul low, as he bows his Body,
Watch every Glance, obey her e're she speaks,
Cast up his eyes at each affected word,
And swear-Besides her Honor, Sir, her Honor,
Obliges her to stand a while at distance.

Phar. It Is almost empty; Honor, Courtship, all
But gaudy Nonsense. O, Pelopidas,
Rather than buy my Pleasure with such baseness,
I Would be a Brute: Now, by my Life; methinks,
The happier Creature, cast before thy eyes;
The generous Horse, loose in a Flowery Lawn,
With choice of Pasture, and of Crystal Brooks,
And all his cheerful Mistresses about him,
The white, the brown, the black, the shining bay,
And every dappled Female of the Field;
Now, by the Gods, for ought we know, as Man
Thinks him a Beast, Man seems a Beast to him.

Pelop. Be more considerate, less rash and hot;
I have thought of an Expedient to gain her.

Phar. Thou art my better Genius, and shall flourish,
When Archelaus, like a blasted Tree,
Lies rotting to the ground.

Pelop. Did Mithridates
Know of your Love to Monima?

Phar. He did:
As publicly I showed it as Ziphares:
Yet he, who like the Hesperian Dragon, thinks
The Golden Fruit of Beauty all his own,
Flew at me as a Thief, who, while he slept,
Had stolen his Prize, and made me pay it back;
Or swore my life should be the fatal forfeit.

Pelop. It Is as I could have wished: thus then, the King,
Whose Heart Semandra kindles into Flame,
Cools every hour to his new-marry'd Bride,
And will not Bed her till the Coronation.
A mere put off, wading in deep disgust,
And wishing for pretense to part for ever.

Phar. Which he shall have; this Head of thine has thought it.

Pelop. I, and the needful Andravar,
Who feels the Pulse of his Affection,
Will swear boldly,
As Witnesses who had both seen and heard
The jealous Monima enraged with Love,
But more for what her vast Ambition lost,
Strove to revive the passion that you bore her;
But you most generously opposed her Charms,
Which with unwillingness you shall confess,
And beg your fiery Father to forgive her.

Phar. Pithy, and short; thou art the Soul of Counsel.

Pelop. The very breaking of the business, throws
Her into Prison; where, while I guard the door,
Your Highness may, with as much ease, perform
Your pleasure, as your faithful servant thought it.

Phar. In thanks, the vilest fawning lying Slave
Would speak thee fairer than Pharnaces shall;
But let my deeds be grateful to my Soldier.
Enter Andravar. What news, my Andravar?

Andr. Your Guardian-spirit
Now lays about him, and invisibly
Acts wonders for you, madding all the Court:
Semandra weeping, and your Father burning;
Monima, like a Widow'd-Turtle, mourning;
Old Archelaus pushing on his Fate,
And Amorous Ziphares, led by love,
To tumble from the top of all his hopes.
Defiance from the Roman Consul Glabrio,
I sent, and the third Pontick War renewed.
But Love so rocks your Fathers drouzy brain,
That all the Trumpets of the thundering Legions
Can scarce awake him. See where he comes!
Enter Mithridates attended. His haughty courage scarce submitting to
The weight which presses him; but, striking out.

Mith. She must be mine, this admirable Creature,
Her Charms are now inevitable grown;
And, while I seem to fright her from my Son,
I talk, and gaze, and dote, to my undoing.
See her no more; lose her with weighty thoughts,
And drown her in the Ocean of thy Power:
In vain I strive with cares to keep her down,
In vain does business sink her to the bottom;
This Bladder Love still bears her up again.

Phar. Like a caught Lion, raging in the snare,
He plunges in his passion, spends his force,
And struggles with the Toil that holds him faster.

Mith. See her no more -- and live! Impossible.
As well I might bid Meteors keep their luster,
When all the shining Exhalation's spent
That fed their short-lived glory.

Enter Monima.
Mon. O Mithridates! O my cruel Lord!
I come with all the violence of grief,
To take my last farewell.

Mith. What means the Queen?

Mon. The Queen! O mockery of State!
Pageant of Greatness! wondered at a while,
But strait neglected like a common thing.
I come, my Lord, to beg (O Heavens!) your leave,
Your Royal License, to retire from Court;
And, since my Father by your bounty Reigns
At Ephesus, I there would go to mourn,
And languish out my wretched Life's remain.

Mith. Why will you add new troubles to my Bosom,
Already burdened with the Wrath of Heaven,
By your unnecessary grief?

Mon. From Earth, I fear,
And not from Heaven, those Cloudy Cares are drawn.

Mith. No matter whence; they are dangerous to partake:
The tender Face of Beauty cannot bear 'em;
For, if from Earth they come, their Damp will stifle;
And, if from Heaven, their Influence is blasting.

Mon. Were you but kind, my Lord, as once you were,
What blasting could I fear? what dangers, dressed
In all the horrors of most dreadful Death?
But you are pleased that I should not complain.

Andr. Semandra, by your Majesty's appointment,
Attends without.

Mith. Fair Monima, retire:
You will oblige me by a confidence
I cannot be, but yours; affairs of State
Now take me from you.

Mon. Say, the affairs of Love.
I would, my Royal Lord, but cannot blame you;
I feel a Spirit within me, which calls up
All that is Woman wronged, and bids me chide:
But you are Mithridates, that dear man
Whom my Soul loves; else, were you all the Kings,
All Worlds, all Gods, I could let loose upon you,
For those deep injuries which I must suffer;
Could, like the fighting Winds, disturb all Nature
With venting of my wrongs; but I am hushed
As a spent Wave, and all my fiery Powers
Are quenched, when I but look upon your Eyes,
Where, like a Star in water, I appear
A pretty sight, but of no Influence,
And am at best but now a shining Sorrow.
[Exit, led by Pharnaces.
Mith. O Love! if that the Face of such Affection,
Such modest Sweetness, and such humble Virtue,
As my Queen bears, fix not my wandering Heart;
Break, break thy Bow, and burn thy useless Arrows:
By Heaven, her kindness strikes my troubled Soul.
Enter Semandra with Andravar attending. But see, she is lost again, Semandra
comes,
Who drowns like blushing Noon her paler dawn,
And shows like Summer to the Infant Spring.
Semandra, what, still weeping? will not all
The Wealth which the Sun sees throughout the East
Dry up your Tears? methinks, an Empire might
Suffice for any loss. I give you all my Power;
And, with it, such a heart, as naught but Love
Could bow: I throw it bleeding at your Feet.
Behold, behold, Semandra, while I blush,
The great effects of your Commanding Beauty.

Sem. Were you yet greater than you are, which scarce
The Gods can make you; tho no bounds but Heaven
Did limit your large Sway; tho in your person all
The Graces met that ever Man adorned,
The Blush of Rising Youth, the Conquering Eyes,
The Noble Smiles, and those most passionate Beauties,
Which drew my Heart to Idolize your Son;
I could not love you.

Mith. Oh, unmerciful!

Sem. You said, my Lord, but now,
You blushed to think of your degraded Power;
How then ought I to blush? I, who should be
The daily Curse of your repining Subjects?
I, who am bound by Oaths and solemn Vows
To love Ziphares? By my Father's Order,
And by the tenderest Inclination too.

Mith. You strike me dead.

Sem. Oh, do but think, my Lord,
How would Mankind, when they shall read my Story,
Tear all the Rolls, or throw 'em to the Flames!
How would the weeping Maids curse my remembrance,
Should I for pride of Power, a Golden Promise,
A gaudy Nothing, prove ungrateful perjured!
Leave all the goodness of the Earth to languish,
And break for ever with his matchless Virtue!

Mith. You have said; and I confess it to be Heavenly:
I know, and till I saw your Eyes, I loved
The Virtue of my Son; I lodged him near
My Heart, and set him down my Successor:
But now, Oh hear, and wonder at your Power,
Spite of his Noble Acts, tho to his Arm
I owe my Life, tho Justice speaks so loud,
And the soft Tongue of Nature pleads so well,
I hate him more than I did ever love him.

Sem. Alas! would I had died when first you saw me.

Mith. Had he conspired my Death, usurped my Throne,
Perhaps I might have doomed him to be slain,
Yet sure I should have wept to see him die;
But now, since he must Ravish that loved Gem,
I prize above the World, tearing you from me,
Giving me twenty Deaths, and cutting through
My very Soul, should I my Empire give
To buy his Fate, I Would think it vastly sold.

Sem. Then blasted be the Form that charmed your Eyes.
His Fate! Oh, Gods! then you design his Death,
To reap the Bloody Harvest of his Life,
And, Atreus-like, to feed on your own Bowels?
But know, Proud Monarch, there are Powers who see
And punish Crimes like yours: Nor can I doubt
But they will save from your most Impious Rage
My poor loved Lord, the Innocent Ziphares.
[Weeping.
Mith. Those Waters more inrage my Jealous Flame,
And those heaved Sighs but spread my Anger's Wings;
Your Fatal Kindness hastens on his Death;
And that untimely Doom which I forbore
To execute, seems necessary now:
You give him all your Stock of richest Love,
Your Tears, your longing Looks, your Smiles, your Groans,
And over-bless him with your lavish kindness;
But niggardly to me you will not spare
A pitying Glance, one Pearly drop, to Ransom
The Soul of this despairing Mithridates.
Andravar, go, and bear the Prince to Prison.

Sem. Stay, Andravar; the King has called you back:
See, he repents: Nay, I must hold you then,
And, if you stir, you take Semandra with you.
O, Mithridates! O ungrateful Prince!
What was it you did order? But behold,
His Eyes are fixed upon the ground, he blushes
To think he could so monstrously Decree
To murder the sweet hopes of all his Kingdoms,
The Gods be praised for this Serene Repentance:
Yet, with the fright, I fear I shall not sleep
Till Death does close my Eyes.

Mith. O rise, Semandra!

Sem. Never, I never will.
Oh all you pitying Powers, will not my cries
And piercing Woes move you to melt his Soul?
Can you be deaf? Oh Cruel Mithridates!
Did you but know the workings you have made,
The heavy plight, the panting Passions here,
If you had but a Grain of all that World
Of Love, you swore you once had for Semandra,
You could not see me thus: Misery distracts
My Reason; should you turn to a new rage,
(Which I must fear, unless you Vow to save him)
I could not bear it; you should see me fall
Cold, pale, and with my Deaths Convulsions grasping
Your watered feet, but never more rise.

Mith. Give me your Beauteous Hand; I swear upon it,
By all those Powers we worship, by our Self,
When e're Ziphares dies, Semandra kills him:
She shall alone have Power to give him Death,
Or to recall his most untimely Fate.
Enter Ziphares and Archelaus. Thus dearly do I buy the Red Impression
Which my Lips make; but take it, take it from me:
My Blood boils up again, my Spirits kindle,
That lovely Brand has lent my wishes flame,
And I am lost again in vast desire.

Ziph. Semandra! live I once to see thee more,
Tho in my Father's Arms? It Is Heaven, to gaze
On thy assaulted Honor; thus to see thee;
Thus tempted from me with the Charms of Empire,
Yet not consenting! No, I Will not think the World,
Laid at thy Feet,
Could win thy Faith!
Yet, O dread Sir, forgive me:
If that my boding Heart suspects you more,
Then all that Heaven could send down great and charming,
Or Hell could raise up horrid to destroy me.

Mith. O Glory!

Arch. O, consider, Sir, on that;
Think how the Romans will despise your Wars,
If Love now drive you -- Speak, my Lord: he yields.

Ziph. Oh, Royal Sir, or if the Name of Father
Can move you more, by that I will Conjure you;
By all the Charms of Stratonice's Eyes,
When first they drew you to adore their luster;
By all the Pains you gave her when she bore me;
By all the Obedience I have paid you long,
And by the Blood I yet intend to lose
In your behalf: oh grant me my Semandra.

Sem. Even by the Passion my unhappy Beauty
First kindled in you, but I hope is dying,
Give me Ziphares, give him to my Longings.

Mith. It Is done; the Conquest is at last obtained,
And Manly Virtue Lords it over my Passion:
It shall be so; away, thou feeble God,
I banish thee my Bosom, hence I say;
Be gone, or I will tear the Strings that hold thee,
And stab thee in my Heart. The Wars come on;
By Heaven, I Will drown thy laughing Deity
In Blood, and drive thee with my brandished Sword
To Rome, I will, yes, to the Capitol;
There to resume thy Godhead once again,
And vaunt thy Majesty without control;
But never Reign in Mithridates Soul.

Arch. O wonderful effect of highest Virtue!
O Conquest, which deserves more Triumphs than
A hundred Victories in Battle gained.

Ziph. You must, you shall be now the Lord of Rome;
Her Fate shall bow beneath your Awful Scepter.
O let me not enjoy the Life you promised,
The vast possession of the rich Semandra,
If I strike not Rome's Eagles to the Earth,
Take the Imperial Standard, Chase their Legions,
And bring in Triumph all their Leaders bound.

Mith. Andravar, haste, Proclaim throughout the City
My Son Ziphares General against the Romans.
[Exit Andravar. Come to my Breast once more, my dearest Son;
In spite of Love, thou art again my Child:
Thus, with a Father's bowels, I receive thee,
Thus melting over thee with the tenderest Nature,
I pray the Gods to Crown thy Youth with glory.

Ziph. Oh Happiness! Oh Joy! Oh blessed Tears!
Reward this Goodness, Heaven; for Poor Ziphares
Is now so lost, he knows not what to say.
Let me devour your hands with Filial dearness:
Were my whole Life to come one heap of Troubles,
The pleasure of this moment would suffice,
And sweeten all my griefs with its remembrance.

Sem. Oh happy hour! if I not set thee down,
The whitest that the Eye of Time e're saw,
Let me never smile when I remember thee,
Nor even in wishes offer at a Joy.
[Shouting within.
Mith. Hark! with loud Cries the Soldiers send their joys:
Go then, with the best Blessings I can give thee,
Conduct my cheerful Subjects to the Field;
Take all the sighing Virgins wishes with thee:
Subdue the Consul, and receive Semandra.

Ziph. O do not doubt me, my most Royal Lord;
If now I Conquer not, thus helped, thus promised,
Thus praised, encouraged, and thus over-blest,
I am the Mark, for all
The Synod of the Gods to shoot their Fires at.

Mith. Semandra, veil your Beauties from my eyes;
I would not trust their Influence, tho I thank
The Powers above, so strongly Reigns my Virtue,
I think I might, and fear not a relapse:
In an Apartment, proper for your grief,
You shall be placed, till yours and my Ziphares
Return in Triumph; where no eyes shall see
Your private walks, nor mark your secret sorrow:
I thus divide you, that your meeting may
Be yet more grateful. Haste, my Son, to Battle:
Be short in parting, for there is no end
Of Lovers Farewels. The Powers above preserve you.
[Exit Mith. with Pelop. and Andra.
Ziph. Farewell Semandra; O, if my Father should
Fall back from Virtue, it is an impious thought,
Yet I must ask you; could you in my absence,
Solicited by Power and Charming Empire
And threatened too by death, forget your Vows?
Could you, I say, abandon poor Ziphares,
Who midst of Wounds and Death would think on you;
And, whatsoever Calamity should come,
Would keep his love sacred to his Semandra,
Like Balm, to heal the heaviest misfortune?

Sem. Your cruel question tears my very Soul:
Ah, can you doubt me, Prince? A Faith, like mine,
The softest Passion that e're Woman wept;
But as resolved as ever man could boast:
Alas, why will you then suspect my Truth?
Yet, since it shows the fearfulness of Love,
It Is just I should endeavor to convince you:
Make bare your Sword, my Noble Father, draw.

Arch. What would thou now?

Sem. I swear upon it. Oh,
Be witness, Heaven, and all avenging Powers,
Of the true love I give the Prince Ziphares:
When I in thought forsake my plighted Faith,
Much less in act, for Empire change my love;
May this keen Sword by my own Fathers hand
Be guided to my Heart, rip Veins and Arteries,
And cut my faithless limbs from this hacked body,
To feed the ravenous Birds, and Beasts of prey.

Arch. Now, by my Sword, 'twas a good hearty wish;
And, if thou play'st him false, this faithful hand
As heartily shall make thy wishes good.

Ziph. O hear mine too. If e're I fail in ought
That Love requires in strictest, nicest kind;
May I not only be proclaimed a Coward,
But be in deed that most detested thing.
May I, in this most glorious War I make,
Be beaten basely, even by Glabrio's Slaves,
And for a punishment lose both these eyes;
Yet live, and never more behold Semandra.
[Trumpets.
Arch. Come, no more wishing; Hark, the Trumpets call.

Sem. Preserve him, Gods, preserve his Innocence;
The Noblest Image of your perfect selves:
Farewell; I Am lost in Tears. Where are you, Sir?

Arch. He Is gone. Away, my Lord, you will never part.

Ziph. I go; but must turn back for one last look:
Remember, O remember, dear Semandra,
That on thy Virtue all my Fortune hangs,
Semandra is the business of the War,
Semandra makes the Fight, draws every Sword:
Semandra sounds the Trumpets; gives the Word.
So the Moon Charms her watery World below;
Wakes the still Seas, and makes 'em Ebb and Flow.
Exeunt.
ACT III. SCENE I.
The Field.
Enter Ziphares bloody, with Soldiers.
Ziph. ARe these, are these the Masters of the World?
O my brave Friends, how have you fought to day!
You fought, as if you all had Mistresses,
Who from some Battlement beheld your Valor,
And from your Arms expected all their Fortune:
Oh, had you heard 'em clap their tender hands,
Beat their white Breasts, and rend the wondering Heavens
With their shrill cries, you could not have done more;
Your looks were Basilisks to Roman Blood,
Your very Breath was as the furious North,
And drove the Legions, like the Chaff, before you.
Nor was I idle; witness the wounds I feel,
Tho Glabrio, at distance, shunned the force
Of my far-darted Javelin, yet it struck
A Tribune down, and did not useless fall.
What more remains, but that we haste to meet
Victorious Archelaus, plunder their Tents,
And loaded with the Laurel we have won,
March to Synope, shouting all the way,
Long live the King of Kings, great Mithridates?

Enter Archelaus, attended.
Arch. O Prince! thou Life, thou Soul of all the Army,
To whose dear hand thrice I did owe my life,
When thrice this day my Horse was killed beneath me;
O Renowned day! this one day of thy Valor
Has drowned in dark Oblivion all my Wars:
Like Time it self thy Glory shall run on,
While mine, my fifty Iron-years of battle,
Lies smeer'd in dust, and moulder into Ash s.

Ziph. Yes, Father, now I could grow proud of Conquest,
Since it must give your Daughter to my Arms.
Methought to day, when I had given the word,
Semandra, Victory declared her self
E're yet a Death by any hand was given:
Even now my blood more heats my youthful veins,
My Cheeks grow redder, with the expectation
Of Love's dear promised joys, than when I strove
In flame of fight, with all my toil upon me,
To cut my way, and win the famous Field.

Arch. Grant me, you Gods, before the hand of Death
Comes, like Eternal Night with her dark Wing,
To bar the comfortable light for ever
From these my aged eyes; O let me see
A Grandchild of my Princes Sacred Blood,
To call him mine, to feel him in my Arms,
To hear his innocent talk, and see him smile,
While I tell Stories of his Fathers Valor,
Which he in time must learn to imitate:
Grant me but this, you Gods, and make an end,
Soon as you please, of this old happy man.

Ziph. I feel a gladness lightning in my breast,
The kindled joy disperses quickly through me,
And says, E're yet the setting-Sun has quenched
His Love in his cold Mistress Bed,
Semandra shall be mine; even all Semandra:
The thought is Ecstasy! these Arms shall hold her
Fast to my throbbing Breast; these ravished eyes
Gaze till they are blind, with looking on her Blushes;
These stifling Lips shall smother all her Smiles,
And follow her with such pursuit of Kisses,
That even our Souls shall lose themselves in pleasure.

Arch. First, send a Flying Messenger, with news
Of our great Victory.

Ziph. Ziphares self
Must be the Harbinger of his own joy:
I Will go, with the best-mounted Cavalry,
While you behind conduct, on easy March,
The weari'd Army. Once more let me lock
My Father thus.

Arch. My heart bodes happiness.

Ziph. 'Twere sin to doubt, since Fortune had no hand
In what our Swords by dint of Valor won:
She to the Brave was ever a cursed Foe;
But I at last have bound her to my Chariot,
By Conquering Virtue to be dragged along;
And while her broken Wheel is proudly born,
She shall be forced our Triumph to adorn.
Exeunt severally.
SCENE II.
The Palace-Garden.
Enter Pharnaces and Andravar.
Andr. THen there is hope, my Lord, the unsettled King
May yet relapse, and fall to Love again?

Phar. It Is certain that the end will Crown our wishes.
Late, as I pried about Semandra's Gardens,
Mad that our Plot a-ground, so plough'd to bear,
Should yield no Fruit, still thoughtful how to work him,
And watching for some accident, to fit
Our purpose, and redeem the last design,
I chanced to spy the fair Semandra sleeping;
But, in that posture, she appeared so lovely,
Bold as I am, she Charmed me into wonder:
But strait thy General came to rescue me,
Who took the hint immediately, and went
To see the King.

Andr. I guess the good design,
To draw him on to see our beauteous Foe.

Phar. You have it; and it is more than half effected.
I saw 'em walk: Pelopidas, by his action,
I know did kindle him with wondrous praise,
But once to view the bright Semandra sleeping;
But the King stopped, as if he feared to go;
Then side-long glanced, and sighed, and walked again,
Rubbing his hand upon his Face, to hide
The rising Blushes: but, behold 'em here!

Enter Mithridates, Pelopidas.
Mith. What are her Charms to me?

Pelop. It Is true, they are not;
And yet, methinks, the sight might draw down Jove --
Yet, I Would not ask you, for the World, to see her;
But that I think you 're Master of your promise:
I thought your God-like frame, your strength of mind
Not to be shook, therefore I wooed you, Sir,
In Curiosity, to see a Wonder;
But, if you doubt your self.

Mith. I think I need not:
I think my Virtue is resolved; but yet,
I fear, and therefore I will go no farther.

Pelop. It Is well resolved; and yet, methinks, 'twou'd raise
Your pity, more than love, to see the tears
Force through her snowy lids their melting course,
To lodge themselves on her red murmuring lips
That talk such mournful things; when strait, a gale
Of starting sighs carries those Pearls away,
As Dews, by Winds, are wafted from the Flowers.

Mith. It Is wondrous pitiful; by Heaven, it is!
I feel her sorrow working here; it calls
Fire to my breast, and water to my eyes,
And, if I durst.

Pelop. If you the least suspect
Your temper, if the smallest Breath of Love
But stir your heart; let me Conjure you, Sir,
Not to go on: the dazzling manner will
Disturb your quiet, and confound your Reason.

Mith. 'Twill be as well, tho I believe no Power
Can change my Virtue, yet 'twill be as well
If you relate exactly what you saw.

Pelop. Behold her then upon a Flowery Bank,
With her soft sorrows lulled into a slumber,
The Summers heat had, to her natural blush,
Added a brighter, and more tempting red;
The Beauties of her Neck and naked Breasts,
Lifted by inward starts, did rise and fall
With motion that might put a Soul in Statues:
The matchless whiteness of her foulded Arms,
That seemed to embrace the Body whence they grew,
Fixed me to gaze over all that Field of Love;
While to my ravished eyes officious winds,
Waving her Robes, displayed such handsome Limbs,
As Artists would in Polished Marble give
The Wanton Goddess, when supinely laid
She Charms her Gallant God to new enjoyment.

Mith. Something there is stirs mightily my Breast;
It Is Pity, sure, it can be only Pity:
Who knows, but that her multiplying fears,
And cruel griefs, in time, may give her death?
'Twere most Inhumane therefore not to go,
And comfort her, with praises of Ziphares:
I Will tell her how he Conquers, how he comes
Triumphant from the Consul's overthrow,
To take the Noble Wreaths he has deserved,
Embraces from her Arms; Circles more rich
Than all the Crowns my fruitless Valor won.
Yet, stay; I will not speak of him: 'twere rude
To break her rest; I Will see her, when she wakes.

Pelop. Then you dare trust your heart?

Mith. It Is sure I dare:
By Heaven, my Friends, I dare: I feel such strong
Collected Manly Virtue, that I Will on.

Pelop. Oh, sacred Sir, turn back: if, Conquered by
Her Beauties, you should love again, I know
Pelopidas must bear the blame of all;
Therefore, my Lord.

Mith. Away; by Heaven, I Will go.

Pelop. Oh, it is impossible, if once you loved
But you must certainly relapse:
Therefore your fearful Servant kneels and begs
You would turn back: Alas, he is conscious now
What a gross fault his foolish tongue committed,
By tempting unawares your Reason forth.

Mith. I Will see her; yes, it is resolved, I Will see her,
With all that World of Charms thou have described;
Therefore arise, and lead the way.

Pelop. Alas,
My Lord, I fear you; but it is your pleasure,
And I Am your Slave.

Mith. Reply not; but obey.
[Exeunt Mith. Pelop.
Phar. I feel a pleasant expectation breeding;
His starts, his stops: by Mars, he loves her still:
Join then the much prevailing circumstance,
Of Time, and Place; the absence of my Brother,
To make Guilt bold; the loneness of her Mansion:
Both strong Incentives to a violent Lover.

Andr. Then Love has blessed you on the other hand,
Since, by our subtle practices, we brought
Monima to disgrace; with whom you may
Divert, till we have gained our full Revenge.
I have the guard of her.

Phar. I Am glad thou have.
Then, to complete the ruin of Ziphares,
I hear his Mother, fearful of the Event
Of this long War, and loving him as life,
With Pompey holds private Intelligence,
And has, to Rome, given all those Castles up,
Which she had charge of, to preserve her Son.

Andr. This, when occasion calls, I Will aggravate,
To mad your Father more. But see, the General!

Enter Pelopidas.
Pelop. He Is gone; he is ruined; quite transported with
The Ecstasy of Love: I left him kneeling
Close to her side, winding about his Heart
Such Nets of Beauty, as must hold him fast;
Therefore, when he approaches us for comfort,
Showing his griefs, and seeking shroud for guilt,
Let us encourage, to our utmost power,
What e're his Violent Love dares put in act.

Enter Mithridates.
Mith. Torment of heart! Oh, feeble Virtue! hence,
I blow thee from the Palace, to the Cottage;
To build in Hearts of Hinds, bless their rude hands
With thy lean recompense of endless labor:
For me, since I have burst the ungrateful Chain
That held me to thee like a shackled Slave,
I will enjoy what e're the Gods have given,
And surfeit on the Beauties of Semandra.
Oh, my dear Son, my best, my own Pharnaces;
By Heaven, thou never did oppose my pleasure,
As does Ziphares: but I Will cast him out,
That Bosom-Wolf, who laps my dearest blood,
And lodge thee there; thou will not rack me thus.

Phar. The Gods forbid. But why, Sir, will you bear it?

Pelop. I could not think you loved her at this rate;
Therefore I hope forgotten Virtue yielded
To bolder pleasures, and you quenched your fires.

Mith. Drawn by resistless Love, I put one knee
To Earth, and gently bowing down my head,
First took at distance the sweet-wafted breath;
Which blew my flames to such a raging height,
That straight I fell upon her Balmy Lips,
And glew'd my own so fiercely, that she waked:
And, starting up, soon vanished from my sight,
Leaving me dumb, pale, languishing, and dying,
Rent with her Charms, distracted with the rage
Of my desires, and torn with cruel Love.

Pelop. Why stopped you there? I would have followed her
Into her inmost Closet; pardon me,
If I prove passionate to see you thus:
Better a million of such slight-soul'd things
Were ravished, massacred, than Mithridates
Suffer one moments care.

Phar. I have no patience.
By your great Glory, 'twas not Nobly done:
In The midst of groans, and cries, and gushing tears,
I would have ravished her; -- your Royal Hand,
Locked in her Amber-Hair, should then have forced her;
Who knows, but opposition mounts the joy?
Like that Athenian Tyrant, who never took
His Barge for pleasure, but in highest Storms;
Then would he stand like Neptune on his Deck,
And laugh to see the Dolphins back the billows.

Andr. Say but the word, I Will fetch her from the Altar
To your embraces: never did I see
So strange an alteration; your fierce eye,
Which, like the Sun at Noon, none could behold
But with a snatch of light, and then be dazzled:
Now, like a cold and drouzy Winter-star,
Bears a bleak brightness. O decay of luster!

Mith. I am not as I was. -- Ha! whence this noise?
[Shout within. Ex. Pelop. and Andra.
Phar. My Lord, this Passion has unmanned you quite:
Forgetful of the glorious Fields you won,
You lose your dear bought Honors in a day,
And sell your Fame to your ambitious Son.
The Coward Glabrio, whom by flying Agents
I hear, in diverse Skirmishes he vanquished,
Has swelled him so, and blown him to that height,
He rides upon the shoulders of his Army:
They heave him, as he were a God, in Air,
And dance before him, shouting in their Songs,
You are their Saturn, but the Prince their Jove,
All that their waning Faith can give Ambition;
And he too laughs, to hear the thundering Titles.

Mith. And, for a recompense, shall I bestow
Upon this Traitor, all I love on Earth?
No, my Pharnaces, I have marked him dead,
If that Semandra's loss can bring his ruin:
Not but the thought I go with shows me just
To what she shall appear: the Noble wile
Kills by her seeming Infidelity.
Monima too must perish for dishonor;
But rather to make way for my new Love,
And fix the giddy People on my side.
[Shouts again. Again these shouts?

Phar. I guess Ziphares comes.

Mith. Down, struggling Nature;
Die, die, thou Ravisher of my Repose;
Be strangled in me all remorse, all thoughts
Of pity; yet I will be calmly cruel,
Nor shall he find the depth of my Revenge.

Enter Andravar.
Andr. Your Son has Conquered, mightiest of Kings;
But by a way so infamously base,
I fear my doom will scarce be less than death
For the relation.

Mith. Monstrous may it be;
For I so hate him now, I wish for Crimes
Of deepest grain, for color to his Fate.

Andr. His Royal Mother, the False Stratonice,
To whom you gave in Custody Inora,
The strongest, richest Fort of all the East,
E're he with Glabrio joined, to Rome did yield
That wondrous mass of treasure, with her Honor.

Mith. Cursed State of Monarchs! Let the judging World
Now weigh our pleasures, with our mightier troubles,
And find us happier than the rest of men!
False Beauty, thou shall die, thou bane of greatness;
Or, if I cannot reach thy fickle being,
I Will punish thee by ruining Ziphares.

Andr. This have I learnt by frequent Messengers,
Who warrant with their lives, how by consent
Glabrio but skirmish'd with the Prince your Son,
And was by Stratonice bribed before.

Mith. Plots, Treasons, horrid black Conspiracies!
Mother and Son, Oh Parricides! combine;
But if you escape me, may I sleep my Reign out.
Enter Pelopidas. What says Pelopidas? What of Ziphares?
Bring'st thou more matter for my Curses? Speak.

Pelop. He comes, my Lord, and with a Port so proud,
As if he had subdued the spacious World,
And all Synope's Streets are filled with such
A glut of People, you would think some God
Had conquered in their Cause, and they thus ranked
That he might make his entrance on their heads:
While from the Scaffolds, Windows, tops of Houses,
Are cast such gaudy showers of Garlands down,
That even the Crowd appear like Conquerors,
And the whole City seems like one vast Meadow,
Set all with Flowers, as a clear Heaven with Stars.

Mith. Ungrateful Slaves! by Mars, when I returned,
Worn with the hardship of a ten-years War,
My Army's heavy-gaited, bruised and hacked,
With cutting Roman lives;
They never received me with a pomp like this.

Pelop. Nay, as I heard, e're he the City entered,
Your Subjects lined the ways for many furlongs;
The very Trees bore men: and, as our God,
When from the Portal of the East he dawns,
Beholds a thousand Birds upon the boughs,
To welcome him with all their warbling throats,
And prune their feathers in his Golden Beams;
So did your Subjects, in their gaudy'st trim,
Upon the pendant branches, speak his praise.
Mothers, who covered all the banks beneath,
Did rob their crying Infants of the breast,
Pointing Ziphares out to make 'em smile;
And climbing Boys stood on their Father's shoulders,
Answering their shouting Sires with tender cries,
To make the Consort up of general joy.

Mith. What, will you bear your part too? Oh the Gods!
He is transported with the ample Theme,
And plays the Orator! Plagues rot thy Tongue,
And blasted be the Lungs that breathed his welcome,
Perish the Bodies that went forth to meet him,
A prey for Worms, to stink in hollow ground.
O, Viper! Villain! not content to take
My Love, but Life! will thou unthrone me too?
Shall Mithridates live to be deposed;
A Stale, the Image of what once he was;
The very Ghost of his departed Greatness;
A thing for Slaves to be familiar with,
To gape, to nod, and sleep in my scorned face?
Awake, awake, thou sluggard Majesty,
Rouse thee to Act; tho all the Elements,
Tho Heaven and Hell, Subjects and Sons conspire,
With Fate thy Empires fall; oppose their will:
Dare to the last, and be a Monarch still.
[Exit.
Pelop. What think you now?

Phar. I think, for my Revenge,
For any act that witty horror asks,
Thou art an Instrument so black and fit,
The Furies joined in Council could not match thee.
But see, Ziphares comes: with what a Train
Of Priests! nay, then the God must be Adored.

The Scene being drawn, represents Ziphares's Triumph, which is a Street full
of Pageants, crowded with People, who from the Windows fling down Garlands:
others dance before him, while the Priests sing, Ziphares resting under a
Canopy of State.
Ziph. Enough, my Friends, my Noble Countrymen,
I am indebted to your Bounties ever;
But let me now Conjure you, cease the noise
Of your loud thanks, lest we disturb the King:
We Are near the Palace, and my boding heart
Says he interprets rudely this our Triumph
Which you, against my will, have forced upon me;
Therefore Ziphares begs you to retire:
By the small Victories my Arms have gained,
If you have any Love, as much you show,
Let me entreat you all, by that affection,
Even now, upon this instant, to disband.

All. Long live our King, and Noble Prince Ziphares.
[Exeunt shouting.
Phar. Welcome, Ziphares, welcome to Synope;
Still, when Fate calls thee forth, may thou return,
Thus swelled, thus Lord Triumphant over the Romans.

Ziph. Had I subdued the World, I should detest
The Title of Triumpher, and scarce think
That man my friend who praises at your rate.

Pelop. Had not the Monster multitude received you Sir,
With such a monstrous State, methinks,
Like Hercules, you should have slain the Hydra.

Andr. Heard you but Sir, how, with hundred mouths,
It worshipped, as you were already Crowned:
Long live our King, the Noble Prince Ziphares?

Ziph. What, Villains! Ha! Gods, have I flesh and bear it?
Pharnaces, off; by my just wrath they die.
[Exeunt Pel. and Andr.
Phar. The King! remember how this Rage will sound.

Ziph. O the cursed Traitors! Brother, beware of 'em:
How e're they crouch at present to your Fortune,
For I perceive your favor warmed the Snakes
To stir, they have no sense of gratitude:
I found 'em base, and therefore did discard 'em;
For which, the Slaves have sworn me mortal hate;
But if I live I Will crush 'em.

Phar. You Will to the King?

Ziph. I will. Methinks this meeting was unlucky;
My heart misgives me more, and higher beats
With this last heat, than all the toil of War:
Perhaps, they move the King; but sure not much:
Or if they do, tho our great Father frowns,
One smile, one tear of joy from my Semandra
Will wash the anger of the Gods away.
[Exit.
Phar. Go, and the welcome that I wish attend thee.
Of all my Elder Brothers, he remains
To cross my hopes, and bar me from the Crown:
Whom yet I doubt not, by my Engines help,
To burst in sunder, and then gild my Brows.
Methinks I should become the Golden-Hoop
That circles in one quarter of the Globe:
I have it just; my Scepter waving thus,
The starting Princes run to clear my way.
Enter Mithridates, Semandra, Pelopidas, Andravar, Guards. But hold, my Father
comes, with sad Semandra!
Weep on; while I go laugh my cares away
With Monima, who must or yield or die.
[Exit.
Mith. Has not the Traitor won my Subjects hearts?
Has not his Mother basely too, betrayed me?
Has he not dared to Triumph without leave?
Which, when my faithful'st worthi'st Counselors
Rebuked him for, with mild and gentle Language,
He redned with proud anger, drew his Sword;
Then, like a monstrous Parricide, came on
Here, to my Palace, Heading the wild Crowd,
So through the Bodies of my Friends to pass,
Till with his barbarous hand he reached my Bosom.

Sem. It Is false; it is all most horrid Perjury;
And the cursed spotted Souls of these vile Traitors
Shall burn for this beneath: I know they hate
The Gallant Prince, and now conspire against him;
With words, made up with all the blasts of Hell
They strike your sacred Ears, bewitch your Senses,
And with those Spells that foulest Treason hatched,
Stagger your Royal Reason. O yet hear me!

Mith. From what I have decreed, no Charm, no Power,
No Eloquence; not Mercy's self, adorned
In all Semandra's Beauties, in her tears,
Prostrate upon the Earth, and hanging on
My knees, nay dying with her grief, shall move me.

Sem. I now believe you are not to be moved;
Therefore with my undaunted Innocence,
I stand to hear the Doom you have decreed.

Mith. If when Ziphares, at your first appearance,
Runs to your Arms, fired with expected joys,
You thrust him not away, and slight him strangely,
With all the marks of the most proud disdain,
That a most faithless and ambitious Woman
Could show to gain the Empire of the World;
He shall be stabbed, be murdered by my Guards,
Before your eyes.

Sem. O, it is not possible,
That you can mean the dreadful things you speak:
You speak it but to try the poor Semandra.

Mith. Mark me most heedfully, for it is most true,
And sooner shall a dooming God recall
His Stygian Oath, than I renounce my Vow:
He dies, I say, if you receive him not
With all the coldness of a fair Apostate,
Whose Chastity the poison of sweet Power
Had brought to ruin, whose protested Faith
The Charms of Empire had quite turned to Air.

Sem. Gods, do you hear the Tyrant?

Mith. Do you hear me?
If to your words, which must make plain your falsehood,
Your looks should give the Lie, by amorous glances,
And languishings, for Lovers eyes will talk;
Or, as you speak your hate, mixed sighs arise,
Or faultring speech, or any other mark,
To show that you are forced to what you say;
Then, from the place where I shall stand concealed,
I Will give the Signal to my waiting Guards,
Who in a moment shall destroy your Lover,
When all your tears and sighs shall not recall him.

Sem. I Will die, I Will die, ten thousands deaths I Will die,
Rather than meet him thus: what, after all
The dreadful Imprecations that I made him,
And swore upon my Fathers Sword, a Faith,
A spotless Love, for ever to endure;
Shall I abjure my Oaths, and to his face
Protest a falsehood, and belie my heart?

Miih. Take your own course; I have sworn.

Sem. O Tyranny!
What, shall I meet him after all his hardships,
After the heats and colds, and smarting wounds,
Which for my sake he patiently endured,
Still chearing up himself, that after all
The blood he lost, he should enjoy Semandra,
His gentle Mistress one day should reward him,
For the long mischiefs of a cruel War?

Mith. I have not leisure now to hear complaints:
Either resolve to obey, and speedily,
Or you and I must never see him more.

Sem. Stay, Royal Sir, come back: never see him more!
And if I die, rather than see him thus,
Will you not save his life?

Mith. Your death, Semandra!
The very mention hastens on his fate.

Sem. Alas, alas! I fear, if I but look
As if I knew him not, or had forgot him,
So nice and tender is his love,
So soft his disposition, 'twill be fatal.

Mith. Then, you resolve his death?

Sem. It cannot be.
No, I will see him, tho I must be cruel;
But bate a little of your Imposition:
An unkind word will kill the poor Ziphares,
As sure as all the hate which you enjoin me.

Enter Ismenes.
Isme. The Prince Ziphares begs admittance of Your Majesty.

Mith. You must retire, Semandra.

Sem. O Torment! O the Racks of Love distressed
Like mine! of Passion at a loss like mine!
Help me, you Gods, or I shall faint with bearing.
[Exit.
Mith. Call in the Prince. -- What, Nature yet again?
I charge thee trouble my repose no more.

Enter Ziphares.
Ziph. It Is well, you Powers that pry into our hearts,
Well have I lost my dearest blood in battle,
Since once again I see my Royal Father.

Mith. Ziphares, rise; I hear you have fought well,
Too well perhaps for Mithridates peace:
You Triumphed too, I hear.

Ziph. Alas, my Lord,
I fear Pelopidas and Andravar
Have been too busy with your Ear.
By my best hopes, by your most Sacred Life,
I would not Triumph till your Orders came;
At least, they told me, that they came from you:
If they were false, --

Mith. They were your Friends who brought
Those Orders; therefore you are not in fault:
Nor ought you share the Crimes of Stratonice.

Ziph. Of Stratonice! Ah, what has she done?
Ah, Sir, what Villain has tradue'd my Mother?
Give me to know --

Mith. Perhaps you 're ignorant:
Would I had been so too; but to the purpose.
I promised, when the Consul was overcome,
To give Semandra to you: -- Seem not sad,
You love your Father well; but, Prince, I know
Your Passion for Semandra is the highest:
I Will send her to you, if you please retain her.
[Exit.
Ziph. Is this then thy reward, unnecessary Virtue?
Why do we wear thee thus, to our undoing?
O, inauspicious Stars! thy Father hates thee,
Because thou art too good! went it not so?
I fought too well! His eye disdained me too,
And held my High Desert at hateful distance:
But, let it be, there is satisfaction still
In Innocence: and conscious Glory tells me,
My Griefs shall fly, like Clouds, before Semandra.
Enter Semandra. But see, the Sun that drives 'em! O my Star!
Thou Day, that gild'st my little World of comfort,
Give me thy warmth; let me, upon thy Bosom,
Breath all my Victories. Alas, the King,
My cruel Father, -- Ha! what now, Semandra?
Not fly into my arms! O all you Powers
That Nursed our tender Loves, she turns away!
Have thou too caught the coldness of my Father?
Clear me, you Gods, and fix my Understanding
To this one view, left I mistake all measure,
And run to madness. What, not look upon me?
By Heaven, if thus, if thus I should behold thee,
Tho in a Dream, 'twou'd make me wish to sleep for ever.
O my dear Life! thou shall not hide thy kindness;
But to dissemble thus a moment longer,
Would quite destroy the Passionate Ziphares.
I Will force thy hand, thus, to my trembling lips.

Sem. The kiss you ravish, Prince, is dangerous;
And let me now Conjure you, by your Love,
If you can love after what I enjoin you,
Upon your life, offer the like no more.
O Man me, Reason, with thy utmost force;
Or Passion, with the dreadful starts it makes,
Will soon Divorce my Soul from this weak Body.
What have thou said? and, Ah! what have I heard?
Fair cruel faithless, for the blood I lost,
Do thou thus meet me? Raise thy eyes from Earth,
And tell me, Have I, Ah, have I deserved
This usage from my dear adored Semandra?

Sem. You deserve all things; but you must not ask
My Love, unless you wish me most unhappy.

Ziph. O, you good Gods! is it then come to this?
Shall I, shall I -- but speak it once again,
Unhappy! did thou, could thou say unhappy?

Sem. I Would have you strive, my Lord, to love me less.

Ziph. If you would have it so, be witness, Heaven,
If for your quiet you enjoin me this,
I Will strive; but (oh!) it is most impossible:
Ah, may I not presume to ask, if this
The reason be why I should love you less,
That the too happy King may love you more? --
-- Your silence does confirm Ziphares lost:
And all that I could fear is come upon me.
Ah, Barbarous King! I Will bear thy Bonds no longer;
But cast off Duty, as thou have all Love,
Thou bloody Author of this wretched Being.
Tyrant --

Sem. Take heed, Ziphares, how you wrong your Father:
I Have heard you give another Character,
So different from this last, of Mithridates,
Methinks you scarce appear the same Ziphares
Whom once I knew.

Ziph. It is most sure I do not;
But, to convince me more, quite to complete
The cruel sum of all my desperate woes,
And sink me ever; what, Madam, have you heard
Me say? or, rather, what is it you would say
In ill-time praised, of this inhumane Father?

Sem. Have I not heard you speak the tender'st things,
How, but for some few faults, so small, that scarce
The Eye of Envy or of Hate could find'em,
He would be perfect as the Gods themselves;
A King so awful, that the Romans feared him,
A King so merciful, Barbarians loved him?
A King --

Ziph. No more; I am confirmed: she is lost:
The King! she is gone; the Beauty of the Earth,
All that in Woman could be Virtue called
Is lost.
Corrupted are her Noble Faculties,
The temper of her Soul is quite infected:
Inconstancy, the Plague that first or last
Taints the whole Sex, the catching Court-disease,
Has spotted all her white, her Virgin Beauties.

Sem. You think me false -- Ah, it is but just you should!
But, Prince, I swear, I am not what you think me;
Yet never can be yours.

Ziph. O confusion!
Never! O horror? never can be yours!
Thou tear'st my heart! call back those dreadful words;
Tho thou art going, yet thou art not gone:
Ah, e're it be too late, behold me gasping.
Come to my Arms; Oh, leave me not for ever:
Fall on my Bosom, I Will forget thy weakness;
Try to deceive my self with specious Reasons,
Never upbraid thee that thou once were false,
But with my tears wash all thy stains away. (Counsel;

Sem. Since tears (O help me Heaven!) are vain, take, take my
Cheer your sad heart, and grieve, Oh grieve no more!

Ziph. Then thou art lost? resolved upon my ruin?

Sem. Your life's too precious: I resolve against it!
Not for ten thousand Worlds -- What was I saying?
[Aside. What shall I say? Live, live, thou lost Ziphares.

Ziph. No, thou perfidious Maid, thou wretched Beauty,
Ziphares loves thee still; so well he loves thee,
That he will die, to rid thee of a torment.
Where are thy Vows? O think upon thy Father,
How this will cut him, this thy cruel Change,
And break his aged heart: or, e're he dies,
Think, if his kindled rage should execute
What he has sworn, to hack thy beauteous Limbs,
Tear thy false flesh into a thousand pieces.

Sem. If that were all my fear! --

Ziph. What, hardened! Oh my Stars!
So quickly perfect in the cursed Trade?
I shall go mad with the Imagination.
O heart! tho Heaven had opened the pregnant Clouds,
And teemed, with all the never-erring Gods,
To swear on Earth Semandra had been false,
Semandra had been false to her Ziphares,
I would not have believed.

Sem. I cannot hear this grief, nor must I cure it.
Farewell -- O Prince -- Instruct me, Heaven to save him.
Aside.
Ziph. Stay thee; there is something, e're we part for ever,
That I would speak: if I could make it way.

Sem. Speak then, and speak the mournful'st things you can,
To break both hearts.

Ziph. Thou have undone me; like a Silver-Frost,
Thou come upon the Flower of all my Youth,
To nip the tender Bud, and blast my Glory:
Yet I will live, Semandra, I will live,
To save thee from thy Father's cruel rage;
For, wicked as thou art, with grief, I feel
My Soul looks after thee, and seeks thy safety.

Sem. I shall not hold; I feel the climbing grief:
My eyes grow full, and I shall give him Death.
Aside.
Ziph. Farewell. Thus, kneeling at thy feet, I pour
These parting tears; and sure, the happy King,
In pity will allow this dying Kiss,
Which my cold lips print on thy faithless hand.
Oh, all my Vows, for ever here I leave you;
And, since we never, never must behold
Each other more, I Will breath'em once again:
Farewell, Semandra. O, thou wilt never find,
In all thy search of Love, a heart like mine.
Once more, Farewell for ever, false Semandra.
What? yet again thy name? will my Charmed tongue
Sound nothing but Semandra? Oh, Semandra!
Exit.
Enter Mithridates, with Priests.
Sem. The cruel Task is done; and I can hold
No longer! --
Come back Semandra, Empire, Empire calls thee,
Open thy eyes to meet thy coming glory!
O barbarous Prince, may I not die in quiet?

Mith. Talk not of dying,
See this Holy Man --

Sem. Holy, Profane,
All things are now alike to my distraction.

Mith. He instantly shall join your hand with mine.

Sem. What means the Tyrant?

Mith. You are now our Queen.

Sem. First let me seek a Dragon in his Den;
Embrace an Aspic, curl with Basilisks,
E're I give up this Body, this poor Beauty
To any but my Lord, the wronged Ziphares.

Mith. I guess you would not, by your free consent;
But I shall force, if you refuse to yield:
This moment I will take you in my Chariot,
Straight to the Temple, and in public Wed you;
Tho you refuse to join in Ceremony,
Instead of sacred words venting loud Curses,
'T will not avail; for when the Mystery's done,
I Will bear you back, and as my Queen enjoy you.

Sem. I will be dragged; die stifled, with my grief.

Mith. You have the Will, but not the Power to die.

Sem. None! is there none? no pitying God awake?
And are your Priests Confederate in my ruin?
They sure will tell you of your Tyranny,
And fear too much the anger of the Heavens,
To force a helpless Virgin: they will speak
Your Crimes abroad; will you not, Holy Men?

Mith. Let me but hear the Holiest of 'em cross me,
By Heaven, he shall go Sacrifice beneath:
Therefore away, Priest, forward to the Temple.

Sem. Help, help, you Gods.

Mith. All thought of help is vain.
Give me your beauteous hand, and willingly,
Or here are arms to bear you.

Sem. Let 'em be;
Call all your Armies hither to your aid,
I will not stir, nor give this trembling hand
To gain an Empire: thus, to the Earth, I Will grow
One piece. O, root me here, some pitying God,
And let me lose my being, to escape him.

Mith. Andravar, raise her gently from the ground:
[They take her in their arms. Take help, and bring her softly to my Chariot.

Sem. Stay, Mithridates; hear me but one word;
One moments stay: even Malefactors are
Allowed to speak before their Execution;
And shall not I? I, who am Innocent?
It Is not to thee, but to the Gods, I bow:
Behold; -- but see, from you, from you they take me:
O save me thus by cruel men betrayed;
Revenge your selves, and right a Ravished Maid.

ACT IV. SCENE I.
Mithridates encompassed with the Ghosts of his Sons, who set Daggers to his
Breast, and vanish.
WHat Hoa! Pelopidas! why, Andravar!
Haste to my help.
Enter Pelopidas, Andravar.
Pelop. What would your Majesty?

Mith. I would, what I must never expect on Earth,
The Peace I had. Come nearer. Oh, my Friends!
If Fate did e're foreshow a Doom in sleep,
Mine is at hand. Last night, you well remember,
I bore Semandra from the Thundering Gods,
Who shook the deep Foundations of the Temple,
With the reports of Wrath Divine; yet I,
This desperate wretch, through streets of fire, did bear her
Back, in a Swoon, to my most inward Closet:
But there you left me; left me to the rage
Of monstrous Love, which, in the midst of faintings,
With Transports yet unheard of, forced a Joy
Whose momentary pleasures will heap on me
Whole Worlds of Furies, Hells of endless horror.

Pelop. But, Sir, the Dream; that may divert your cares.

Mith. Divert 'em! rather let me gather all my courage
To Bulwark in my Soul. O plant me round
With your kind Bodies; blunt, if possible,
Heavens whetted vengeance, while I tell the Vision.
After the dreadful Ecstasy was over,
The Ravished Maid, half-dead with shrieking prayers,
Burst, at the last, from my relenting Arms,
Ran to my Sword, of which when I disarmed her,
She fled the Room, with cries like one distracted.
Pressed with Remorse, I rested on my Couch,
And slept; but oh, a Dream so full of terror,
The pale, the trembling midnight Ravisher
Never saw, when cold Lucretia's Mourning-Shadow
His Curtains drew, and lashed him in the eyes
With her bright Tresses, dabbled in her blood.

Pelop. I have heard of Dreams that have proved Ominous;
But I could never fix my Faith on Fancies.

Mith. Methought, by Heavenly Order I was doomed
To seek my Fate alive in the other World:
Straight, like a Feather, I was borne by Winds,
To a steep Promontory's top, from whence
I saw the very Mouth of Opening Hell;
Shooting so fast through the void Caves of night,
I had not time to ponder of my passage.
I shot the Lake of Oaths, where Fleeting Ghosts,
Whose Bodies were unbury'd, begged for wastage:
Then was I thrown down the Infernal Courts,
Infinite fathom, till I soared again
To the bright Heavenly Plains, the happy Fields.

Andr. I wonder, that the brittle thread of thought
Should hold in such a maze!

Mith. Oh, now it comes.
After that Heavenly Sounds had Charmed my Ears,
Methought I saw the Spirits of my Sons,
Slain by my jealousy of their Ambition,
Who shrieked, He Is come! our cruel Father's come!
Arm, arm, they cried, through all the enameled Grove:
Straight had their cries alarmed the wounded Host
Of all those Romans, massacred in Asia:
I heard the empty clank of their thin Arms,
And tender voices cried, Lead, Pompey, lead.
Straight they came on, with Chariots, Horse and Foot.
When I had leisure to discern their Chief,
Methought that Pompey was my Son Ziphares;
Who cast his dreadful Pile, and pierced my heart:
Then such a din of Death, Swords, Spears and Javelins,
Clatter'd about me, that I waked with terror,
And found my self extended on the Floor.

Enter Pharnaces.
Phar. Arm, arm, Great Mithridates, the big War
Comes with vast leaps, bounding over all the East,
Which crouches to the Torrent: Pompey comes;
Pompey the Great, saluted Emperor,
And, for some years, destined to govern all
The Italian Armies, with such full Commission,
As yet was never granted to a Roman.
Pompey, so young, so soft, in shining Courts,
That all the Roman Ladies languish for him:
Pompey, so fierce in Camps, so brave in Fields,
The very Boys, like Cupids, dressed in Arms,
Clap their young harnessed thighs, and strut to Battle:
Pompey, Rome's Darling, and Fame's Eldest Son,
Proclaims with Mithridates mortal War.

Mith. Were all well here, what force, what Roman Arms,
What General, marching at the Head of Millions,
Could daunt the bold, the forward Mithridates?
But here, Pharnaces, in my guilty Bosom,
The fatal Foe does undermine my quiet;
Black Legions, are my thoughts; not Pompey, but
Ziphares comes, with all his wrongs, for Arms,
Like the Lieutenant of the Gods, against me:
Semandra too, like bleeding Victory,
Stands on his side, and cries out, Kill, kill, kill
That cursed Parricide, that Ravisher.
Oh Heaven, sustain me, or I shall go mad.
My ugly guilt lies in my conscious face,
And I am vanquished, slain with Bosom-war.

Phar. It Is much beneath your Majesty, to alarm^
Your self with fears.

Mith. Pharnaces, you are ignorant!
I tell thee, Boy, remorse and upstart fear
Oppresses me, in spite of all my knowledge:
Tho none of those that boast Philosophy
Has made a deeper search in Nature's Womb
Than I; (the midnight Moon has seen my watchings)
I tell thee, none can name her infinite seeds
Like me; nor better knows her sparks of light,
Those Gems that shine in the blew-Ring of Heaven;
None knows more Reasons for, or against yon' first
Bright Cause, can talk of accidents
Above me: yet I tell thee, once again,
There is a Thorn, called Conscience, makes its way
Through all the Fence of Pleasure, fortified
With reasons, that this ill seemed good to me,
And stings thy guilty Father to the Soul.

Pelop. After the fierceness of uncommon pleasure,
A sudden heaviness is natural.

Andr. Not but the fading Spirits will revive.

Mith. Never, oh never: nor did I enjoy
Expected pleasure, tho these hands did hold,
All night, her panting Beauties to my breast;
But, oh! what joy, what pleasure, what content,
Could my griev'd-heart receive in ravished kindness!
Her lips, which if Ziphares had been there,
Would sure have shot their gleamy warmth at distance,
Were cold to me, as Odours are in Frost:
Her face, like weeping Marble, damped my flames;
And, as I drew her trembling to my Arms,
She fainted still, and wooed me with such wailings,
Such languishings, and broken sighs, to leave her;
That, had not more than monstrous appetite
Transported me, the Rose had been unblasted.

Phar. You think of her too much: the Sex of Women,
The ravished Beauties of the Earth together,
Deserve not half the grief that clouds your Brow.

Pelop. Your Subjects want you, to defend their lives;
Each Citizen, in Armor clad, defends
His Houshold-Gods, standing to guard his door,
And cries, a Leader, let us to the Wars.

Mith. The Thunderbolt of Mithridates battle,
That tore the Roman Banners, now is lost:
My arm, my arm, even my right arm is lost.
Nor will my Trumpets sound, without Ziphares:
His Breath was as the Air, to all the Army;
His Face was as the Sun, in depth of Winter;
And made cold Cowards blush away their fears;
But he is set, for ever set in sorrow.

Andr. Your Majesty is, of your self, sufficient
To Head your eager Troops; or brave Pharnaces
Stands forth, to fill Ziphares empty place.

Pelop. Ziphares still your Royal Favor had,
To improve himself in Arms, against the Romans;
While, in inglorious Fields, Pharnaces strove
Amongst Barbarians, to get a Name:
And tho, perhaps, he greater pains employed,
In rooting up such Rubbish of the Earth,
Than the other did in felling the tall Trees;
Yet this was paid with Labor, that with Praise.

Mith. Peace, Villains; peace, conspiring Sycophants:
Now, by the Gods, my eyes are half unsealed;
But, if the thought that kindles in my breast
Finds proper fuel to increase my fire,
It shall consume you, Traitors; if I find
(Which I begin to do) that you have played
The Villain, Andravar, or thou Pelopidas,
And laid Semandra's Beauty as a snare
To catch Ziphares life, (Oh, all the Gods!)
And ruin me, by placing of the Bait:
Mark me, if ought of this, if any shadow
Appear, that you conspired to betray me;
I Will heap such horrors on your frighted Souls,
That you shall call your Brother-Devils up,
To snatch you hence, rather than stand my fury.

Pelop. Why should your Majesty suspect your Servants?

Mith. Because thou did foment my fatal passion;
And, when I view thee well, my Genius bids
Beware of thee: tho thy most subtle Devil
Has wrought me still to listen to thy lies;
Thou art, methinks, maliciously contrived,
And have, if ever yet a Villain had,
The Face of a most subtle working Slave.

Andr. We have done naught, but what your Royal Word
Did Warrant: if you loved, should we rebuke it?
Or durst we think to quench a fire, which you
Resolved should burn?

Mith. Yes, Traitors, yes; you ought,
When you had seen me going, to have stopped me:
My struggling Virtue might, with some assistance,
Have cast the Venom of my Passion up;
But, with your poisonous breath, you made it rage,
Till I was fit to ruin poor Semandra.
Enter Semandra. But, oh! behold the Innocence I wronged!

Sem. What, do thou start? Oh Heavens! Semandra frights him!
Why, what a Monster then must I appear,
Whose Form can shake the bloody Mithridates!
It Is sure, thou have undone this helpless Creature,
[Weeping. And turned to mortal paleness all her Beauties;
Thou have made her hate the Day which once adorned
Her opening Sweets: how wretched have thou made me!
Yet, Oh my Soul, thou inward knowledge, speak,
How much I hate this violated Shrine.

Mith. Wretched Semandra!

Sem. Do thou pity me?
Is the long Line of my Eternal grief
Of such a Charming force, that it can fetch
Tears from that Rock? Ah, most unheard of sorrow!
Do thou repent? or are they but feigned tears?
What-e're they are, thou should have thought before,
The cruel consequence of this dark deed;
When I was heaved in Air, and with my cries
Pierced the deaf Heavens, and called to thee for mercy,
Then had thou thus dissolved, I should have blessed thee:
But now, thy black Repentance comes too late.
What, Ah! what satisfaction can thou make?

Mith. Instruct me.

Sem. No: there is in Nature none;
Since I can never be Ziphares Bride.
For if thou should consent to make us one,
And Heaven should Warrant it; nay, tho Ziphares
Extravagantly should consent to take me,
Ah, could I meet those dear, those faithful arms,
Which yet, in sleep, never touched a breast but mine,
Thus wronged, and thus defiled, thus nothing left,
Of his Semandra, but her spotless mind!
This is too much to think. Ah, cruel King!
Now I could curse, now I could tear my self,
Now I could weep, as if 'twere possible
To wash my stains out. Tell me, O you Powers,
For I Will be calm, was I not worth your care?
And why, you Gods, was Virtue made to suffer?
Unless this World be but as fire, to purge
Her dross, that she may mount, and be a Star.
Were this but certain; Ah, there is nothing sure,
But my irrevocable Fate: undone Semandra! --
This, this is certain, Death with loss of Honor.
[Exit.
Mith. Farewell, Semandra, thou most wronged of Women.
But I Will this instant go to Monima,
And if I find what I suspect; Pharnaces,
I Will cut thee off, as an infectious limb:
And, for those Villains, I shall quickly know
The wrong she has had; whose accused Innocence
If your foul words have sullied with black slander,
Think not to escape, for should you ride on Charms,
Take Winds to bear you, or the Lightning's speed,
With panting horror to the brink of Hell,
I Would sweep you from the Verge to flames beneath,
And sink your Villainies with weighty death.
[Exit.
Phar. First, sink your self, your Crown and Love together.
Pelopidas, this comes of your cool counsel:
Had I been heard, Monima had been gone
By this; enjoyed, and Crowned my Royal Bride,
And we received, as Conquerors, by the Romans.
Have thou not heard how when Tygranes came,
And cast his Diadem at Pompey's feet,
He called him King, and raised him by that Name
To sit as Equal to the Roman Consul?
By all the Gods, I will not stay a moment,
But take immediately my flight; except
You swear to side with Rome; call Pompey hither,
And haste with all the Forces we can make,
To join his Army, and betray my Father.

Pelop. A sudden thought of lucky mischief comes;
Old Archelaus is arrived, but left
The labored Army some few furlongs hence;
You know the violent love the Soldiers bear
The Prince your Brother; and we know too well,
And so do all the murmuring Citizens,
How cruelly your Father lately used him:
But that great Mole, the Multitude, never sees
Who works their Prince, but still take all on trust;
Therefore I instantly will spread amongst em,
How Archelaus was Conspirator
Against the Prince, and finding more advantage
To have the King his Son in-law, by Letters
Basely compelled his Daughter to the Marriage.

Phar. Millions to one but this will set 'em on
To tear cursed Archelaus, like mad Dogs.
Besides, I find, by frequent murmures, how
His Subjects are quite tired with length of War;
And, but last night, I know no less than twelve,
All Captains, who conspired to take the part
Of Pompey, and entreated me to Head 'em.

Andr. Pursue the Treason, and be sure it cool not;
While I, with Tryphon, hasten to the Army:
A Priest will color well our enterprise.
There will we give out all that Treachery
Can raise to fire 'em; how the King has doomed
The Prince to death, having first ravished from him
The Fair Semandra, for whose sake he dies.

Phar. While I immediately to Pompey send,
Who comes, I hear, on hasty march, to fight
Our Army, and besiege us in our Walls.

Pelop. Thus shall the Prince and I rule all within;
And you, with the High Priest my Brother, play
Your Parts without.

Phar. I long to be in action:
And sure Rome must, for the great overthrow,
Give me my Father's Crowns; which gratitude
Shall distribute to both your utmost wishes.

Pelop. We must not doubt your bounty. -- But, away;
Enter Ziphares; with Ismenes, at distance. Your melancholy Brother may
o're-hear us.
Ex. Phar. Pelop. Andr.
Ziph. Oh, my hard Fate! why did I trust her ever?
What Story is not full of Woman's falsehood!
The Sex is all a Sea of wide destruction:
We are the venurous Barks that leave our home,
For those sure dangers which their smiles conceal:
At first, they draw us in with flattering looks
Of Summer-Calms, and a soft gale of Sighs:
Sometimes, like Sirens, Charm us with their Songs,
Dance on the Waves, and show their Golden Locks:
But, when the Tempest comes, then, then they leave us,
Or rather, help the new Calamity,
And the whole Storm is one injurious Woman.
The Lightning followed with a Thunderbolt
Is Marble-hearted Woman: all the Shelves
The faithless Winds, blind Rocks, and sinking Sands,
Are Women all; the wracks of wretched men.
Prithee, Ismenes, while I lay me here,
Charm me with some sad Song into a slumber.

SONG; by Sir Car Scroop.
1.
ONe night, when all the Village slept,
Myrtillo's sad despair,
The wandering Shepherd waking kept,
To tell the Woods his care.
Be gone, said he, fond thought, be gone;
Eyes, give your sorrows over:
Why should you waste your tears for one
That thinks on you no more?
2.
Yet all the Birds, the Flocks, and Powers,
That dwell within this Grove,
Can tell how many tender hours
We here have passed in Love.
Yon' Stars above (my cruel Foes)
Have heard how she has sworn
A thousand times, that like to those,
Her Flame should ever burn.
3.
But, since she is lost, Oh! let me have
My wish, and quickly dye:
In this cold Bank I Will make a Grave,
And there for ever lie.
Sad Nightingales the Watch shall keep,
And kindly here complain:
Then down the Shepherd lay to sleep,
But never waked again.
Enter Archelaus.
Arch. How now, Ismenes? Prithee, gentle Boy,
Instruct me where to find thy Royal Master.
What, do thou weep? I charge thee bring me to him.

Isme. See there, my Lord.

Arch. Bless me, you Heavenly Powers,
Upon the Earth! It cannot be thy Master.
Is that a posture for a Conqueror?
He who so bravely beat the Romans back?
A General, and Triumpher? Haste, and show me.

Isme. By Heaven, it is true, my Lord; there lies the Prince.

Arch. Something my heart presaged, when, having left
The Army, I came posting to the Court,
And scarce received a welcome from my Friends:
They said the Prince had Triumphed, but I saw
Not the least track of such a Glory left,
No glimmering twilight of so full an Honor.
There has been foul play, and I Will find it out.

Ziph. Away, Semandra; cruel Woman, leave me.

Arch. Ha! goes it there? Ziphares, Prince, arise.

Ziph. Ha! who is there? old Archelaus?

Arch. Why
Do I not see you in a Chariot,
With all the Pride of Asia's brightest Gems?
Why mount you not the Throne which you deserve,
The Lords of Colchis waiting as your Slaves?
Give me some reason why I see you thus.

Ziph. Alas, he had no hand in her revolt,
Nor knows not yet, perhaps, how she has used me:
Why do I seem thus strange then? -- Oh, Archelaus,
(For I must never call thee Father more)
Pardon my faulty carriage.

Arch. Forbear these strict embraces,
Your tears, your hanging on my Bosom thus;
Your sighs reduce my Age to sobbing Childhood,
And make an Infant of your poor Old Man.

Ziph. Did I not say I never more must call
Thee Father?

Arch. Yes, you did.

Ziph. Fond, foolish sorrow!
Thou art, thou-shalt, thou must be still my Father,
My Brother, Sister, Mistress, all, my Friend;
For all but thou have left me: no kind eye
Pities the sufferings of abused Ziphares;
They fly, all fly from my infectious Fortune.

Arch. Nay, good dear Prince, stand up; you smother all
Your words with groans: dry up this womanish grief,
And speak, dear Sir, declare the cursed cause,
The baleful Spring, the Source of all this mischief.

Ziph. Would you believe it? scarce can I my self,
Oh Heavens, and oh you ever-burning Lights,
Who have beheld at midnight from your Orbs
Our flames, that kindled bright and chaste as yours,
Which of you all, which most malignant Star,
Show me that envious Fire that crossed our loves,
That I may curse him from his fatal Sphere.

Arch. Name it, I say, the ground of all this trouble;
I feel a warm revenge run through my blood,
As if I had put off some forty year:
Methinks I stand as fit to fight the Cause
Of Friendship now, as then I could my Love's.
But speak.

Ziph. Thy Daughter.

Arch. Well, I guessed Fate wounded there.

Ziph. Semandra, my most fair, dear, gentle Mistress.

Arch. If she be false, she is no longer fair.

Ziph. That sweet protesting Creature, that pure whiteness,
Where I so deep had writ my Vows in blood,
Is taken from me.

Arch. By her own consent?

Ziph. Most certain. That Eternal Bond of Oaths,
Committed to her keeping, now is Cancelled:
Even her fair Hand, the Seal of all my Love,
Her Hand has given her faithless Heart away.

Arch. Then, she is false? you know her to be so?

Ziph. False, false, as waters, winds, or wandering fires:
She is more false than Woman can believe.

Arch. The opening of her treachery, come, how was it?
Particular revenge would know particulars.
At first, I guessed she did receive you kindly.

Ziph. Quite contrary, as if she never had seen me;
Quite altered, quite estranged, reserved and cold,
With all the coyness of a base-born Beauty,
Made proud with Power: not one tender look;
The very Accent of her Voice was changed,
Nor was she to be known, but by her Beauty,
Naught else could speak her to my Sense the same,
O nothing but the Face of my Semandra.

Arch. When my keen Sword shall glitter in her eyes,
Doubt not, but I shall make her know you well;
And, tho you never grace her with your favor,
For she is now unworthy your embraces,
Yet I will bring the Traytress to your knees.

Ziph. Can it be
Thou should be ignorant, she is past the giving?

Arch. I have not met the news, which your swollen eyes
Appear so big with.

Ziph. Here I am lost again;
Here all my courage, which has born the blow
Of sternest War, shrinks like a beaten Coward:
Here, I confess, my Piety gives way,
I could fall out with the forgetful Gods,
And curse the cruel Author of my Being.
No, Tyrant, no, thou bloody Parent, think not
That I will bear it longer; I Will forget,
Like thee, all nature, all remorse, all pity,
And snatch her from thee, wedded as you are.

Arch. What, Wedded! Married!

Ziph. Wedded, Married, Bedded;
He has enjoyed her, rifled that fair Casket
Where all the riches of my life were laid:
Yes, yes, you Gods, I saw 'em pass along,
Pass to the Temple, through the crowded Streets,
Saw 'em come back, darted my wishing eyes
At her false Face, with such accusing glances,
She fainted in the Chariot; yes, I saw her
Sink pale, and dying down; but there I lost her,
And left her to the Revels of the Night,
To be enjoyed, even this last night enjoyed.

Arch. By all the Honors which she has dishonored,
She shall not live another.

Ziph. Oh my Father!
Could you but guess the pains that I endured,
Oh all the subtillest fits of sharpest sickness,
Were nothing to the torments which I bore:
I timed even their disrobing kisses, smiles,
The first embraces, and the racking joy,
But there methought Fancy it self was stopped,
It could no more. The limit of my life
Was found, the end of all my joys on Earth.

Arch. She dies; not Destiny shall save her from me:
As she has sworn, and as she has forsworn,
I Will draw my Sword, bathed in her dearest blood,
From forth her Heart Strings, while the rank red Weeds
Cling to my reeking Blade: or would you more?
I am grown up to your anger.

Ziph. General, hold:
I have been Impious in my vented rage;
For which, oh pardon me, my Royal Father,
And you most injured Powers, whom I offended:
And, oh, whatever shall become of me,
Forgive the fair, the false, the loved Semandra.
If while I live thou mark her gentle Limbs
With the least wound, it ends Ziphares life:
Or if thou hurt her after I am dead,
Thou Wilt raise my Ashes up in Arms against thee.

Isme. My Lord, the Queen Semandra's coming hither.

Ziph. Say thou?

Isme. The Queen -- But see, she enters.

Ziph, Ha!

Enter Semandra.
Sem. Oh Ziphares! Oh Prince! Oh thou most wronged!

Ziph. How can this be? Madam, you ought at least
To have sent me word; for now, instead of Songs,
I can present you nothing but my tears,
A beating heart, and groans that will not suit
With your most happy state, your blessed condition.

Sem. Ah, did you rightly understand my sufferings,
You would not wound a bleeding, dying Creature:
But I Will endure yet more. When I am dead,
And it is too late, you will murmr to your self,
At least I might have heard what the poor Wretch
Could say.

Arch. Oh Siren! but I will be hushed.
[Aside.
Ziph. What can thou say, if I resolve to hear thee?
Thou will but tear the wounds which thou have made.
This Visit was most cruel: why come thou then;
For fear I should forget thee? Merciless Woman!

Arch. Yet let us hear her, Prince; let us hear the Sorceress;
That when sure Vengeance overtakes her Crimes,
She may have naught to answer.

Sem. The good Gods
Reward that Voice of Mercy, First then, my Lord.

Ziph. No; I Will be gone: Fly, Archelaus, fly,
She has a Tongue that can undo the World.
She eyes me, just as when she first inflamed me,
Such were her looks, so melting was her language,
Such false soft sighs, and such deluding tears,
When from her lips I took the luscious poison,
When with that pleasing perjured breath avowing,
Her whispers trembled through these credulous ears,
And told the story of my utter ruin.

Arch. Nay, it is impossible to clear her self;
And it was Impudence to offer at it:
Therefore, thou shameless Offspring of my Blood,
I Will cut thee from me; thus, with all thy Crimes,
Die, as thou did desire.
Half-drawing: stopped by Ziph.
Ziph. Hold thy hand;
I charge thee touch her not.

Arch. By Heaven, she dies:
I may dispose my own; she shall not live.

Ziph. By all the Gods, she shall, while I have breath:
And, if thou draw'st, I Will guard her life with mine.
I should be loath to lift my Arm against thee
Of all Mankind; but, were my Father here
Resolved to give her Death, I would oppose him.

Sem. Draw then, and sheath your weapons in my breast,
In cursed Semandra's Heart; but for the World,
Oh Father, do not wound the Prince Ziphares:
And, oh Ziphares, do not hurt my Father!
Upon my knees, I beg you to be calm,
And hear me thus.

Ziph. Oh rise! false, as thou art,
Thou once were Empress of my Soul, and I
Still drag thy Chains: Speak then, Semandra, speak;
For I Am so doz'd, so weary with complaining,
That I could stand and listen to the Winds,
And think that Women talked: observe the Rain,
And think that Women wept; or in the Clouds
Behold Semandra's Form, still fleeting from me.
But, speak: I lose my Senses with my Woes.

Arch. He has saved thy life; come, make a handsome lie
In recompense.

Sem. I will be short, as true.
When you were gone to Wars, the King relapsed;
How prompted, Heaven best knows: and when with Conquest
You came from Battle, he with dreadful threats
Compelled me to receive you in that manner.

Ziph. Ah, cruel Creature! what, what Menaces,
What fear of death, could so have made Ziphares
Receive Semandra?

Sem. Not Racks, nor all the Tortures
Which Hell combined could put into the hearts
Of bloodiest Tyrant, should have forced me to it,
But, oh! your life, which he with deepest Oaths
Had sworn to take, unless I seemed to scorn you;
That dashed my Spirits, bafled all the daring
Of my defenseless heart: there I confess
The Woman worked; I trembled and agreed
To see you so, rather than lose you ever.

Arch. Now, by my Arms, she has come off with wonder!

Sem. And think, my Lord, reflect upon your self;
I dare believe so dearly once you loved me,
That were you certain I should lose my life,
Unless you used me in that very manner,
I know you would constrain your flame awhile,
And seem as cold, and as reserved as I.

Ziph. Oh heart! oh bleeding Love! but speak, Semandra,
For there is wondrous Reason, mighty Sense
In what you say: and I could hear you ever.

Sem. When you were gone, the cruel King came in,
And, without stop, proposed the fatal Marriage,
Which being denied, he forced me to the Temple.
Yet, at the Altar, I denied my hand,
Invoked the Gods with the most violent sorrow,
Tears, sighs, and swoonings; cursed the frighted Priests,
Struck down the Censors, and like one distracted
I mangled my own flesh; but all in vain:
I was supposed his Queen, and so enjoyed.

Ziph. Then still thy heart, thy heart was mine, Semandra?

Sem. It was, it is, for ever shall be yours.

Ziph. Oh, at thy feet, let me for ever lie,
Thus hang upon thy knees with dying grasps,
Thou most wronged Innocence, abused Semandra.

Sem. Oh, my dear Lord, you shall not kneel without me.

Ziph. Thou art not false then!

Sem. Could you think me so?
False to my Life, my Soul, my All I have!

Ziph. I did; I thought thee false, and I deserve
To die, for wronging thy most matchless Faith:
For thou art true, constant as pining Turtles,
Constant, as Courage to the Brave in Battle,
Constant as Martyrs, burning for the Gods.

Arch. What Changes drive business of the World!
Come, no more weeping: rise,
Think on the King, if he should take you thus.

Ziph. Oh rise, Semandra; what, what are we doing?
Why, Archelaus, why did thou cut me off
The moments pleasure which my thoughts were forming?
Thy cruel breath quite broke the brittle Glass
Of my short life, and stopped the running Sand.
What shall we do, Semandra?

Sem. Part, and die.

Ziph. Die, it is resolved; but how? that, that must be
My future care: and with that thought I leave thee.
Go then, thou Setting-star; take from these eyes,
(These eyes, that if they see thee, will be wishing)
O take those languishing pale fires away,
And leave me to the wide, dark Den of Death!

Sem. Something within me sobs to my boding heart;
Semandra never shall see Ziphares more.

Ziph. Away then; part, for ever part, Semandra:
Let me alone sustain those ravenous Fates,
Which, like two famished Tigers, are gone out,
And have us in the Wind. Death come upon me;
Night, and the bloodi'st deed of darkness, end me.
But, oh, for thee, for thee, if thou must die,
I beg of Heaven this last, this only favor,
To give thy life a painless dissolution:
Oh, may those ravished Beauties fall to Earth
Gently, as withered Roses leave their Stalks:
May Death be mild to thee, as Love was cruel;
Calm, as the Spirits in a Trance decay:
And soft, as those who sleep their Souls away.
[Exeunt.
ACT V. SCENE I.
Pelopidas, Andravar, Priest, encompassed with Romans.
Pelop. ROmans, who send your Laws far as the Sun
His Beams, and whom the Universe beholds
With joy, yet dreads your anger as the Gods,
Why move you to the ruin of this Tyrant,
To the sure death of bloody Mithridates,
As if you feared, or cared not he should die?
Can you suspect an Ambush? or that we
Should dare betray you, yielding thus our persons,
Our Lives, our Prince himself into your hands?

Andr. This man, to whom the servile Priests bow down,
Who wears a Crown in honor of his place,
And sacred worth, abandons all his glories
TO attest the truth of what we have declared.
Enter Pharnaces. But see, the fierce, the brave, the Great Pharnaces
Comes on to meet you; waves his Royalties:
Therefore, O mighty Romans, give him Audience.

Phar. That I am rough, and of an untaught Spirit,
All the East knows; I ever scorned those Slaves
With whom I have been bred; and when my Father
Ordered Barbarian Princes for my Masters,
In Arts and Arms, I spurned 'em from my presence;
And rather chose, since Rome might not instruct me,
Nature in all my Actions for my Guide.
Hence could I brook more hardly the fierce mind
Of our Inhumane Parent Mithridates.
My Eldest Brother's Fate did kindle first
My fiery Soul to a most swift revenge;
For when the State of Bosphorus demanded
That Prince for King, he bound the gallant Youth
In Golden Chains, and doomed him to be slain:
Two more were by his boundless fury strangled;
And even the last but me, the brave Ziphares,
Last night was murdered in the Tyrants Palace:
In whose sad cause, the Squadrons which he led
Of late so valiantly against you Romans,
Attend some furlongs hence to join your Banners.
If this be true, not to recount the Slaughters
Of all his Queens and poisoned Concubines,
I think the World (Rome I should first have named)
Will little censure this so just revolt.
If you suspect me false, behold Pharnaces,
Never yet detained, but free as roving Lions
That swept at will like Winds in Deserts wild;
Behold him, with these Noble Hostages,
Your Prisoner to be bound the Slave of Rome.

Romans Capt. Lead us on to Victory.

Omnes. To Victory.

Phar. On them, you Race of Heaven, you Seed of Gods;
And to Immortalize Pharnaces Name,
Plant me, like Thunder breaking from this Cloud,
Foremost, while all the rattling Engines follow.
Monima, whom this Tyrant ravished from me,
I hear is fled to Pompey: her I ask,
For my reward, with half his spreading Empire.
But I waste words; let us act, and then make claim.
And O remember, when we storm the Town,
Remember that most horrid Massacre
Of Asia; whet on that your blunted Spirits,
Till with the motion Lightning edge your Souls
To mow off hoary Heads, hurl Infants puling
From the lug'd breast, kill in the very Womb:
To Beauties cries be deaf, make all Synope
But one vast Grave, to hold the infinite bodies
Which we must shovel in; and when you see
The Head of Mithridates in this hand,
Then think who ever dared for Rome like me,
Or bought an Empire at a price so dreadful:
Then yield the Beauty I so much desire,
And all those Crowns to which my thoughts aspire.
[Exeunt.
SCENE II.
Enter Ziphares, Archelaus.
Ziph. It Is late; the gathering Clouds, like meeting Armies,
Come on apace, and Mortals now must die,
Till the bright Ruler of the rising Day
Creates 'em new: the wakeful Bird of Night
Claps her dark wings to the Windows of the dying.
General, Goodnight.

Arch. Sir, I Will not leave you yet.
I do not like the dusky boding Eve.
Well I remember, Sir, how you and I
Have often on the Watch in Winter walked,
Clad in cold Armor, round the sleeping Camp,
Till covered over from head to foot with Snow,
The Sentinels have started at our march,
And thought us Ghosts stalking in Winding-sheets:
And do you think I cannot watch you now,
Thus covered, and beneath this bounteous Roof?
Sleep, Sir; I Will guard you from suspected danger.

Ziph. Danger! there is none; no shadow of a harm:
Dear General, you will oblige me to retire:
We'll meet to morrow with the earliest dawn;
I Am troubled now, and heavy; in the morning,
Soon as you please, you shall have entrance here;
And then, I trust the bounteous Gods, you will find
A wondrous alteration. Sleep may Charm
My talking griefs, and hush 'em fast for ever.

Arch. It Is that I fear. -- I tell you there are Deaths
Brooding this night abroad. A Recluse Priest,
Surpised with mortal sickness, was this Evening,
As he himself desired, ta'n from his Bed,
And carried to the Closet of the King:
Where, after some close conference, he expired.
Immediately your Father Orders gave
For doubling all his Guards, and went in fury
To Monima's Apartment, where 'twas said
Pharnaces had been gone a while before.

Ziph. I ever thought that Brother most ambitious;
But what is this to me?

Arch. What followed does
Concern both you and me, and all the East;
For straight, when the sick Priest had breathed his last,
The sacred Oil, which for a hundred years
Supplied the Sun behind the Golden Vail,
Went out, and all the mystic lights were quenched:
Strange doleful Voices shrilly echoed through
The darkened Fane; the Monuments did open,
And all the Marble Tombs, like Spunges squeezed,
Spouted big Sweat: the Curtain was consumed
With wondrous flame; and every shining Altar
Dissolved to yellow puddle, which anon
A flash of thirsty Lightning quite licked up.
While through the Streets your murdered Brothers rode,
Arcathias, Mithridates, and Machares,
And madded all the schreaming multitude.
Is not this strange?

Ziph. The Gods reproach my slackness.
[Aside. It Is strange! most wondrous strange! Once more I pray thee
By all our Friendship, leave me to my self.

Arch. Ah, Prince, you cannot hide
Your purpose, from your narrow-searching Friend:
I find it, by the sinking of your Spirits,
Your hollow speech, deep musings, eager looks,
Whose fatal longings quite devour their objects,
You have decreed, by all the Gods you have,
This night to end your Noble Life.

Ziph, Away.
I never thought thee troublesome till now.

Arch. I care not; spite of all that you can do,
I Will stay, and weep you into gentleness:
Your faithful Soldier, this old doting Fool
Shall be more troublesome than one that is wiser.
By Heaven, you shall not hurt your precious life.
I Will stay and wait you, wake here till I die;
Follow you, as a fond and fearful Father
Would watch a desperate Child.

Ziph. I Will tell thee then,
Since thou will tear the Secret from my breast,
And dive into the bottom of my Soul,
This night must end me: make not a reply;
It Is fixed as fast and sure as are my woes.
Did thou but know what it is to love like me,
And to be so beloved; O Archelaus!
Yet to be past all hope of happiness,
Of ever tasting those desired Beauties,
Of any dawn, least glimpse, or spark of comfort,
Did thou not hate me much, even thou would kill me.

Arch. If that my death, (for that indeed's but little)
Cannot once move you from this dreadful deed,
Yet, Prince, your Country, which must fall without you,
Your bleeding Country must obtain at least
That you would live to free her from her Foes;
Your Glory calls, your sinking Father begs,
That you would save your Country from the Romans.

Ziph. Much I indeed have got by Conquering Rome!
And to much purpose lost my dearest blood!
Much have my wounds deserved; and Heaven can tell
How Nobly I have been rewarded for 'em!
I tell thee, Archelaus, I have sworn,
Were I to live, I would not fight again:
The World should neither better be, nor worse
For me. But I waste time; and to convince thee,
Since thou will have the trouble to behold
My death, I bid thee now farewell for ever.

Arch. Hold, Sir.

Ziph. I will; and talk as calmly to thee
As any dying Roman of 'em all:
I have considered well of what I do,
And I will perish with as little noise
As Fate could wish that would not be accused.

Arch. I Will follow you.

Ziph. I would entreat thee not;
Thou have no sorrows that are past the sufferance:
And sure my flying Soul will hang her wing,
When she shall feel thy weighty death upon her.
O, Archelaus, leave me to my Fate;
If thou must see me fall, I charge thee live,
At least so long to tell Semandra of me:
Bear her some Token of my ill-star'd Love,
Which Empire could not win to live without her.
Dip in the blood which trickles from my heart
Thy Handkerchief, and bid her keep it for me,
As a Remembrance now and then to mourn me:
Swear to do this.

Arch. This I will do; and, mark me, cruel Prince,
If thus thou violate that Royal Frame,
Tearing the gallant Spirit from his Mansion,
I swear by what I tremble at, thy death,
I Will double all thy wounds upon Semandra.

Ziph. Ha!

Arch. I Will tear her piecemeal, and so hack her limbs,
Thou shall not know her in the other World.

Ziph. Oh torture: dear, good Archelaus, hold;
I know thou can not mean such cruelty.
Why do thou rack me thus, with thoughts in death
That are much heavier even than death it self?
Why do thou make my eyes thus swim in tears?
I charge thee, do not hurt her; for the sake
Of all the Gods, be gentle to my Love:
I beg for mercy to the soft Semandra.
Alas, if she deserved, as she is faultless,
She could not bear the wounds which we can bear.

Arch. Give me your promise then that you will live:
Live but this night, or I have sworn her death.

Ziph. Thou have found the means to Charm me into life,
And keep me on the Rack; but no more threats
Against Semandra: 'twas unkindly done,
And I grow angry at my Fates delay.

Arch. Why will you be thus froward? Live to night;
Be careful of your self but till the Morn:
Methinks there may be wonders wrought e're then.

Ziph. O Archelaus! it is impossible:
Had she been Ravished by another Man,
I could have cleared her with the Villains Blood;
But by my Father touched, what Miracle
Can work me into hope? Heaven here is Bankrupt;
The wondering Gods blush at their want of power,
And, quite abashed, confess they cannot help me.

Arch. Sure, by you lifted Torches, I discern
Your Father moving this way.

Ziph. Ha! my Father!
How my flesh trembles! I could do a deed
Would make us both run mad. Draw, Archelaus.
Yet stay: what Devil starts thus in my blood,
And turns my Reason to this maze of folly?
No; let us suffer more, if possible:
Yet I will shun his Presence. Oh you Powers,
Is that a Crime? answer me if it be,
And I will meet him, tho his sight should blast me.
[Exeunt as Mithridates, Captain of the Guards, and Attendants enter.
Mith. Betrayed! and by my Son! given up a Prey
For the Insulting Romans to devour!
Pharnaces is the Traitor, that Pharnaces
Who was to inherit all that space of Empire
Which Fortune gave to this unhappy King!
O Friends, when from the Palace-gate we sallied,
And drove the bold Assailants through the City,
The Impious Boy Charged as I foremost rode,
And braved my Fury with his Bever up;
But, Oh the Gods, I who before had crimsoned
My Arms with Blood of Rebels, I who moved
With Whirlwinds swiftness still on every side,
And tossed like Leaves the weightiest Foes about me,
Now stood, as if Gorgonian Charms had fixed me:
Nor know I more.

Capt. Your Sword, Great Sir, when you
A while had gazed on that Audacious Prince,
Fell from your hand, your mighty Spirit left you;
And as some famous piece of Antick-work,
When the sunk Props and wasted Beams decay,
Staggers and nods before the ruin comes:
So waved your Royal Fabric e're it fell;
And, as our Arms received you, cursed Pharnaces,
Born by Ambition to a murder new;
Offered a wound, and 'twas with great expense
Of lives, we bore your Body to the Palace.

Mith. My Senses blaze; my last I know is come;
My last of hours: it is wondrous horrid! now
My lawless love, and boundless power reproach me.
But I will think no more on it. Come, my Friends,
Let Us meet these Romans, and my Rebel-Son;
Let Us kill till we are weary, then lie down
And rest for ever: O it is Noble Ruin!
Creatures of vilest make, upon disgust
With Knives or Cords set loose their Coward Souls;
But we will live in spite to grieve the World,
While life will last, or any Spirits hold.
O that, like Serpents hewn, we still might move,
Our Limbs lopt off, and kill with every parcel!

Enter Semandra.
Sem. It Is done; my Ruin is at last revenged,
And cruel Mithridates is no more:
That famous wicked man shall kill no more:
Fallen is the Murderer, he shall love no more
Another's right; shall Ravish now no more.

Mith. O horror! snatch me, Furies, from her presence:
Gape wide, O Earth, and swallow me alive.

Sem. I go before, and never shall we meet
On Earth again, inhumane Mithridates;
Yet I rejoice not, be my Witness Heaven,
At those Calamities that come upon thee:
But think 'em just, and with a dread reflection
Behold thy Fate, and wonder at the Gods.
Not but thy Son, my Love, my lost Ziphares,
And I, in lamentable Shapes, made up
By Death's own hand, will tell 'em all thy Story.
For ever thus, thou Ravisher of Honor,
I leave thee to the Vultures of thy Conscience,
To all the Stings Ambition feels in death,
Or Lust, the Rape committed. O, you Powers
Make firm my hand, for an Exploit, to Crown
My Life, whose business shall be quickly done.
[Exit.
Mith. Away, to Arms, to Arms; plunge deep in blood:
Be quick to die. Were all the Roman Piles,
And Scythian Darts, and Parthia's poisoned Arrows,
Shot through this Body, her words would be more.
I Will not endure 't; rush to the fatal War:
I would be drunk with Death, and steaming Slaughter,
To stupifie the sense of inward torment.
Haste then, and wallow in the murdering Field,
Through all the Avenues to battle fly:
They who have lived in blood, in blood must die.
[Exeunt.
Trumpets. Enter Pelopidas, Andravar, their Swords drawn, with a Lamp.
Pelop. Yonder he Sallies, furious for Destructions,
And now full scope is given to act our business,
And end the sad Ziphares.

Andr. I am glad
The chance is fallen to us: to death, nay more,
To Hell I hate him, and to have him slain
By any hand but mine, would pall the Murder.

Pelop. The Palace now is drawn
Of all the glittering Host that twinkled here,
Following their King, to shoot the Gulf of Ruin:
And it was ordered well, by Prince Pharnaces,
While with the Romans he dispatched his Father,
That we should kill his drooping Brother. Ha!
I hear some tread! your Lamp must wink awhile.

Enter Ziphares.
Ziph. Oh, it is too much; I never shall sleep more.
How loud the Voice of Fate sounds everywhere!
Trumpets and Drums! yet old Archelaus,
With grief and watching spent, in spite of all
Those Tides of Care that swelled e're-while so high,
Lies like a Child that braul'd himself asleep.
Ismenes too, that wept to see me mourn,
Falls on his breast, and nods his tears away:
So sleeps the Sea-boy on the Cloudy Mast,
Safe, as a drowzy Tryton, rocked with Storms,
While tossing Princes wake on Beds of Down.

Pelop. It Is he; prepare.

Andr. Both perish, if he escape.

Ziph. This darkness fills my breast with horror: now,
Now I may do the deed; which done, all is sure:
It shall be so, and thus I will deceive him.
But then he kills Semandra. Whence this light?
Swords! Vizors! what Assasinates are these?
Would they were more; for ruin is my wish:
Yet I disdain to fall by Villains hands.
[Beats 'em off.
Enter Semandra, with a Dagger in her hand.
Sem. Where do I wander in the dismal Shades
Of this black night? there is not a Soul beneath
Who died as I must do, for fatal Love,
Knows better all the gloomy Arbours there,
Than I each Chamber in this House of Death.
'Twas here the God-like Prince did woo me first,
Sighed his first Vows, and wept me into passion:
Where shall I find him, that most perfect Soul?
Whose whiteness will to after-ages answer
For all the spotted loves of perjured men.
Meet him I must, and run into his arms;
But with a Roman blow, which first shall drive
This Poniard to my heart: then, rush upon him,
Then clasp him close, then he will believe me true.

Enter Ziphares.
Ziph. This way the Cowards fly; this way the noise goes,
I think thou have it there, and can not escape me.

Sem. I thank the Gods, I shall not. Let me kiss
The hand that kills me. Oh too gracious Heaven!
Semandra now is happy.

Ziph. Semandra! what;
What say thou? Speak again, thou dismal voice.

Sem. Oh, that I could see your face before I die:
Those eyes, where I would look my Soul away.

Ziph. Awake; what ho, Ismenes! haste, a light!
Haste hither, Father, Archelaus, haste!
My heart bodes ruin, we are all undone.
Enter Archelaus, and Ismenes with a Light. Oh, Father, either I am Charmed, or
here
Semandra lies, slain by this dreadful hand.

Arch. Our Guardian-spirits shield us, it is my Daughter.

Ziph. Cursed Fate! malicious Stars! you now have drained
Your selves of all your poisonous influence;
Even the last baleful drop is shed upon me.

Sem. Give me thy hand most matchless of thy kind;
O join us, Father, join us thus in death:
Now thou art mine; and we'll be wedded too
In the other World; our Souls shall there be mixed:
Who knows, but there our joys may be complete?
A happy Father, thou; and I, perhaps,
The smiling Mother of some little Gods.

Ziph. Oh Archelaus, if thou love her memory,
Fly to the King, and let him understand
The truth of all: if he be pleased to hear her,
Entreat him haste, the pangs of death are on her.

Arch. I will, if tears will let me, find the way:
And, by your leave, these Weapons shall be mine.

Ziph. That I expected. Ha! she faints, Ismenes,
Run to my Closet, haste, where thou will find
A Golden Vial of rich Juice, to bring the Spirits
Back to their Seat: go, pour it in a Bole
With speed, to save her.
[Exit Ismenes. Have thou not a word,
A syllable, fair Soul? Speak, speak, Semandra.
I feel a trembling warmth about thy heart:
It pants.

Sem. As Cowards do before a Battle.
Oh, the Great March is sounded.

Ziph. Stay thee one moment,
Ismenes reenters, with a Bole. And I will lead thee on. Away, Ismenes;
Watch thou the King's approach, and bring me word.
Exit Ism. Here, see thou this, my Love? look up, Semandra,
Thou dying Spark, glimmer a little while;
Behold this Cordial, this sure warmth at heart,
This faithful Offering of Eternal Love.

Sem. VVhither, oh where? Death's Mist comes fast upon me.
What is it you drink?

Ziph. A Draught which makes me thine;
The powerful Cordial which my Father gave me,
A Noble Compound of his fatal skill:
He charged me, when I could not live with Honor,
To taste it, and be free.

Sem. Methinks your Voice is faint
As distant Echoes; and I am now far off:
Alas, I know not where.
[Dies.
Ziph. I Will fold thee thus,
And Mithridates shall not part us now:
Fan thus the dying flame with my last breath.
She Is out: the damp of Death has quenched her quite:
These spicy-doors, her lips, are shut, close locked,
Which never gale of life shall open more.
I come. Oh Father! Oh thou true Physician!
Thou work'st me Nobly now; and oh it is welcome!
Thy Drugs are quick; once more, O Love! I come,
Thou most of Life in Death. Ambition, Fame:
It Is empty all; and nothing but a Name.
[Dies.
Archelaus, Mithridates supported bleeding: Pharnaces, Pelopidas, Andravar,
bound.
Arch. Behold, behold my Lord, how I Am rewarded
For faithful service, for the numerous scars
Which in your Cause have marked my aged body!
My Daughter's slain. Ha! let me never rise,
If that the brave Ziphares be not killed!
Was this the Cordial, wicked Boy, thou brought him?

Mith. Blame not the guiltless, for by me he is poisoned:
By this inhumane Tyrant, Monster, Parricide;
By me the Drugs were mixed, and dol'd about
To my unhappy Children, left surpised,
They should be born to Rome for Royal Slaves.

Arch. Dead! art thou dead, O lovely Royal Plant,
Blown down by gusty Heaven, in all thy bloom!
My hour is come; and thus I follow thee.

Mith. Hold him. What means the frantic General?
Disarm, and bring him hither. Kneel, O kneel,
Before these Bodies.

Arch. What would you, sacred Sir?

Mith. Swear, swear to live.
I have a Royal Race of Little Ones:
Live, I Conjure thee, to defend those Infants
From Roman Rage; entreat Victorious Pompey,
And he will be gentle to 'em: Swear to live.

Arch. I swear; but after that -- --

Mith. Rise, and no more.
My blood leaks fast; and the great heavy lading,
My Soul will quickly sink; therefore revenge:
Yes, you pale figures, you most precious forms,
Who, where you walk, for sure you tread the Stars,
Shame brightest Gods, and add new light to Heaven,
First, in most dreadful manner, will I give
Those Traitors lives, who drew me to your ruin.
Hence, burn the Slaves; the cursed Pelopidas,
And Villain Andravar: away with 'em.
For thee -- (but sure I shall disdain to name thee)
The Palace yet is ours.

Arch. But cannot long
Be so: Pompey the Great is entered;
And those who took your part, are all revolted.

Mith. Away then; bear him to the middle Turret,
Whose Brazen-head rises above the rest,
In sight of Pompey, throw him from the top,
And give his most aspiring life an end.

Phar. I know thou can not long outlive me, Tyrant.
Accursed be Fortune, which too forward bore me
To be thy Prey; and rot the hand that seized me:
Yet, when my Ghost is from this body dashed,
If such a Goblin as a Ghost there be,
I Will rise, and wing the midway Air to wait thee;
Hurled shall thou be, as Saturn was by Jove,
And flag beneath me, while I reign above.

Mith. O General, behold, and wonder with me,
How swiftly Fate can make, or unmake Kings!
How empty is Death's Pomp, compared with Life!
Where now are all the busy Officers,
The supple Courtiers, and big Men of War,
That bustled here, and made a little World?
Revolted all: Support me, for I go.
My Soul is on the Beach, and strait must lanch
Into the Abyss of the black Sea of death,
Where Furies stand upon the smoaky Rocks,
Prepared to meet one greater than themselves.
Here, lay me bleeding by these murdered Lovers;
And, oh! when I am dead, let Sorrow stalk
In sacred silence to my gaping Tomb.
Forget that ever Mithridates was;
No tongue relate the deeds this Hand has done,
Let thought be still, or work beneath the ground!
But oh he is come, cold Tyrant I obey,
And hug thy Dart that bears my Life away.
[Dies.
FINIS.
Epilogue, by Mr. Dryden.
YO've seen a Pair of faithful Lovers die:
And much you care; for, most of you will cry,
'Twas a just Judgment on their Constancy.
For, Heaven be thanked, we live in such an Age
When no man dies for Love, but on the Stage:
And even those Martyrs are but rare in Plays;
A cursed sign how much true Faith decays.
Love is no more a violent desire;
It Is a mere Metaphor, a painted Fire.
In all our Sex, the name examined well,
Is Pride, to gain; and Vanity to tell:
In Woman, it is of subtle interest made,
Curse on the Punk that made it first a Trade!
She first did Wits Prerogative remove,
And made a Fool presume to prate of Love.
Let Honor and Preferment go for Gold;
But glorious Beauty is not to be sold:
Or, if it be, it is at a rate so high,
That nothing but adoring it should buy.
Yet the rich Cullies may their boasting spare;
They purchase but sophisticated Ware.
It Is Prodigality that buys deceit;
Where both the Giver, and the Taker cheat.
Men but refine on the old Half-Crown way:
And Women fight, like Swizzers, for their Pay.
Prologue, by Mr. Lee.
NOt careful Leaders, when the Trumpets call
Their Martial Squadrons on, to stand or fall,
Tossed with more doubts, than careful Poets are
When venurous Wit for Sally does prepare;
When Humming Voices bid the Play begin,
And the last flourish calls the Prologue in.
Here you, like dreadful Warriors, judging sit;
And, in full Council, try all Writers Wit.
To some for Sense Renowned, our Authors bow;
And what you Doom, for a just Fate allow:
But sure far less such Judges Poets dread,
Than those Raw Blades who will not let 'em Plead,
But, e're they can be heard, cry, shoot 'em dead.
These Pirates, they both Arms and Wits debase;
Who Fields and Poems, with their Spleen, disgrace,
Poets and Warriors both should have in Chase:
These Libellers who noblest Fights despise,
Yet, when a Pan but flashes, shut their Eyes.
They who write Lampoons, vilely get a Name
By others Infamy, and live in shame;
Fifes, Whiflers, and the silly'st Sense, not fit
To be the Powder-Monkeys of true Wit:
Mimies, like Apes, what is ill, for head they cover,
And live upon the Vermin of a Lover:
Nauseous to all, like Pills, by Fortune hurled,
And coated over with Gold, to Purge the World.
Neglecting these, and rusting to your aid,
To Beauty our last Vows, like yours, are made:
Beauty, which still adorns the opening List,
Which Caesar's Heart vouchsafes not to resist:
To that alone devoted is this day;
For, by the Poet, I was bid to say,
In the first draught, 'twas meant the Ladies Play.
Persons Represented; By Mithridates, King of Pontus. Mr. Mohun. Ziphares,
Pharnaces,
his Sons. M. Heart. M. Goodman.
Archelaus, General under Ziphares. M. Griffin. Pelopidas, Andravar,
two Courtiers. M. Wintershul. M Powell.
Aquilius, a Roman Captive. M. Clark. Another Roman Officer. M. Wiltshire.
Ismenes, Page to Ziphares. Monima, Contracted to Mithridates. Mrs. Corbett.
Semandra, Daughter to Archelaus. Mrs. Boutel. Priests, and Attendants, Mutes.

Scene Synope.


