THE PRINCESS OF CLEVE, As it was Acted AT THE Queens Theater IN DORSET-GARDEN.
By Not. Lee, Gent.

Tuque, dum procedis, lo Triumph,
Non semel dicemus: lo Triumph,
Civitas omnis, dabimusque divis
-- Thura benignis.
Horat. LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1689.

TO THE Right Honorable Charles Earl of Dorset and Middlesex, Lord Chamberlain
of His Majesty's Household, and one of His Majesty's most Honorable
Privy Council, etc.
May it please your Lordship,
THis Play, when it was Acted, in the Character of the Princess of Iainville,
had a resemblance of Marguerite in the Massacre of Paris, Sister to Charles the
Ninth, and Wife to Henry the Fourth King of Navar: That fatal Marriage which
cost the Blood of so many Thousand Men, and the Lives of the best Commanders.
What was borrowed in the Action is left out in the Print, and quite obliterated
in the minds of Men. But the Duke of Guise, who was Notorious for a bolder
Fault, has wrested two whole Scenes from the Original, which after the Vacation
he will be forced to pay. I was, I confess, through Indignation, forced to limb
my own Child, which Time, the true Cure for all Maladies, and Injustice has set
together again. The Play cost me much pains, the Story is true, and I hope the
Object will display Treachery in its own Colors. But this Farce, Comedy,
Tragedy or mere Play, was a Revenge for the Refusal of the other; for when they
expected the most polished Hero in Nemours, I gave 'em a Ruffian reeking from
Whetstone's- Park. The fourth and fifth Acts of the Chances, where Don John is
pulling down; Marriage Alamode, where they are bare to the Waste; the
Libertine, and Epsom-Wells, are but Copies of his Villainy. He lays about him
like the Gladiator in the Park; they may walk by, and take no notice. I beg
your Lordship to excuse this account, for indeed it is all to introduce the
Massacre of Paris to your Favor, and approve it to be played in its first
Figure.

Your Lordships Humble and Obedient Servant, NOT. LEE.

This Song should be inserted in Act V. Scene III.
WEep all ye Nymphs, your Floods unbind,
For Strephon's now no more;
Your Tresses spread before the Wind,
And leave the hated Shore:
See, see, upon the craggy Rocks,
Each Goddess stripped appears;
They beat their Breasts, and rend their Locks,
And swell the Sea with Tears.
II.
The God of Love that fatal hour,
When this poor Youth was born,
Had sworn by Styx to show his Power,
He Would kill a Man ever Morn':
For Strephon's Breast he armed his Dart,
And watched him as he came;
He cried, and shot him through the Heart,
Thy Blood shall quench my Flame.
III.
On Stella's Lap he laid his Head,
And looking in her Eyes,
He cried, Remember when I Am dead,
That I deserve the Prize:
Then down his Tears like Rivers ran,
He sighed, You Love, it is true;
You love perhaps a better Man,
But Ah! he loves not you.
CHORUS.
WHY should all things bow to Love,
Men below, and Gods above?
Why should all things bow to Love?
Death and Fate more awful move,
Death below, and Fate above,
Death below, and Fate above.
Mortals, Mortals, try your skill,
Seeking Good, or shunning Ill,
Fate will be the burden still,
Will be the burden still,
Fate will be the burden still,
Fate will be the burden still.
THE PROLOGUE.
TRust was the Glory of the foremost Age,
When Truth and Love with Friendship did engage;
When Man to Man could walk with Arms entwined,
And vent their Griefs in spaces of the Wind;
Express their minds, and speak their thoughts as clear,
As Eastern Mornings opening to the year.
But since that Law and Treachery came in,
And open Honesty was made a Sin,
Men wait for Men as Dogs for Foxes prey,
And Women wait the closing of the day.
There Is scarce a man that ventures to be good,
For Truth by Knaves was never understood;
For there is the Curse, when Vice over Virtue rules,
That all the World are Knaves or downright Fools.
So they may make advantage of the Allay,
They Will take the Dross and through the Gold away.
Women turn Usurers with their own affright,
And Want's the Hag that rides 'em all the night.
The little Mob, the City Wastcoateer,
Will pinch the Back to make the Buttock bare,
And drain the last poor Guinea from her Dear.
Thus Times are turned upon a private end,
There Is scarce a Man that is generous to his Friend.
But there is a Monarch on a Throne sublime,
That makes Truth Law, and gives the Poets Rhyme;
Be his the business of our little Fates,
Our mean Contentions, and their high Debates.
By Sea and Land our most Imperial Lord,
With all the Praises Blessed that Hearts afford,
With Laurels Crowned, unconquered by the Sword:
William the Sovereign of our whole Affairs,
Our Guide in Peace, and Council in the Wars.
The Names of the Actors.
PRince of Cleve Mr. Williams. Duke Nemours Mr. Betterton. Bellamore Mr. Jacques
Mr. St. Andre Mr. Lee. Vidam of Chartres Mr. Gillo. Poltrot Mr. Nokes.
Women.
Princess of Cleve Mrs. Barry. Tournon Mrs. Lee. Marguerite Lady Slingsby.
Elianor Mrs. Betterton. Celia Mrs. Irene Mrs. La March Mrs.
Scene Paris.

THE Princess of Cleve.
ACT I. SCENE I.
Nemours, Bellamore. Fiddles Playing. Nem. HOld there you Monsieur Devol;
prithe leave off playing fine in Consort, and stick to Time and Tune -- So now
the Song, call in the Eunuch; come my pretty Stallion, Hem and begin.

SONG.
ALL other Blessings are but Toys
To his that in his sleep enjoyes,
Who in his Fancy can possess
The object of his Happiness;
The Pleasure's purer for he spares
The Pains, Expenses, and the Cares.
II.
Thus when Adonis got the stone,
To Love the Boy still made his moan;
Venus the Queen of Fancy came,
And as he slept she cooled his flame;
The Fancy charmed him as he lay,
And Fancy brought the Stone away.

Nem. Sirrah, stick to clean Pleasures, deep Sleep, moderate Wine, sincere
Whores, and thou art happy; Now by this damask Cheek I love thee; keep but this
gracious Form of thine in health, and I Will put thee in the way of living like a
man -- What I have trusted thee with -- My Love to the Princess of Cleve,
Treasure it as thy Life, nor let the Vidam of Chartres know it; for however I
seem to cherish him, because he has the knack of telling a Story maliciously,
and is a great pretender to Nature, I cast him off here -- It Is too much for
him: Besides he is her Uncle, and has a sort of affected Honor, that would
make him grin to see me leap her -- Hey Jacques -- When Madam Tournon comes,
bring her in; and hark you Sir, whoever comes to speak with me, while she is
with me --


Iaq. What if the Dauphin comes?


Nem. What if his Father comes, Dog -- Slave -- Fool! What if Paris were a
fire, the President and Council of sixteen at the door! I Am sick, I Am not
within -- I Am a hundred mile off -- My bosom Dear -- So young, and yet I trust
thee too -- But away, to the Princess of Cleve, thou art acquainted with her
Women, watch her Motions, my sweet-fac'd Pimp, and bring me word of her rising.


Bell. She is a prize, my Lord, and oh what a night of pleasure has Cleve had
with her -- the first too!


Nem. Any thing but what makes such a pleasure, would I give for such another
-- But be gone, and no more of this provoking discourse, lest Ravishing should
follow thee at the heels, and spoil my sober design. Exeunt severally.


Enter Tournon, La March. Iaq. Madam, my Lord was just now asking for you.


Tour. Go tell him I Am coming -- Is he dressed?


Iaq. Yes -- But your Ladyship knows that is all one to him --


Tour. Honest Jacques, it is pity such. Honesty should not be encouraged --


Iaq. This comes of Pimping, which she calls Honesty. Exit. Iaq.


Tour. Thus thou may see the method of the Queen -- We are the lucky Sieves,
where fond men trust their Hearts, and so she sifts 'em through us --


La M. What of Nemours, whom you thus early visit?


Tour. The Queen designs to rob him of a Mistress, Marguerite the Princess of
Ianvill, whom he keeps from the knowledge of the Court; and if the Queen be a
Judge, is contracted to her --

The Dauphin loves her too, whereon the Queen,
Who works the Court quite round by Womankind,
And thinks this way to mould his supple Soul,
Resolves, if possible, to gain her for him.

La M. But how is it possible to work the Princess from the Duke Nemours, who
loves him as the Queen affects Ambition.


Tour. Why thus she knows Nemours his Soul is bent
Upon variety, therefore to gain her ends
She has made me Sacrifice my Honor, nay
I Am become his Bawd, and ply him every day
With some new face, to wean his heart
From Marguerite's Form, nor must you longer be
Without your part.

La M. Employ me, for you know the Queen commands me.

Tour. There was a Letter dropped in the Tennis-Court
Out of Nemours his Pocket, as I Am told,
And read last night in the presence -- It Is your Task
Slily to insinuate with Marguerite.
This Note which came from some abandoned Mistress,
Is certainly the Dukes --

La M. Then Jealousie's the ground on which you build.

Tour. Right, we must make 'em jealous of each other; Jealousy breeds disdain
in haughty minds, and so from the extremes of violent Love, proceeds to
fiercest hate. But see the gay, the brisk, the topping Gallant St. Andre Enter
St. A. here, Cousen to Poltrot, who arrived from England with a pretty Wife
last week, and Lodges in the Palace of this his related Fool -- St. Andre has a
Wife too of my acquaintance -- Both for the Duke my Dear; but haste I Am called
-- Exit La March.


Iaq. Madam --


Tour. I go. Exit Tournon.


St. A. Monsieur Jacques, your most obliged faithful humble Servant. What, his
Grace continues the old Trade I see, by the Flux of Bawds and Whores that choke
up his Avenues, and I must confess, excepting my self, there is no man so built
for Whoring as his Grace, black sanguine Brawny -- a Roman Nose -- long Foot
and a stiff -- calf of a Leg.


Iaq. Your Lordship has all these in Perfection.


St. A. Sir your most faithful obliged humble Servant. Boy --


B. My Lord --


St. A. How many Bottles last night?


B. Five my Lord.


St. A. Boy.


B. My Lord.


St. A. How many Whores?


B. Six my Lord.


St. A. Boy --


B. My Lord.


St. A. What Quarrels, how many did I kill?


B. Not one my Lord -- But the night before you Hamstrung a Beadle, and run a
Link-man in the Back --


St. A. What, and no Blood nor Blows last night?


B. O yes my Lord, now I remember me, you drew upon a Gentleman that knocked
you down with a Bottle.


St. A. Not so loud you Urchin, lest I twist you neck round -- Monsieur Jacques
is his Grace stirring?


Iaq. My Lord, he is at Council --


St. A. Od I beg his Pardon, pray give my duty to him, and tell him, if he
pleased to hear a languishing Air or two, I am at the Princess of Cleve's with
a Serenade -- Go Raskal, go to Monsieur Poltrot -- tell him he will be too late
-- Black airy shape -- but then Madam Cleve is Virtuous, Chaste, Cold -- Gad
I Will write to her, and then she is mine directly, for it is but reason of course,
that he that has been Yoked to so many Dutchesses, should at last back a
Princess: Sir, your most obliged faithful and very humble Servant Sir. Exeunt.


SCENE II.
Nemours, Tournon. Tour. UNdone, undone! will your sinful Grace never give
over, will you never leave Ruining of Bodies and Damning of Souls -- could you
imagine that I came for this? What have you done?


Nem. No harm, pretty Rogue, no harm, nay, prithee leave blubbering.


Tour. It Is blubbering now, plain blubbering, but before you had your will
'twas another tone; why Madam do you wast those precious Tears, each falling
drop shines like an Orient Pearl, and sets a Gaity on a Face of Sorrow.


Nem. Thou art certainly the pleasantest of Womankind, and I the happiest of
Men; dear delightful Rogue, let us have another Main like a winning Gamester, I
long to make it the other hundred Pound.


Tour. Inconsiderate horrid Peer, will you Damn your Soul deeper and deeper,
can you be thus insensible of your Crime?


Nem. Why there is it, I was as a man may be, very dry, and thou kind Soul,
gav'st me a good draught of Drink; now it is strange to me, if a man must be
Damned for quenching his thirst.


Tour. Ha, Ha -- Well, I Will swear you are such another man -- who would have
thought you could delude a Woman thus, and a Woman of Honor too, that resolved
so much against it; Ah my Lord! your Grace has a cunning Tongue.


Nem. No cunning Tournon, my way is downright, leaving Body, State and Spirit,
all for a pretty Woman, and when gray Hairs, Gout and Impotence come, no more
but this, drink away pain, and be gathered to my Fathers.


Tour. Oh thou dissembler, give me your hand, this soft, this faithless
violating hand, Heaven knows what this hand has to answer for.


Nem. And for this hand, with these long, white, round, pretty Bobbins, t'has
the kindest gripe, and I so love it, now Gad's Blessing on it, that is all I say
-- But come tell me, what no new Game, for thou know I dye directly without
variety.


Tour. Certainly never Woman loved like me, who am not satisfied with
sacrificing my own Honor, unless I rob my delights by undoing others --


Nem. Come, come, out with it, I see thou art big with some new Intrigue, and
it labors for a vent.


Tour. What think you of St. Andre's Lady?


Nem. That I Am in Bed with her, because thou dare befriend me.


Tour. Nay, there is more -- Monsieur Poltrot lodges in his House, with a young
English Wife of the true breed, and the prettier of the two.


Nem. Excellent Creature, but command me something extravagant, as thy
kindness, State, Life and Honor.


Tour. Yet all this will be lost when you are married to Marguerite.


Nem. Never, by Heaven I Am thine, with all the heat and vigorous Inspiration of
an unflesh'd Lover -- and so will be while young Limbs and Lechery hold
together, and that is a Bond methinks should last till Doomsday.


Tour. But do you believe if Marguerite should know --


Nem. The question's too grave -- when and where shall I see the Gems thou have
in store?


Tour. By Noon or thereabouts; take a turn in Lunemburg Garden, and one, if not
both, shall meet you.


Nem. And thou wilt appear in Person?


Tour. With Colors flying, a Handkerchief held out; and yet methinks it goes
against my Conscience.


Nem. Away, that serious look has made thee old:
Conscience and Consideration in a young Woman too?
It makes a Bawd of thee before thy time.
Nay, now thou put'st me in Poetic Rapture,
And I must quote Ronsard to punish thee:
Call all your Wives to Council, and prepare
To Tempt, Dissemble, Flatter, Lie and Swear;
To make her mine, use all your utmost skill,
Virtue! An ill-bred crosness in the will;
Honor a Notion, Piety a Cheat,
Prove but successful Bawds and you are great.
Come, thou will meet me.

Tour. It Is resolved I will, till which time, thou dear Man --

Nem. Thou pretty Woman.

Tour. Thou very dear Man.

Nem. Thou very pretty Woman one Kiss.

Tour. Hey Ho --

Nem. Now all the Gods go with thee --

Tour. A word my Lord, you are acquainted with these Fops; set 'em in the
modish way of abusing their Wives, they are turning already, and that will
certainly bring 'em about.

Nem. Bellamore shall do it with less suspicion: farewell -- Exit Tour. Hey
Jacques -- Enter Jaques with the Vidam.

Iaq. Ha! my grave Lord of Chartres, welcome as Health, as Wine, and taking
Whores -- and tell me now the business of the Court.

Vid. Hold it Nemours for ever at defiance,
Fogs of ill humor, damps of Melancholy,
Old Maids of fifty choked with eternal Vapors,
Stuff it with fulsome Honor -- dozing Virtue,
And everlasting dullness husk it round,
Since he that was the Life, the Soul of Pleasure,
Count Rosidore, is dead.

Nem. Then we may say
Wit was and Satyr is a Carcass now.
I thought his last Debauch would be his Death --
But is it certain?

Vid. Yes I saw him dust.
I saw the mighty thing a nothing made,
Huddled with Worms, and swept to that cold Den,
Where Kings lie crumbled just like other Men.

Nem. Nay then let us Rave and Elegize together,
Where Rosidore is now but common clay,
Whom every wiser Emmet bears away,
And lays him up against a Winters day.
He was the Spirit of Wit -- and had such an art in guilding his Failures, that
it was hard not to love his Faults: He never spoke a Witty thing twice, tho to
different Persons; his Imperfections were catching, and his Genius was so
Luxuriant, that he was forced to tame it with a Hesitation in his Speech to
keep it in view -- But oh how awkard, how insipid, how poor and wretchedly dull
is the imitation of those that have all the affectation of his Verse and none
of his Wit. Enter Jaques.


Iaq. My Lord, Monsieur Poltrot desires to kiss your Grace's hand.


Nem. Let Us have him to drive away our Melancholy --


Vid. I wonder what pleasure you can take in such dull Dogs, Asses, Fools.


Nem. But this is a particular Fool Man, Fate's own Fool, and perhaps it will
never hit the like again, he is ever the same thing, yet always pleasing,; in
short, he is a finished Fool, and has a fine Wife; add to this his late leaving
the Court of France, and going to England to learn breeding. Enter Poltrot.


Pol. My Lord Duke, your Grace's most obedient humble Servant, My Lord of
Chartres and Monsieur Jacques, yours Monsieur; St. Andre desires your Grace's
presence at a Serenade of mine and his together -- And I must tell your Grace
by the way, he is a great Master, and the fondest thing of my Labors --


Nem. And the greatest Oaf in the World.


Pol. How my Lord --


Vid. The whole Court wonders you will keep him company.


Nem. Such a passive Raskal, he had his Shins broke last night in the Presence,
and were it not feared you would second him, he would be kicked out of all
Society.


Pol. I Second him my Lord, I Will see him Damned ever I Will be Second to any Fool
in Christendom -- For to tell your Grace the truth, I keep him company and lie
at his House, because I intend to lie with his Wife; a trick I learnt since I
went into England, where of my Conscience Cuckoldom is the Destiny of above
half the Nation.


Nem. Indeed!


Pol. O there is not such another Drinking, Scowring, Roaring, Whoreing Nation
in the World -- And for little London, to my knowledge, if a Bill were taken of
the weekly Cuckolds, it would amount to more than the Number of Christnings and
Burials put together.


Vid. What, and were you acquainted with the Wits?


Pol. O Lord Sir, I lived in the City a whole year together, my Lord Mayor and
I, and the Common Council were sworn Brothers -- I could sing you twenty
Catches and Drolls that I made for their Feast-days, but at present I Will only
hint you one or two --


Nem. Pray do us the Favor Sir.


Pol. Why look you Sir, this is one of my chief ones, and I Will assure your
Grace, 'twas much Sung at Court too. O to Bed to me -- to Bed to me -- etc.



Nem. Excellent, incomparable.


Pol. Why is it not my Lord? This is no Kickshaw, there is substance in the Air,
and weight in the words; nay, I Will give your Grace a taste of another, the Tune
is, let me see -- Ay, Ay -- Give me the Lass that is true Country bred --
But I Will present your Grace with some words of my own, that I made on my Wife
before I married her, as she sat singing one day in a low Parlour and playing
on the Virginals.


Nem. For Heavens sake oblige us dear pleasant Creature --


Pol. I Will swear I Am so ticklish you will put me out my Lord, for I am as wanton
as any little Bartholomew Bore-Pig --


Vi^. Dear soft delicate Rogue sing.


Pol. Nay, I protest my Lord, I vow and swear, but you will make me run to a
Whore -- Lord Sir, what do you mean?


Nem. Come then begin -- Poltrot Sings.

PHillis is soft, Phillis is plump,
And Beauty made up this delicate lump:
Like a Rose bud she looks, like a Lilly she smells,
And her Voice is a Note above sweet Philomel's.
Now a little Smutty my Lord is the fashion --

II.
Her Breasts are two Hillocks where Hearts lie and pant,
In the Herbage so soft, for a thing that they want;
But Mum Sir for that, tho a notable Jest,
For if I should name it you would call me a Beast.

Enter St. Andre without his Hat and Wig. St. A. My Lord, the Serenade is just
begun, and if you don't come just in the nick -- I beg your Grace's Pardon for
interrupting you -- But if you have a mind to hear the sweetest Airs in the
World --


Nem. With all my heart Sir --


Pol. Nay, since your Grace has put my hand in, I Will sing you my Lord, before
you go, the softest thing -- composed in the Nonage of my Muse; yet such a one
as our best Authors borrow from. Nay, I Will be judged by your Grace, if they do
not steal their Dying from my Killing --


St. A. Nay prithee Poltrot thou art so impertinent.


Pol. No more impertinent than your self Sir, nor do I doubt Sir, but my
Character shall be drawn by the Poets for a Man of Wit and Sense Sir, as well
as your self Sir --


Vid. Ay I Will be sworn shall it --


Pol. For I know how to Repartee with the best, to Rally my Wife, to kick her
too if I please Sir, to make Similes as fast as Hops Sir, tho I lay a dying
slap dash Sir, quickly off and quickly on Sir, and as round as a Hoop Sir --


St. A. I grant you Dear Bully all this, but let us have your Song another time,
because mine are begun.


Pol. Nay, look you Dear Rogue, mine is but a Prologue to your Play, and by
your leave his Grace has a mind to hear it, and he shall hear it Sir --


Nem. Ay and will hear it Sir, tho the Great Turk were at St. Dennis's Gate;
come along my Orpheus, and then Sir we'll follow you to the Prince of Cleve's
--

Ballad -- When Phoebus had fetched, etc. Exeunt Singing.


SCENE III.
The Prince of Cleve' s Palace. Music. SONG.
IN a Room for Delight, the Landscape of Love,
Like a shady old Lawn
With the Curtains half drawn,
My Love and I lay, in the cool of the day,
Till our Joys did remove.
II.
So fierce was our Fight, and so smart every stroke,
That Love the little Scout
Was put to the Rout;
His Bow was unbent, every Arrow was spent,
And his Quiver all broke.
Enter Vidam, Nemours. Nem. I have lost my Letter, and by your Description
It must be that which the Queen read at Court.
But are you sure the Princess of Cleve has seen it?

Vid. Why are you so concerned, does your wild Love
Turn that way too -- She is too Grave.

Nem. Too Grave, as if I could not laugh with this, and try
with that, and veer with every gust of Passion -- But has she seen it?

Vid. She has the Letter, the Queen Dauphin sent it her.

Nem. Then you must own it on occasion, and whatever else I shall put upon your
Person --

Vid. Why?

Nem. Lest it should reach the Ears of Marguerite,
For, Oh my Vidam! it is such a ranting Devil,
If she believes this Letter mine, when next
We meet, beware my Locks and Eyes -- No more,
But this remember that, you own it. Exit.

Enter St. Andre and Poltrot. St. A. His Bow was unbent, etc. Singing with
Poltrot.
Come, my Lord, we'll have all over again.

Enter the Prince of Cleve. Vid. See, we have raised the Prince of Cleve:
My Lord, good Morrow --

P. C. Good morrow my good Lord -- Save you my dear Nemours!

Pol. Give you Joy my Lord: What a little blew under the Eyes, Ha, Ha --

St. A. Give you Joy my Lord: Ha, my Lord, Ha. Holds up 3 Fing.

Pol. Ha, my Lord, Ha -- Holding up five Fingers.

P. C. You are merry Gentlemen -- I am not in the vein,
Therefore, Dear Chartres, take these Fingers hence.

St. A. My Lord, you look a little heavy, shall we Dance, Sing,
Fence, take the Air, Ride --

Vid. Come away Sir, the Prince is indisposed.

St. A. Gad I remember now I talk of riding, at the Tournament of Mete, as I
was riding the great Horse --

Vid. Leave off your Lying, and come along.

St. A. With three pushes of Pike, and six hits of Sword, I wounded the Duke of
Ferrara, Duke of Millain, Duke of Parma, Prince of Cleve --

P. C. My Lord, I was not there --

St. A. My Lord -- I beg your Lordships pardon, I meant the Vidam of Chartres.

Vid. You Lie, I was then at Rome.

St. A. My Lord --

Pol. Ha, Ha -- Lord, Lord, how this World is given to Lying! Ha -- Come, come,
you're damnably out, come away.

St. A. My Lord, I beg your pardon, I see you are indisposed, besides the Queen
obliged me this Morning to let 'em choose Colors for my Complexion --

Vid. Hark you, will you go or shall I -- Pulling him off by the Nose.

St. A. My Friend, my Lord you see, is a little Familiar, but I am ever your
Highness's most humble faithful obedient Servant.

Exeunt. Manet P. Cleve. Full of himself, the happy Man is gone;
Why was not I too cast in such a Mould?
To think like him, or not to think at all.
Enter the Princess of Cleve. Had he a Bride like me, Earth would not bear him:
But Oh I wish that it might cover me!
Since Chartres cannot love me: Oh I found it!
Last night I found it in her cold Embraces;
Her Lips too cold -- Cold as the Dew of Death:
And still whenever I pressed her in my arms,
I found my Bosom all afloat with Tears.

Princess C. He weeps, O Heaven! my Lord -- the Prince of Cleve.

P. C. My Life, my Dearest part!

Princess C. Why Sighs my Lord?
What have I done Sir, thus to discompose you?

P. C. Nothing.

Princess C. Ah Sir, there is a Grief within,
And you would hide it from me.

P. C. Nothing my Chartres, nothing here but Love.

Princess C. Alas, my Lord, you hide that Secret from me,
Which I must know or think you never loved me.

P. C. Ah Princess! that you loved but half so well!

Princess C. I have it then, you think me Criminal,
And tax my Honor --

P. C. Oh forbid it Heaven --
But since you press me Madam, let me ask you,
Why when the Princess led you to the Altar,
Why cak'd the Tears upon your Bloodless Face?
Why sighed you when your hand was clasped with mine?
As if your Heart, your Heart refused to join.

Princess C. Ah Sir --

P. C. Behold, you're dashed with the remembrance;
Why when my Hopes were fierce, and Joys grew strong,
Why were you carried like a Coarse along?
When like a Victim by my side you lay,
Why did you Gasp, why did you Swoon away?
O speak --
You have a Soul so open and so clear,
That if there be a Fault it must appear.

Princess C. Alas you are not skilled in Beauties cares,
For Oh! when once the god his Wrath declares;
And Stygian Oaths have winged the bloody Dart,
To make its passage through the Virgins Heart:
She hides her Wound, and hasting to the Grove,
Scarce whispering to the Winds her conscious Love.
The touch of him she loves she will not endure,
But Weeps and Bleeds, and strives against the Cure:
So judge of me when any Grief appears,
Believe my Sighs are kind, and trust my Tears.

P. C. Vanish my Doubts, and Jealousies be gone --
On thy loved Bosom let me break my Joy,
O only Sweets that Fill, but never Cloy:
And was it, was it only Virgins fear?
But speak for ever and I Will ever hear.
Repeat, and let the Echoes deal it round,
While listening Angels bend to catch the Sound;
Nay, Sigh and Weep, drain all thy precious Store,
Be kind, as now, and I Will complain no more. Exit.

Princess C. Was ever Man so worthy to be loved,
So good, so gentle, soft a Disposition,
As if no Gaul had mixed with his Creation:
So tender and so fearful to displease,
No barbarous Heart but thine would stop his entrance;
But thou Inhumane banished him from his own.
And while the Lordly Master lies without, Enter Iren.
Thou Trait'ress, Riotests with a Thief within.

Iren. Ah Madam, what new Grief!

Princess C. Alas Iren,
Thou Treasurer of my thoughts --
What shall I do? how shall I chase Nemours,
That Robber, Ravisher of my Repose?

Iren. For the great care you wish, may I enquire
Whether you think the Duke insensible,
Indifferent to the rest of Womankind?

Princess C. I must confess I did not think him so
Tho now I do -- But would give half my Blood
To think him otherwise --

Iren. Without the Expense,
There take your wish, -- a Letter which he dropped
In the Tennis-court, given the Queen Dauphin
By her Page, and sent to you to read for your Diversion.

Princess C. Alas! Iren --
Why trembles thus my Hand, why beats my Heart?
But let us Read --
Reads -- Your affection has been divided betwixt me and another, you are False
-- a Traitor to the truest Love -- never see me more --

Princess C. Ah it is too plain, I thought as much before; but Oh! we are too
apt to excuse the faults of those we love, and fond of our own undoing.
Support me Oh to bear this dreadful pang,
This stab to all my gathered Resolution.

Iren. Read it again, and call Revenge to aid you.

Princess C. Perhaps he makes his boast too of the Conquest,
For Oh! my Heart he knows too well, my Passion --
But as thou have inspired me, I Will revenge
The Affront, and cast him from my Poisoned Breast,
To make him room that merits all my thoughts.

Enter the Prince of Cleve with Nemours. P. C. Madam there is a Letter fallen
by accident into your hands -- my Friend comes in behalf of the Vidam of
Chartres to retrieve it, when I am dismissed from the King my Lord, I Will wait
you here again.


Nem. My Lord --


P. C. Not a step further. Exit P. C.


Nem. Madam, I come most humbly to enquire, whether the Dauphin Queen sent you
a Letter which the Vidam lost?


Princess C. Sir, you had better
Find the Queen Dauphin out, tell her the truth,
For she is informed the Letter is your own.

Nem. Ah Madam! I have nothing to confess
In this Affair -- or if I had, believe me,
Believe these Sighs that will not be kept in,
I should not tell it to the Dauphin Queen.
But to the purpose; Know my Lord of Chartres
Received the Note you saw, from Madam Tournon,
A former Mistress -- But the Secret's this --
The Sister of our Henry long has loved him.

Princess C. I thought the King intended her for Savoy.

Nem. True Madam, but the Vidam is beloved;
In short, he dropped the Letter, and desired,
For fear of her he loves, that I would own it;
I promised too to trace the Business for him,
And if 'twere possible, regain the Letter.

Princess C. The Vidam then has shown but small Discretion,
Being engaged so high --
Why did he not burn the Letter?

Nem. But Madam, shall I dare presume to say,
It Is hard to be in Love and to be wise?
Oh did you know like him -- like him! Like me,
What it is to languish in those restless Fires.

Princess C. Iren, Iren, restore the Duke his Letter. Enter Iren.

Nem. Madam, You Have bound me ever to your Service,
But I Will retire and study to repay,
If ought but death can quit the Obligation. Exit.

Princess C. O it is too much, I Am lost, I Am lost again --
The Duke has cleared himself, to the confusion
Of all my settled Rage, and vowed Revenge;
And now he shows more lovely than before:
He comes again to wake my sleeping Passion,
To rouse me into Torture; O the Racks
Of hopeless Love! it shoots, it glows, it burns,
And thou alas! shall shortly close my Eyes.

Iren. Alas! you're pale already.

Princess C. Oh Iren --
Methinks I see Fate set two Bowls before me,
Poison and Health, a Husband and Nemours;
But see with what a whirl my Passions move,
I loath the Cordial of my Husband's Love;
But when Nemours my Fancy does recall,
The Bane's so sweet that I could drink it all.

Finis Actus Primi.
ACT II.
SCENE I.
Tournon, La March. Tour. IT works, my Dear, it works beyond belief,
The Letter which he lost has sprung a Mine
That shatters all the Court, each Jealous Duchess
Concludes her Man concerned, and strait employs
A Confident to find the Mystery out.
But that which takes the Queen, and makes me dye
With Pleasure, is, that Marguerite thinks
Spite of the Imprecations of Nemours,
The Letter sent to him --

La M. I see 'em move this way.

Tour. Have to St. Andre's Palace, watch their Wives, till I appear -- I have
promised Nemours an Afternoon Assignation with 'em in Luxemburg Garden, but I
will antedate the business as he is waiting, and set Marguerite upon him just
as he meets 'em, which will heighten the design; be gone while I attend the
business here --


Exit La March. Enter Nemours, Marguerite. Nem. You have heard me more than once
Affirm, the Vidam (if you will give him leave)
Will own it to your Face.

Marg. Hear, hear him Heaven;
By all Extremes thou art False, therefore be gone,
For if I look upon thee in this Rage,
I shall do mischief; speak not, but away --

Nemours beckens the Vidam, they steal off. Enter Tournon. Tour. Madam, the
Duke has taken you at your word, and is gone with the Vidam; I made bold to
over-hear part of your Discourse, because I have more of his Infidelity to tell
you -- Betwixt one and two in Luxemburg Garden he has appointed some Ladies --


Marg. Furies and Hell! --

Tour. Have Patience for an hour, I Will bring you to the place, where, if you
please, you may flesh your Fingers in the Blood of those young Women, whom he
meets to enjoy.

Marg. No, no, I have a better Cast, if I can conquer this rising Spleen --
How long will it be ever your call me?

Tour. An hour or thereabouts --

Marg. And by that time I Will put on a Disguise; fail not --

Tour. But what do you intend?

Marg. I know not yet my self; Revenge --

Tour. You had a Lover once, Francis the Dauphin --

Marg. Be that then the last Card -- I know not what;
The Dauphin shall -- I Will do it, and openly affront him --
And as the little Worshippers adore me,
Spy the Duke out, and leaning on the Prince,
Enquire who is that: It shall be so, I will --
Revenge, Revenge, and show thy self true Woman.
Down then, proud Heart, down Woman, down, I Will try,
I Will do it, I Have sworn, to curb my Will or dye. Exeunt.

SCENE II.
St. Andre, Poltrot, Bellamore. Bell. WELL, Gentlemen, good Morrow, and
remember my Counsel.

Pol. What, to bear our selves like Men of Wit and Sense,
Snub our Wives, Rally 'em, and be as Witty as the Devil?

St. A. With all my heart, it is not my time of Assignation yet with my
Dutchesses, and this is very Fashionable.


Bell. I Have put you in the way -- And so good Morrow. Exit.

Pol. They come, they come, Enter Elianor and Celia.
Walk by 'em, take no notice, and Repeat Verses.
Phillis did in so strange a Posture lie
Panting and Breathless, languishing her Eye,
She seemed to live, and yet she seemed to Dye.

St. A. I grow sick of the Wife -- Prithe Poltrot let us go.

Pol. Whither thou will, so we get rid of 'em -- Z'life I am as weary of mine,
as a Modish Lady of her old Clothes --


Cel. What does the Maggot bite, you must be jogging from this place of little
Ease? yet I am resolved to know some reason, why a Wife may not be as good
Company as a Wench.


Pol. Prithe Spouse -- do not provoke me, for I Am in the Witty Vein, and shall
Repartee thee to the Devil.


El. Pray, St. Andre, leave trising your Curls, your affected Nods, Grimaces,
taking of Snuff, and answer me -- Why are we not as pleasing as formerly?


St. A. Why, Nell -- Gad it is special -- This Amarum is very pungent -- Why,
Nell, I can give no more reason for my change of humor, than for the turning
of a Weathercock; only this, I love Whoring; because I love Whoring.


Pol. Nay, since you provoke us, know I can give a reason; we run after Whores,
because you bar us from 'em -- As some take pleasure to go a Deer-steeling that
have fine Parks of their own -- Gad, and there I was with her -- This itch of
the Blood, Spouse, is nothing but a Spice of the first great Jilt ^our
Grandmother Eve; we long for the Fruit, because it is forbidden.


St. A. Nay, that is not all, for Misses are really more pleasant than a Wife
can be, Probatum est. A Wife dares not assume the Liberty of pleasing like a
Miss, for fear of being thought one. A Wife may pretend to dutiful affection,
and bustle below, but must be still at night. It Is Miss alone may be allowed
Flame and Rapture, and all that --


Cel. Yet how do you know, but a Wife may have Flame and Rapture, and all that
--


Pol. It Is impossible, it is the Nature of a Wife to be as cold as a Stone --
There Is Slap Dash for you --


Cel. Yet out of a Stone a Man of Sense would strike Fire: There Is Slap Dash
for you --


El. Will you be Constant to us, if we make it appear by your own Confession,
that we can please as well as the subtl'st She that ever charmed you?


St. A. Till which Miracle come to pass, since 'twas your own Proposition, I
St. Andre and thou Elianor come not between a pair of Sheets --


El. How should they know then?


Pol. Nor I Antony with thee Celia.


El. But we hope you are not in earnest, you cannot be so Inhumane.


Cel. It Is a Curse beyond all Curses, to have a Man that can and will not; it is
worse than teaching a Fool, or leading the Blind.


El. To Marry and live thus, is to be like Fish in Frosty Weather, have Water,
but pine for want of Air.


Cel. Yet, who knows but Heaven may send some Kind Good Man, that in mere pity
may break the Ice, and give us a Breathing?


El. Can you be so hard-hearted?


Pol. Come Bully, let us away, for fear we should melt; look ye Spouses of ours,
if our Wenches prove ill-humour'd, we'll come back to you.


St. A. Agreed, rather than grow Rusty let our Wives File us -- But I thank
Heaven it is not come to that yet -- There Is no such want, I Will have you to know
Nell, there is no Woman can resist me if she would, no Duchess scapes me, if I
make it my business to compass her.


Pol. Any Man of Wit and Sense like us, Charms all Women, as one Key unlocks
all Doors at Court -- Nay, I Will say a bold word for my self, Turn me to the
sharpest Shrow that ever Bit or Scratched, if I do not make her feed out of my
hand like a tame Pidgeon, may I be condemned to lie with my Wife.


Eli. Flesh and Blood can endure no longer, you are the vainest lying Fellows
that ever lived, you compass a Duchess -- There Is not a Footman but would
shame you.


St. A. Z'Death and Fury, if they should try --


Cel. You pitiful, sneaking, rascally Cuckold, countenanced Scoundrels, that
dare Bespatter Ladies of Honor thus -- For Heaven sake what are you, how do
you live, and where do you spend your time? in Tennis-Courts, Taverns,
Eating-houses, Bawdy-houses, where you quarrel in Drink for your Trulls, who
while you Manfully Fight their Cause, they run away with your Hats and Belts --


Eli. Then you come home, and swear you will be revenged on this Lord, or that
Duke, that assaulted you single, with all his Foot men.


Cel. And, says my Gentleman, if I had not been the most Skillful Person alive,
my Body had been by this time like an Old-fashioned Suit, Pink'd all over, and
full of Ilet-holes.


Eli. But did he not disarm my Lord at last?


Cel. By all means, and made him beg his Life.


Eli. When indeed he compounded with the Constable for his own Liberty.


Cel. You Persons of Quality -- What Person of Honor would keep company with
such Debauches? Z'life Madam, an Orange-wench is above their Ambition.


Eli. An Orange-wench! If they can but run in her debt, and the poor Creature
come dunning 'em to their Lodgings, they will Swear they lay with her, when they
dare not be known that they are within.


Cel. Sometimes lie Lolling upon a long Scarf in the Playhouse, talking loud
and affectedly, and Swear at night they had the prettiest thing just come out
of the Country.


Eli. And wish themselves Damned if she did not smell of the Grass.


Cel. When in truth 'twas some disguised Bawd, that met 'em there according to
Assignation.


Pol. Hark you Potiphar's Wife of mine, by Pharaoh's lean Kine thou shall
starve for this.


St. A. And for thee Nell -- Mark me, thou shall Dream and be tormented with
Imagination, like one that having drunk hard is thirsty in the Night, dreams of
Vessels brim-full, and drinks and drinks, yet never is satisfied.


Pol. For my part, I Will serve my Damned Wife as Tantalus was punished the Fruit
shall bob at her Lips, which she shall never enjoy.


Exeunt St. A. Pol. Eli. Very well, the World's come to a fine pass; if this be
Marrying, would I were a Maid again. Men take Wives now as they snatch up a
Gazette, look it over and then fling it by.


Cel. They forget us in a day or two, or if they read us over again, it is only
to rub up Remembrance, and commonly they fall asleep so.


Eli. What Is to be done Child? for rather than live thus --


Cel. Rather than live thus let us do any thing.


Eli. Any thing Rogue, why Cuckolds are things.


Cel. Perhaps they think we have no such thing as Flesh and Blood about us, but
we'll make 'em know, a young Woman in the flour of her Age, is not like painted
Fruit in a Glass, only to be looked on -- Perhaps you are a more Contemplative
Person, and will go farther about.


Eli. What, Dear Rogue, do think I will leave thee? by this Kiss not I.


Cel. Thus then we'll slip on long Scarfs, and black Gowns, put on Masks, and
ramble about.


Eli. Rare Rogue, let me Kiss thee again -- Certainly Intrigueing is the
pleasantest part of Life; to meet a Gallant abroad in a Summers Evening, and
Laugh away an hour or two in a Garden Bower, where no body sees nor no body
knows, methinks it is so pretty and harmless, Lord, how it works in my Fancy --


Cel. We must tell Madam Tournon by all means --


Eli. I believe her Secret, and know her very good Natured; but for all that,
methinks she has the Cant of a refined Florence Bawd --


Enter Tournon. Cel. The better for our purpose, she comes as wished.


Tour. Dear Precious Rosebuds your Servant, now for all the World you look as
you were New-blown; and how do ye my pretty Primroses? it is a whole day since I
saw ye.


Cel. Oh Madam! we have a Suit to your Ladyship.


Tour. I grant it whatever it be; speak my Hyacinth.


Eli. Our Husbands are worse than ever.


Cel. They use us as if we had neither Beauty nor Portion.


Tour. What Is this I hear? O Ingrate and Ignoble! Revenge your selves Sweetings
-- It Is time to pule and put Finger in Eye, when you are past Propagation. But
my Lady-birds you are in your Prime, let me touch your delicate Hands -- Well,
and do not these humid Palms claim a Man -- Nay, and your Breasts, Lord! Lord!
how swollen and hard they are, how they heave and pant now, by Cynthia, as if
they were ready to burst? look to it, have a care of a Cancer, draw 'em down,
draw 'em down, for let me tell you Jewels, it may be dangerous for you to go
thus long without Cultivation --


Eli. What would you have us do Madam?


Tour. Do Violet? why do as all the World does beside, lose no Time, catch him
by the Forelock, get a Man to your mind -- I Will acquaint you with one that is as
true as the day, that will Fight like a Lion, and Love like a Sparrow -- He has
Eyes as black as Slows, you can hardly look on 'em, and a Skin so white -- and
soft as Satin with the Grain: And for thee Tulip --


Cel. For me Madam!


Tour. For thee Hony-Suckle, such a Man, well, I shall never forget him, such a
strait bole of a Body, such a Trunk, such a shape, such a quick strength, he
will over any thing he can lay his hand on, and Vaults to Admiration.


Eli. But Madam, will you provide us Lodgings on occasion --


Tour. The Richest in the Town, the costliest Hangings, great Glasses, China
Dishes, Silver Tables, Silver Stands, and Silver Urinals -- And then these
Gallants are the closest Lovers, so good at keeping a Secret -- Well, give me
your Man that says nothing, but minds the business in hand -- For a Secret
Lover's like a Gun charged with White Powder, does Execution but makes no noise.


Cel. Well, and let me tell you that is the Point, Madam --


Tour. Ay, and it is a Precious Point, a Feeling Point, and a Pleasing Point;
you shall know him, you must know him, I shall dye if you don't know him -- He
has the fling of a Gentleman.


Eli. Pray Madam, how is that?


Tour. Why thus Apricock -- Into your Arms, then stops your Mouth with a
double-tongu'd English Kiss, that you cannot be angry with him for your Blood.


Cel. I know it is my filthy Country way -- But I Will assure you if he should
serve me so, my Blood would rise at him.


Tour. But then you would repent and fall before him, for he has the most
particular obliging way, and she whom he particularly loves, is so obliged with
his Particular -- Well, for my part, my Twins of Beauty, I set an infinite
Value on their Charesses, Distresses and Addresses; nay, I could refuse a Quilt
Imperial, to be obliged by them, tho on the bare Boards, or the cold Stones.


Eli. But, Madam, are they in being --


Tour. They are my Blossoms -- Then they Kiss beyond Imagination, just for all
the World as when you cut a pure Juicy China Orange, the Goodness runs over --
Lord! now it comes in my Cogitation, I Am just now going to take a View of them in
Luxemburg Garden, where, if you please to walk, they shall Sun themselves in
your Smiles -- Come my Carnations, nay, I protest I will not go before ye.


Cel. But, Madam, we are at home.


Tour. O Lord, Beauties! I know not the way.


Eli. Indeed Madam you must -- or we shall use Violence --


Tour. Well Ladies, since it is your command, I dare not but obey.


Exeunt. SCENE III.
Nemours, Bellamore. Nem. THou Dear Soft Rogue, my Spouse, my Hephestion, my
Ganymed, nay, if I dye to night my Dukedom's thine -- But art thou sure the
Princess of Cleve withdraws here after Dinner --


Bell. One of her Women whom I have Debauched, tells me it is her Custom; you
may slip into the Closet and over-hear all, and yet methinks it is hard, because
the Prince of Cleve loves you as his Life.


Nem. I saved his Life, Sweetheart, when he was assaulted by a mistake in the
dark, and shall he grudge me a little Fooling with his Wife, for so serious an
Obligation?

Enter the Vidam -- A Pox upon him, here comes the Vidam with his sour Morals
--


Vid. It Is certain I like her -- She Is very pretty, and Tournon shall help me
to her --


Nem. In Love, by my Lechery -- Ay, and she shall help thee to her -- But who,
but who is it my Man of Principles --


Vid. To tell your Grace, I am sure were to be a Man of none for my self -- You
that are the Whores Ingrosser -- Let me see -- There Is Tournon your Ubiquitary
Whore, your Bawd, your Bawd Barber or Bawd Surgeon, for you're ever under her
hands, and she Plasters you every day with new Wenches -- Then there is your
Domestic Termagant -- Elianor and Celia, with something new in Chase -- Why
you outdo Caesar himself in your way, and dictate to more Whores at once than he
did to Knaves -- Believe me Sir, in a little time you will be nicked the Town
Bull.


Nem. Why there is the difference betwixt my Sense and yours; would I were, and
your Darklin Mistress the first should come in my way, Jove and Europa, I Would
leap her in thy Face -- Why, how now Vidam, what Devil has turned thee Grave,
the Devil of Love, or the Devil of Envy?


Vid. Friendship, mere Friendship and care of your Soul; I thought it but just,
to tell you the whole Town takes notice of your way.


Nem. Why then the whole Town does me wrong, because I take no notice of
theirs; thus the other night I was in company with two or three well-bred Fops,
that found fault with my Obscenity, and protested 'twas such a way -- Why it is
the way of ye all, only you sneak with it under your Cloaks like Tailors and
Barbers; and I, as a Gentleman should do, walk with it in my hand. For prithee
observe, does not your Priest the same thing? did not I see Father Patrick
declaiming against Flesh in Lent, strip up to the Elbow; and telling the
Congregation he had eat nothing but Fish these twenty years, yet protest to the
Ladies, that Fat Arm of his, which was a chopping one, was the least Member
about him?


Bell. Faith, and it may be so too.


Nem. Does not your Politician, your little great Man of business, that sets
the World together by the Ears, after all his Plotting, Drudging and Sweating
at Lying, retire to some little Punk and untap at Night?


Vid. I submit to the weight of your Reasons, and confess the whole World does
you Injustice, wherefore I judge it fit that they Bring your Grace their Wives
and Daughters to make you amends.


Nem. Why now thou talk like an honest Fellow, for never let business
Flatter thee Frank into Nonsense: Women are the sole Pleasure of the World;
nay, I had rather part with my whole Estate, Health and Sense, than lose an
Inch of my Love -- I was the other day at a pretty Entertainment, where two or
three Grave Politic Rogues were wondering, why Women should be brought into
Plays; I as gravely replied, the World was not made without 'em; he full Pop
upon me -- But Sir, it had been better if it had --


Vid. And then no doubt a gloomy Smile arose --


Nem. These are your Rogues, Frank, that would be thought Critics, that are
never pleased but with something new, as they call it, just, proper, and never
as men speak; you're out of the way, men that hate us Rogues with a way --


Bell. But after all this they will run you down, and say your Grace is no
Scholar --


Nem. Why, Faith, nor would be, if Learning must wrench a Man's Head quite
round; I understand my Mother Tongue well enough, and some others just as I do
Women, not to be married to 'em, but to serve my turn; what is good in 'em never
scapes me, but as for Points and Tags, for which those solemn Fops are to be
valued, I slight 'em, nor would remember 'em if I could; for he that once
listens to Jingling, ten to one if ever he gets it out of his head while he
lives -- But prithee be gone, and leave me to my Musing; find Tournon out, my
Vidam, and bid her remember the Handkercher -- Away, thou art concerned in the
business, therefore away. Exeunt Vid. Bell.


Enter the Princess of Cleve, Irene. Nem. She comes, ye Gods, with what a
pompous State;
The Stars and all Heavens Glories on her wait.
That Is out of the way too -- But now for my Closet. Exit.

Princess C. No, no, I charge thee pity me no longer,
But on the Earth let us consult our Woes:
For Earth I shall be shortly; sit and hear me,
While on thy Faithful Bosom thus I lean
My akeing Head, and breath my cruel Sorrows.

Iren. Speak Madam, speak, they will strangle if contained --

Princess C. As late I lay upon a flowery Bank,
My Head a little heaved beyond the Verge,
To look my Troubles in the Rockless Stream,
I slept, and dreamt I saw
The bosom of the Flood unfold;
I saw the Naked Nymphs ten Fathom down,
With all the Crystal Thrones in their Green Courts below,
Where in their busy Arms Nemours appeared:
His Head reclined, and swollen as he were drowned,
While each kind Goddess dew'd his Senseless Face
With Nectars drops to bring back Life in vain:
When on a sudden the whole Synod rose
And laid him to my Lips -- Oh my Irene!
Forgive me Honor, Duty -- Love forgive me,
I found a Pleasure I never felt before,
Dissolving Pains, and Swimming shuddering Joys,
To which my Bridal Night with Cleve was dull --

Enter the Prince of Cleve. Iren. Behold him, Madam.

P. C. Ha! my Chartres -- How --
Why on the Earth?

Princess C. Because, my Lord, it suits
The humble posture of my sad Condition.

P. C. These Starts again; but why thy sad Condition?
O rise and tell me why this Melancholy!
Why fall those Tears? Why heaves this Bosom thus?
Nay, I must then constrain thee with my Arms. Rise.
Is It possible? does then thy load of Grief
Oppress thee so, thou can not speak for Sighing --
Ah Chartres, Chartres! then thou did but sooth me,
There is some cause, too frightful to be told,
And thou have learnt the art too to dissemble.

Princess C. O Heavens! dissemble when I strip my Soul,
Show it all bear, and trembling to your view;
Can you suspect me Sir, for a Dissembler?

P. C. By all my Hopes, Doubts, Jealousies and Fears,
I know not what to think, I think thou show'st
Thy inmost thought, and now I think thou do not.
I think there is a Bosom secret still,
And have a dawn of it through all thy Folds
That hide it from my view: O trust me Cleve!
Trust me whatever it be; I love thee more
Than thou love help for that which thus inthrauls thee.
Trust thy Dear Husband, O let loose the pain
That makes thee droop, though it should be my death!
By thy dear self I Will welcome it to ease thee.

Princess C. Thou best of all thy Kind, why should you rack me,
Who dare not, cannot speak -- No more but this,
Take me from Paris from the Court.

P. C. Ha, Chartres, how!
What from the Court of Paris, why?

Princess C. Because -- my Mothers Deathbed Counsel so advised me,
Because the Court has Charms, because I love
A Grotto best, because it is best for you
And me, and all the World.

P. C. Because, O Heaven!
Because there is some cursed Charm at Court,
Which you love better than me and all the World.
The Reason's plain, for which you would remove.
To lose the Memory of some lawless Love.

Princess C. Why then am I detained, if that is your fear?

P. C. It is, it ought, and shall, and Oh! you must
Confess this horrid Falsehood to my Face.

Princess C. Never, my Lord, never confess a Lie,
By Heavens I love your Life above my own.

P. C. Not that, not that, speak home and fly not wide,
Swear by thy self, thou dearly purchased Pleasure,
Swear by those Chaster Sweets thy Mother left thee;
Swear that thy Soul, which cannot hide a Treason,
Prefers me even to all the World; Hold Precious,
Swear that thou love him more -- And only love him,
And in such Sense as not to love another.

Princess C. Ah, Sir! why will you sink me to your Feet,
Where I must lie and groan my Life away?

P. C. Speak Chartres, Speak, nor let the name of Husband
Sound Terror to thy Soul; for by my hopes
Of Paradise, however thou usest me,
I am thy Creature, still to make and mould me
Thy cringing crawling Slave, and will adore
The hand that kills me --

Princess C. O you are too good!
And I must never hope for Pardon -- Yet
I could excuse it; but my Lord I will not.
Know then -- I cannot speak.

P. C. Nor I by Heaven.

Princes C. I Love.

P. C. Go on.

Princess C. I love you as my Soul.

P. C. Ha -- But the rest.

Princess C. Alas, alas, I dare not --

P. C. Why then farewell for ever --

Princess C. Stay and take it --
Take the extremest Pang of tortured Virtue,
Take all, I love, I love thee Cleve as Life;
But Oh! I love, I love another more --

P. C. Oh Chartres! Oh --

Princess C. Why did you rack me then?
You were resolved, and now you have it all.

P. C. All Chartres! All! Why, can there then be more?
But rise, and know I by this Kiss forgive thee.
Thou have made me wretched by the clearest proof
Of perfect Honor that ever flowed from Woman.
But crown the misery which you have begun,
And let me know who it is you would avoid,
Who is the happy man that had the power
To burn that Heart which I could never warm.

Princess C. Forgive me Sir, in this Prudence commands
Eternal silence --

P. C. Ha! if silent now,
Why did thou speak at all? If here thou stop'st
I shall conclude that which I thought thy virtue,
A start of passion which thou could not hide,
And now Vexation gnaws thy guilty Soul
With a too late Repentance for confessing
His name --

Princess C. You shall not know it -- Yes my Lord,
Now a too late Repentance tears my Soul,
And tells me I have done amiss to trust you;
Yet by my hopes of ease at last by Death,
I swear my Love has never yet appeared.
To any Man but you --

P. C. Weep not my Chartres, for however my Tongue
Upbraid thy Fame, my Heart still worships thee,
And by the Blood that chills me round -- I swear
From this sad Moment, I Will never urge thee more;
All that I beg of thee, is not to hate me.

Princess C. The study of my Life shall be to love you.

P. C. Never, Oh never! I were mad to hope it,
Yet thou shall give me leave to fold thy hand,
To press it with my Lips, to sigh upon it,
And wash it with my Tears --

Princess C. I cannot bear this kindness without dying.

P. C. Nay, we will walk and talk sometimes together,
Like Age we'll call to mind the Pleasures past;
Pleasures like theirs, which never shall return,
For Oh! my Chartres, since thy Heart's estranged,
The pleasure of thy Beauty is no more,
Yet I each night will see thee softly laid,
Kneel by thy side, and when thy Vows are paid,
Take one last kiss, ever I to Death retire,
Wish that the Heavens had given us equal fire;
Then sigh, it cannot be, and so expire. Exeunt.
Enter Nemours. She Loves, she Loves, and I Am the happy Man,
She has avowed it, past all president,
Before her Husbands Face --
Ha! but from Love like hers such daring virtue,
That like a bleeding Quarry lately chased,
Plunges among the Waves, or turns at Bay,
What is there to expect -- But -- let it come
The worst can happ'n, yet it is glorious still.
To bring to such Extremes so chaste a mind,
And charm to love the wisest of her Kind.
Enter Vidam. Ah Vidam! I could tell thee such a Story of such a Friend of
mine, the oddest, prettiest, out of the way of business, but thou art so
flippant there is no trusting thee.


Vid. Tournon says the Flag's held out --


Nem. Tournon be Damned -- Know then, but be secret, there is a Friend of mine
beloved -- But by a Soul so Virtuous,


Vid. That was too much --


Nem. That quite from the method of all Womankind, she told it to her Husband.


Vid. That Is strange indeed: And how did her Husband like it?


Nem. Why, after a tedious passionate Discourse, approved her carriage, and
swore he loved her more than ever; so they cried and kissed, and went away most
lovingly together.


Vid. Why then she Cuckolds him to rights, nor can he take the Law of her; and
I Will be judge by any Bawd in Christendom -- And so my Lord farewell, I have
business of my own, and Tournon waits you --


Nem. But hark you, Frank, I have occasion for you, and must press thee, I
hope, to no unwellcome Office -- only a Second --


Vid. With all my heart, my Lord, the time and place.


Nem. Just now in Luxemburg Garden, betwixt one and two, a Challenge from a
couple, the smartest, briskest, prettiest Tilting Ladies --


Vid. Your Servant Sir, and as you thrive, let me hear from your Grace, and so
Fate speed your Plow. Exit.


Enter Tournon with Marguerite. Nem. And so Fate speed your Plow, and you go to
that, and I shall tell you Sir, 'twas not handsomely done, to leave me thus to
the Mercy of two unreasonable Women at once.


Tour. You have him now in view, and so I leave you. Exit. Tour.


Marg. Stand Sir.


Nem. To a Lady, while I have breath.


Marg. Would you not fall to a Lady too, if she should ask the Favor?


Nem. Ay, Gad, any pretty Woman may bring me upon my Knees at her pleasure.


Marg. O Devil --


Nem. Prithee my dear soft warm Rogue, let thee and I be kind --


Marg. And Kiss, you were going to say.


Nem. Z'Life, how pat she hits me, why thou and I were made for one another --
Let Us try how our Lips fit.


Marg. Is that your fitting?


Nem. Before Heaven she is wondrous quick; Nay, my Dear, and you go to that, I
can fit you every way --


Marg. You are a notorious talker.


Nem. And a better doer; prithee try.


Marg. As if that were to do now.


Nem. Nay then I Am sure of thee, for never was a Woman mine once, but was mine
always.


Marg. Know then you are a heavy sluggish Fellow; but I see there is no more
Faith in Man than Woman, Cork and Feathers.


Nem. Make a Shittlecork that is Woman, let me, if you please, be Battledoor,
and by Gad for a day and a night I Will keep up with any Fellow in Christendom.


Marg. Come away then and I Will keep count I warrant you -- Monster -- Villain
--


Nem. Now is the Devil and I as great as ever -- I come my Dear -- But then
what becomes of my other Dears -- For whom I was Prim'd and Charged --


Marg. Why don't you come my Dear?


Nem. There with that sweet word she cocked me --


Marg. Lord! how you tremble --


Nem. There the Pan flashed --


Marg. I Will set my Teeth in you.


Nem. Now I go off -- O Man! O Woman! O Flesh! O Devil!


Finis Actus Secundi.
ACT III.
SCENE I.
The Vidam, Tournon. Tour. A Woman in Love with another, and confess it to her
Husband -- What would I give to know her -- Without all question Nemours is the
Person beloved.


Vid. That Is plain by his eagerness in the Discovery, he forced me to hear him
whether I would or no; yet what I so admire in his Temper, is, that for all the
former Heat, I no sooner mentioned you, but he flew from it, and run upon
another Scent, as if the first had never been.


Tour. Where did you find him?


Vid. At the Princess of Cleve's, and my Heart tells me that is the Lady that
acquainted her Husband how she was determined to make him a Cuckold -- If he
pleased to give his consent --


Tour. My Judgment, which is most Sagacious in these Matters, is most positive
in your opinion, for by his whitely cast, the Prince of Cleve must be the Man
fork'd in the Book of Fate --


Vid. And yet it is odd, that Nemours of all Men, should have such luck at this
Lottery.


Tour. O to choose, my Lord! because she is nice and precise; your demure Ladies
that are so Squob in company, are Devils in a corner; they are a sort of
melancholy Birds, that never peep abroad by day, but they to whit, to whou it
at night; nay, to my particular knowledge, all grave Women love wild Men, and
if they can but appear civil at first, they certainly snap 'em; for mark their
Language, the Man is a handsome Man, if he had but Grace; the Man has Wit, Parts
and excellent Gifts, if he would but make a right use of 'em; why all these
If's are but civil Pimps to a most Bawdy conclusion -- But see, I descry him
with a Mask yonder --


Vid. You Will remember St. Andre's Lady for this Discovery.


Tour. If she be not yours to night, never acquaint me with a Mystery again --


Vid. Not a word to the Duke -- My Gravity gets me a hank over him -- Therefore
if you tell him of any Love Matters of mine, you must never hope for more
Secrets --


Tour. Trouble not your head, but away. Exit. Vid. So this gets me a Diamond
from the Queen, an Ambassadors Merit at least. Confess to her Husband, alas
poor Princess -- See, they come; but that which startles me, is how a Woman of
Marguerite's Sex can contain all this while as she seems to do; but perhaps she
designs to pump him -- Or has some further end, which I must learn.


Enter Nemours and Marguerite. Marg. But did you never promise thus before?


Nem. Never -- But why these Doubts -- Thou have all the Wit in the World --
Thou know I love thee without Protestations, why then this delay?


Marg. I have not conversed with you an hour, and you are for running over me:
No Sir, but if you can have patience till the Ball -- Oh I shall burst --


Nem. Patience, I must; but if it were not for the clog of thy Modesty, we
might have been in the third Heaven by this, and have danced at the Ball beside
-- Ha! you faint -- Take off your Mask --


Marg. Unhand me, or -- But pray, ever we part, let me ask you a serious
question; what if you should have picked up a Devil Incarnate?


Nem. Why, by your loving to go in the dark thus, I make me begin to suspect
you -- But be a Devil and thou will, if we must be Damned together, who can
help it --


Marg. I shall not hold --


Nem. Yet, now I think on it, thou can be no Devil, thou art so fraid of a
Sinner; for you refused me just now, when I profer'd to sell my self, and seal
the Bargain with the best of my Blood.


Marg. But if I should permit you, could you find in your heart to engender
with a damned Spirit?


Nem. Yes marry could I, for all you ask the question so seriously: For know,
thou bewitching Creature, I have longed any time this seven years to be the
Father of a Succubus --


Marg. Fiend, and no Man --


Nem. Besides, Madam, don't you think a feat Devil of yours and my begetting,
would be a prettier sight in a House, than a Monkey or a Squirrel? Gad I Would hang
Bells about his neck, and make my Valet spruce up his Brush Tail every Morning
as duly as he combed my head.


Marg. But is it possible (for I know you have a Mistress, a Convenience as you
call her,) that you could leave her for me, who may be Ugly, Diseased, or a
Devil indeed for ought you know?


Nem. Why, since you tax me with truth, I must answer like a Man of Honor; I
could leave her for thee or any else of your Tribe, so they were all like you
--


Marg. But in the name of Reason, what is there in us Runners at All, that a
Wife, or a Mistress of that nature, may not possess with more advantage?


Nem. Why, the freedom Wit and Roguery, and all sort of acting, as well as
Conversation. In a Domestic she, there is no Gaity, no Chat, no Discourse, but
of the Cares of this World and its Inconveniences; what we do we do, but so
dully; by Gad, my Thing asked me once, when my Breeches were down, what the
Stuff cost a Yard -- Ha! what now, upon the Gog again? nay, then have with you
at all Adventures, at least to put you in mind of the Ball -- Exeunt.


Enter Tournon. Tour. Ha! yonder she lost him -- see, what can she intend by
keeping her self so close -- But see La March has seized her, and now the
Mystery will open of it self.


Re-enter Marguerite with La March. La M. But have you found him false?

Tour. Curses, Damnation,
The Racks of Women's Wits, when her Soul
Is bawk'd of Vengeance, wait on his desires.

La M. Why did you leave him so upon the sudden?

Marg. Because I found my Passion move too strongly,
My foolish Heart would not obey my Will;
I found my Eyes grow full, my Sighs had choked me,
And I was dying in his Arms --

La M. But now
You have got Breath, what is your purpose Madam?

Nem. To meet him as I promised, to enjoy him
With the last Pang of a revengeful Pleasure;
And let him know --
Then make him Damn himself with thousand Oaths,
That he will never see forsak'n Marguerite more,
The cursed fond, foolish, doting Marguerite;
For thus with an extorted Gallantry,
I Will force him to revile me to my face;
Then throw the Mask away, and vent my Rage;
Tell him he is a Fiend, Devil, Devil, Devil,
Or what is worse, a Man --
And leave him to the Horror of his Soul. Exit.

Tour. I Have heard her Rave, and must applaud thy Conduct
To the next task, then when she has satisfied
This odd Figary of Revenge and Pleasure,
Take her in the height of her disdain
And ply her with the Dauphin; then tell Nemours
Of her resolve to cast him further off,
Millions to one we carry the design.
But have and scout, while I attend the Duke,
That harps upon the loss of his new Mistress.

Enter Nemours. Nem. Death and the Devil -- We went talking along so
pleasantly, when of a sudden whispering, she would not fail me at the Ball, she
sprung from me at yon dark corner and vanished. Well if she be a Devil, Hell by
her should be a merry place, or perhaps she has not been there yet, but fell
this Morning and took Earth in her way; my Comfort is, I shall make a new
discovery if she keeps her word, and she has too much wit to break it before
she tryes me.


Tour. And where are you to make this new discovery?


Nem. At the Ball in Masquerade -- Thus would I have Time roll still all in
these lovely Extremes, the Corruption of Reason being the Generation of Wit;
and the Spirit of Wit lying in the Extravagance of Pleasure: Nay, the two
nearest ways to enter the Closet of the Gods, and lie even with the Fates
themselves, are Fury and Sleep -- Therefore the Fury of Wine and Fury of Women
possess me waking and sleeping; let me Dream of nothing but dimpl'd Cheeks, and
laughing Lips, and flowing Bowls, Venus be my Star, and Whoring my House, and
Death I defy thee. Thus sung Rosidore in the Urn -- But where and when, with
my Fops Wives, be quick, thou know my appointment with this unknown, and the
Minute's precious.


Tour. Why, I have contrived you the sweetest Wight in the World, if you dare.


Nem. Dare, and in a Woman's Cause! why, I have no drop of Blood about me, but
must out in their service, and what matter is it which way?


Tour. Know Poltrot's Lady has informed me, how St. Andre walks in his sleep,
and that her Husband last night attempted to Cuckold him, that she watched and
overheard the whole matter, but Poltrot could not find the door before St.
Andre returned; she doubts not but he will try again to night -- Now if you can
nick the time when Poltrot rises, and steal to her, ten to one but she will be
glad to be revenged --


Nem. Or she would not have told thee the business -- There wants but speaking
with her, taking her by the hand, and it is a bargain --


Enter Celia, Elianora Masked. Poltrot, St. Andre following. Tour. Step, step
aside, they are upon the hunt for you, and their Husbands have 'em in the wind;
stand by a while to observe, and I Will turn you loose upon 'em --


St. A. Ha, Tournon! by my Honor a Prize, let us board 'em.


Pol. Be not too desperate my little Frigate, for I am, that I am, a Furious Man
of Honor.


Cel. Now Heaven defend us, what will you give us a Broadside?


El. Lord! how I dread the Guns of the lower Tire.


St. A. Such notable Marks-men too, we never miss hitting between Wind and
Water.


Cel. I Will warrant they carry Chain-shot; Pray Heaven they do not split us
Sister!


Pol. Yield then, yield quickly, or no Mercy, we have been so shattered to day
already by two she Pirates, that we are grown desperate.


El. But what alas have we done, that you should turn your Revenge upon us poor
harmless Innocents, that never wronged you, never saw you before?


Cel. If you should deal unkindly with us, 'twou'd break our Hearts, for we are
the gentlest things.


St. A. And we will use you so gently, so kindly, like little Birds, you shall
never repent the loss of your Liberty.


El. I Will warrant Sister they will put us in a Cage, or tie us by the Legs.

Pol. No, upon the word of a Man of Honor, your Legs shall be at liberty.


Cel. What will you Pinnion our Wings then, and let us hop up and down the
House?


St. A. Not in the House where we live, pretty Soul, for there is two ravenous
Sow-Cats will Eat you.


El. Your Wives you mean.


Pol. Something like, two Melancholy things that sit purring in the
Chimney-corner, and to exercise their spite, kill Crickets.


Cel. Oh! for God-sake keep us from your Wives.


St. A. I Will warrant thee little Rosamond, safe from my jealous Elianor --


Pol. And if any Wife in Europe dares but touch a hair of thee, I say not much,
but that Wife were better be a Widow.


El. But are your Wives handsome and well qualited? for whatever you say to us,
when you have had your will you will home at night, and for my part I cry All or
none.


Pol. And All thou shall have dear Rogue, never fear my Wive's Beauty or good
Nature, they are things to her like Saints and Angels, which she believes never
were nor never will be -- She Is a Basin of Water against Lechery, and looks so
sharp whenever I see her, like Vinegar she makes me sweat.


St. A. And mine is so fulsome, that a Goat with the help of Cantharides would
not touch her.


Cel. But then for their Qualities --


St. A. Such Scolds, like Thunder they turn all the Drink in the Cellar.


Pol. Such Niggards, they eat Kitchin-stuff and Candles ends -- Once indeed
raving mad my Wife seemed Prodigal, for a Rat having eat his way through an old
Cheese, she baited a Trap for him with a piece of pareing -- But having caught
him, by the Lord she eat him up without mercy tail and all.


El. Are they not even with us Sister?


St. A. It Is hoped tho, the Hangman will take 'em off of our hands, for they
are shroadly suspected for Witches, mine noints her self every Night, sets a
Broom-staff in the Chimny, and op'ns the Window, for what purpose but to fly?


Pol. Gad, and my Wife has Tets in the wrong place, she is warted all over like
a pumpl'd Orange.


Cel. Yet sure, Gentlemen, you told these Hags another story once, and made as
deep Protestations to them as you do to us?


St. A. Never by this hand, the Salt Souls fell in Lust with us, and haul'd us
to Matrimony like Bears to the Stake.


Pol. Where they set a long black thing upon us, that cried Have and Hold.


El. Put the question they had been Handsome, brought you great Po^tions, were
Pleasant and Airy and willing to humor you.


Enter Nemours with the Vidam. Nem. Nay then I can hold no longer: Z'death,
there is it Madam, Willing! That Willingness spoils all my Dear, my Honey, my
Jewel, it Palls the Appetite like Sack at Meals -- Give me the smart disdainful
she, that like brisk Champaign or spritely Burgundy, makes me smack my Lips
after she is down, and long for the other Glass.


St. A. Nay if your Grace come in there is no dallying, I Will make sure of one.


Pol. Nay, and for my part I am resolved to secure another; come Madam no
striving, for I am like a Lion, when I lay hold, if the Body come not
willingly, I pull a whole Limb away --


Nem. Yes Madam, he speaks truth, ^^ake it on my word who am a rational
Creature, he is a great furious wild Beast.


Cel. Pray Heaven he be not a horned Beast, is the Monster married?


Vid. Yes Ladies, they are both married.


El. Married! For Heaven sake, Gentlemen, save us from the Cattle.


Pol. Why, what is the Breeze in your Tails? Z'death Ladies we'll not eat you.


Cel. Say you so? But we'll not trust you, I am sure you both look hungrily.


Vid. It may be their Wives use 'em unkindly.


El. And the poor good-natured things take it to heart.


Cel. I swear it is pity, they have both promising looks.


Nem. Proceed, sweet Souls, we'll defend you to death, spare 'em not.


El. Or it may be we mistake all this while, and their pitiful looks are caused
by loving too much.


Vid. Right Madam, a little too Uxorious; Ha, Ha!


St. A. Now have not I one word to say, but stand to endure all Jerks like a
Schoolboy with my Shirt up.


Pol. I Will have one fling at 'em though I dye for it; why Ladies you will overshoot
your selves at this rate -- Must we only be the Butts to bear all your Railery?
methinks you might spend one Arrow at random, and take off that Daw that
Chatters so near you -- Gad, and I think I paid 'em there --


Cel. Butts and Daw! Let me never Laugh again, if they be not Witty too -- Why,
you pleasant Rogues, Z'life I could Kiss 'em if they did not stink of Matrimony.


St. A. Mum, Mum, Mum. Did not I tell you 'twas a madness to speak to 'em?


El. They envy my Friend too here, this pleasant Companion.


Cel. This dear agreeable Person.


Nem. Ay, Damme Madam, the Rogues envy us --


El. What a gentle Aspect?


Cel. How proper and Airy?


El. See, here is Blood in this Face.


Vid. Pure Blood, Madam, at your Service.


Cel. Will you walk dear Sir? give me your hand --


El. And me yours --


Nem. Come you dear ravishing Rogues -- Your Servant Mr. Butts --


Vid. Gentle Mr. Butts --


El. Adieu sweet Mr. Butts.


Cel. Witty Mr. Butts, Ha, Ha, Ha! Exeunt Nem. Vid. Cel. El.


St. A. Well, I Will to a Duchess.


Pol. Lord! thou art always so high-flown -- Have thou never a cast Countess
for me --


St. A. Come along to the Ball and thou shall see, the Duke of Nemours is the
Gallant to night -- and Treats at his Palace, because it is the King's Birthday
-- Let me see, what new Fancy for the Masquerade? Oh! I have it -- Because the
Town is much taken with Fortune-telling, I Will act the Dumb Man, the Highlander
that made such a noise, and thou shall be my Interpreter -- Come along, and as
we go I Will instruct thee in the Signs.


Pol. Dear Rogue, let us practice a little before we stir -- As what sign for
Lechery, because we may Nick our Wives.


St. A. Why thus, that is a glanting squeezed Eye -- or thus -- for a moist
Hand, or thus, for a Whore in a corner, or thus for downright Cuckolding.


Pol. Well, I swear this will be rare sport, and so my damned Spouse, I am
resolved to tickle her with a squeezed Eye and a moist Hand; and a Whore in a
corner till she confess her self guilty of downright Cuckoldom; then in revenge
for her last Impudence, Sue for a Divorce:

And holding to her Face the flying Label,
Call her in open Court the Whore of Babel.
Exeunt.
SCENE II.
The Prince and Princess of Cleve. P. C. MAdam, the King commands me to attend
His Daughter into Spain, and further adds,
Because no Princess Rivals you in Fame,
You will oblige the Court in going with me.

Princess C. My Lord, I am prepared, and leave the Court
With such a Joy as would admit no bounds --

P. C. As would admit no bounds! and why? because
It takes you from the Charms which you would shun:
This is a Virtue of such height indeed,
As none but you can boast nor I deplore.
But Madam, Rumor says the King intends
To join another with me.

Princess C. Who my Lord?

P. C. 'Twas thought at first the Chevalier de Guise.

Princess C. He is your Friend, nor could the King choose better.

P. C. I say at first 'twas thought the Duke of Guise --
But I was since instructed by the Queen,
That Honor's fixed upon the Duke Nemours.

Princess C. Nemours my Lord?

P. C. Most certain.

Princess C. For what reason?

P. C. Because I moved the Dauphin Queen to gain him.

Princess C. 'Twas rashly done, against your Interest moved.

P. C. Perhaps it is not too late yet to supplant him.

Princess C. Do It then, be quick, Nemours will share your Honors,
Eclipse your Glory --

P. C. Ha -- I must confess
The Soldiers love him, and he bears the Palm
Already from the Marshals of the Field.

Princess C. And in the Court he is called the Rising Star:
You see each night at every Entertainment
Where he moves, what Troops of Beauties follow;
How the Queens praise him, and all Eyes admire him --

P. C. Ha! Chartres --

Princess C. Ah! my Lord -- what have I done?

P. C. Nothing, my Chartres, but admire Nemours!
O Heaven and Earth! and if I had but Patience
To hear you out, how had you lost your self
On that Eternal Object of your Love?
No Madam, no, it is false, it is no Nemours:
'Twas my invention to find out the truth,
Your trouble has convinced me it is Nemours:
Which cursed Discovery in another Woman,
I should have made by her too eager Joy.
Why speak you Not? you're shocked with your own Virtue,
The resolution of your Justice aws you,
Which cannot, dares not give it self the Lie.

Princess C. My Lord, my Love, my Life; Alas my Cleve!
O pity me! I know not what to answer,
I Am mortally ashamed, I Am on the Rack;
But spare this humble Passion -- Take me with you,
Where I may never see a Man again.

P. C. O Rise my Chartres! Rise if possible;
I Will force thee to be mine in spite of Fate:
My constant Martyrdom and deathless Kindness,
My more than Mortal Patience in these Sufferings,
Shall poize his noblest Qualities, O Heaven!
No fear, my Chartres, tho these Sorrows fall,
That I suspect thy Glory; thou have strength
To curb this Passion in, that else may end us.
All that I ask thee, is to bend thy Heart.

Princess C. I Will break it.

P. C. Turn it from Nemours, Nemours --
But Oh! that name presents thy danger greater,
Look to thy Honor then, and look to mine;
I ask it as thy Lover and thy Husband;
I beg it as a Man whose Life depends
Upon thy Breath, that offers thee a Heart
All bleeding with the Wounds of Mortal Love,
All hacked and gash'd, and stabbed and mangled over,
And yet a Heart so true, in spite of pain,
As never yet loved, nor ever shall again. Exit P.C.

Enter Irene. Iren. Ha! Madam, speak, how is it with your Heart?

Princess C. As with a timorous Slave, condemned to Torments,
That still cries out, he cannot, will not bear it,
And yet bears on.

Iren. Ah, Madam! I would speak,
If you could bear the dreadful News I bring.

Princess C. Alas! thou can not add to grief like mine.

Iren. May I demand then, if you have not told
The Secret to your Husband?

Princess C. Ha! Iren --
Why do thou ask?

Iren. Because but now -- Tournon, a Lady of the Queens,
Told me it is blazed at Court -- Nemours confessed
He is beloved by one of such nice Virtue,
That fearing -- lest the Passion might betray her,
She owned, confessed, and told it to her Husband.

Princess C. Death and Despair -- But does Nemours avow it?

Iren. He owned it to the Vidam, who again
Told it to Madam Tournon -- she to others;
It Is true, Nemours told not the Ladies name,
Nor would confess himself to be the Party,
But yet the Court in general does believe it.

P^incess C. I am undone -- my Fame is lost for ever,
And death, Irene, must be my remedy;
It Is true, indeed, I laid my Bosom open,
I showed my Heart to that ungrateful Cleve,
Who since in dangerous search of him I love,
To the eternal ruin of my Honor,
Has trusted a third Person -- But away
I hear his tread, and am resolved to tax him.
Enter Princess C. Ah! Sir, what have you done? if you must kill me,
Are there not Daggets Pois'n -- But the Jealous
Are Cruel still, and thoughtful in Revenge;
And single Death's too little; must your will
Of knowing Names, my duty durst not tell you,
Oblige you to betray me to another;
So to divulge the Secret of my Soul,
That the whole Court must know it?

P. C. Ha! know what?
Know my Dishonor, have you told it then?

Princess C. No, it is your self, it is you revealed it Sir,
To gain a Confident for more Discovery,
A Lady of the Queen's just now declared it,
To your eternal Shame you have divulged it,
She had it from the Vidam, Sir, of Chartres,
And he from the Duke Nemours --

P. C. Nemours --
How, Madam, said you -- What Nemours -- Nemours!
Does Nemours know you love him? Hell and Furies!
And that I know it too, and not revenge it!

Princess C. That Is yet to seek, he will not own himself
To be concerned, he offers not at names,
But yet it is found, it is known, believed by all,
He cannot hold it, 'twill be shortly posted,
That Cleve your Wife's that cursed dishonored She
You told him of --

P. C. Is It possible I told him?
Peace, Peace, and if it lies in Humane Power
To reason calmly, tell me Murd'ress, tell me,
Compose that Face of flushed Hypocrisy,
And answer to a truth -- Was it my Interest
To speak of this? was I not rather tied
To wish it buried in the Grave in Hell!
Whence it might never rise to blot my Honor --
But you have seen him, by my hopes of Heaven,
You have met and interchang'd your secret Souls;
On that Complotted; since I bore so tamely
Your first Confession, I should bear the latter.

Princess C. Believe it if you please --

P. C. I must believe it --
This last Proceeding has unmasked your Soul,
He sees you every hour, and knows you love him:
Nay, for your greater freedom, you have joined
To make this loathed detested Cleve your Stale.
Ha -- I believed you might overcome this passion,
So well you knew to Charm me with the show
Of seeming Virtue, 'till I lost my Reason.

Princes. C. It Is likely Sir, it was but seeming Virtue,
And you did ill to judge so kindly of me --
I was mistaken too in that Confession,
Because I thought that you would do me Justice.

P. C. You were mistaken when you thought I would,
Sure you forgot that I was desperate,
Sentenced and doomed by Fate, or rather damned
To love you to my Grave -- And could I bear
A Rival, what and when I was your Husband,
And when you owned your passion to my face,
Confessed you loved me much -- But loved him more:
Ha -- Is not this enough to make me mad?

Princess C. You have the power to set all right again,
Why do you not end me?

P. C. No, I Will end my self,
My Toughts are grown too violent for my Reason.
By this last usage, Oh! Thou have undone me;
I know not what -- This ought not to be thine --
I have offended and would Sue for pardon;
But yet I blush, the Treason is too gross;
After that most unnatural Confession,
I wonder now that I have lived so long:
Confess and then divulge, make me your Bawd --
It Scents too far, the God of Love flies wide,
He gets the Wind, and stops the Nose at this;
No more -- Farewell -- False Chartres, False Nemours,
False World, False All, since Chartres is not true!
But you your Wish with loved Nemours shall have,
And shortly see your Husband in the Grave. Exit.

Princess C. Sola.
False World, False Cleve, False Chartres, False Nemours,
Farewell to all, a long and last Farewell:
From all Converse, to Deserts let me fly,
And in some gloomy Cave forgotten lie.
My Bower at Noon the shade of some old Trees
With whistl'ing Winds t'endulge my pomp of ease,
And lulling Murmurs rolled from neighboring Seas.
Where I may sometimes hasten to the Shore,
And to the Rocks and Waves my Loss deplore:
Where when I feel my hour of Fate draws on,
Lest the false World should claim a parting groan;
My Mothers Ghost may rise to fix my mind,
And leave no thought of tenderness behind.

Finis Actus Tertii.
ACT IV.
SCENE I.
Music, Songs, Maskers, etc. Nemours with Music, Lady Poltrot. Nem. HE has
confessed to me he intends to Cuckold St. Andre when he walks in his sleep --
Therefore if Love should inspire me to nick the opportunity, I hope you will
not bar the door which your Husband op'ns --


L. Pol. Ungrateful Monster --


Nem. Ungrateful, that is certain, and it lies in your power to make him a
Monster.


L. P. I dare not.


Nem. What?


L. P. Trust you.


Nem. Nay then I am sure thou will, let me but in to show the power you have
over me.


L. P. As how my Lord?


Nem. Why, when I have thee in my Arms, by Heaven I Will quit my Joys at thy
desire --


L. P. That will indeed be a perfect trial of your love; come then through the
Garden back-stairs, and when you see the Candle put out, thrust open the door.


Nem. By Heaven I Will eat thy hand -- Thou dear sweet Seducer, how it fires my
Fancy to steal into a Garden, to rustle through the Trees, to stumble up a
narrow pair of back stairs, to whisper through the hole of the door, to kiss it
open, and fall into thy Arms with a flood of Joy --


L. P. Farewell, the company comes, I must leave you a while, to engage with my
Husband, you will fall asleep before the hour --


Nem. If I do, the very transport of Imagination shall carry me in my sleep to
thy Bed, and I Will wake in the Act. Exit L. Pol. So there is one in the
Fernbrake, and if she stir till Morning I have lost my aim; but now, why what
have we here? a Hugonot Whore by this light -- Have I? For the forward brisk,
she that promised me the Ball Assignation, that said, there was nothing like
slipping out of the crowd into a corner, breathing short an Ejaculation, and
returning as if we came from Church -- Let me see, I Will put on my Mask, fling
my Cloak over my shoulder, and view 'em as they pass, not thou nor thou --


Enter Tournon in the Habit of a Hugonot. Tour. Ah thou unclean Person, have I
hunted thee there like a Heart from the Mountains to the Valleys, and thou
would not be found; verily thou have been amongst the Daughters of the
Philistines -- Nay, if you are Innocent, stand before me, and reply to the
words of my mouth --


Nem. I shall truly --


Tour. Say then -- Have thou not defiled thy self with any Dalilah, since last
you felt upon my Neck and loved much?


Nem. Nay verily --


Tour. Have you not overheated your Body with adulterate Wines? have you not
been at a Play, nor touched Fruit after the lewd Orange Women?


Nem. I am unpolluted.


Tour. And yet methinks there is not the same color in your cheeks; nor does
the Spirit dance in your Eye as formerly, why do you not approach me? Unmasking.


Nem. Tournon turned Heretic! why thou dear Raskal, this is such a new
Frolic, that though I am engaged as deep as Damnation to another, thou shall
not 'scape me. Marg. claps him on the shoulder.


Mar. I love a Man that keeps the Commandment of his word.


Nem. And I a Woman that breaks hers with her Husband, yet loves her Neighbor
as her self -- I would fain be in private with you.


Cel. And I with you, because I am resolved never to see you more.


Nem. Never to see me more? the reason.


Cel. Because I hate you.


Nem. And yet I believe you love me too, because you are precise to the Minute.


Cel. True, yet I hate you justly, heartily and maliciously --


Nem. By Gad, and I Will love the as heartily, justly and maliciously, as thou
can love me for thy blood; come away Riddle, and I Will unfold thee. Exeunt.


Poltrot, St. Andre disguised with Elianora, L. Poltrot coming up to 'em --
Elia. But is it true indeed, that your Friend can tell all the actions of our
Life past, present, and to come, yet cannot speak one word?


Pol. O he is infallible! why what did you never hear of your second-sight men,
your Dumb High-landers that tell Fortunes? why you would think the Devil in
Hell were in him, he speaks exactly.


Elia. I thought you had said he was Dumb?


Pol. Right, but I am his Interpreter, and when the fit comes on him, he blows
through me like a Trunk, and strait I become his speaking Trumpet.


L. P. Pray, Sir, may not I have my Fortune told me too?


Pol. Ay -- and there were a thousand of you, he will run you 'em over like the
Chriss cross-row, and never miss a tittle; he shall tell ye his name that cried
God bless you when you sneez'd last, tell you when you winked last, when and
where you scratched last, and where you sat of Saturday --


Elia. Pray let him tell us then, for we are Sisters, our Tempers and
Conditions, whither married or unmarried, with all the Impertinences thereunto
belonging --


Pol. I Will speak to him -- Son of the Sun, and Emperor of the Stars --


St. A. Ha, Ha --


Pol. Look ye, look ye, he is pleased to tell you, but you must go near him, for
he must look in your hand, touch your Face, Breasts, and wherever else he
pleases.


St. A. -- Makes Horns with both his hands, puts his Finger in his Mouth and
Laughs.


Pol. In nomine domine Bomine. I protest I am confounded; well Ladies, I could
not have thought it had been in you, but it is certainly true, and I must out
with it; first he says, you are both married, you are both Libidinous beyond
example, and your Husbands are the greatest Cornutors in Christendom --


Elia. L. P. Indeed.


Pol. Ay indeed, indeed and indeed -- He says you are a couple of Messalina's,
and the Stews cannot satisfy you; he says your thoughts are swelled with a
Carnosity; nay, you have the Green Sickness of the Soul, which runs upon
nothing but weighing Stallions, churning Boars, and bellowing Bulls --


L. P. O! I confess, I confess -- But for Heaven sake, dear Sir -- Let it not
take Air, for then we are both undone.


Elia. O! Undone, undone Sir, if our Husbands should know it, for they are a
couple of the Jealousest, troublesome, impertinent Cuckolds alive.


Pol. Alack! Alack -- O Iezabel! but I will have my Eunuchs fling her from the
Window, and the Dogs shall eat her.


L. P. But, pray Sir, ask him how many times --


Pol. What, how many times you have Cuckolded 'em?


Elia. Spare our Modesty, you make the Blood so flush in our Faces.


Pol. But by Jove I Will let it out, I Will hold her by the Muzzle, and stick her
like a Pig --


L. P. Will you speak to him Sir?


Pol. See, he understands you without it, he says your Iniquities are
innumerable, your Fornications like the hairs of your head, and your Adulteries
like the Sands on the Sea shore; that you are all Fish downward; that Lot's
Wife is fresh to you, and that when you were little Girls of Seven, you were so
wanton, your Mothers tied your hands behind you --


Elia. All this we confess to be true, but we confess too, if Fate had found
out any sort of Tools, but those leaden Rogues our Husbands.


L. P. Whose Wits are as dull as their Appetites --


El. Mine such a Utensil, as is not fit to wedge a Block.


L. P. Nor mine the Beetle to drive him --


St. A. Nay then it is time to uncase and be revenged.


L. P. Hark you Strumpet --


El. Ha, Ha, Ha, are you not fitted finely,


L.P. -- You must turn Fortune Tellers, must you?


Eli. And think we could not know you?


L. P. Well Gentlemen, shall homely Beck go down with you at last?


Pol. But did thou know me then indeed?


L. P. As if that sweet Voice of yours could be disguised in any shape.


Pol. Nay, I confess I have a whirl in my Voice, a warble that is particular --


El. And what say you Sir, shall musty Wife come into Grace again?


St. A. She shall, and, here is my hand on it, all Friends Nell, and when I leave
thee again, may I be Cuckold in earnest.


Pol. Certain as I live, all this proceeded from his Lady, my dreaming Cuckold
Wife could never think on it; well, I am resolved this very night, when he
Rambles in his sleep, to watch him, slip to his Wife and say nothing. Hey!
Come, come, where are these Dancers, a little Diversion and then for Bed.


Dance. Tour. to Elia. I have locked the Vidam in your Closet, who will be sure
to watch your Husbands rising, therefore be not surpised --


Exit Tournon. St. A. Come, well let us away to bed.


El. And what then?


St. A. Nay, Gad that I cannot tell, for what with Dancing, Singing, Fencing,
and my last Duchess, I am very Drowzy.


Pol. And so am I, perhaps our Wives have given us Opium, lest we should
disturb 'em in the night.


Eli. Don't these Men deserve to be fitted?


Cel. They do, and Fortune grant they may -- Hear us, O! hear us good Heaven,
for we pray heartily.


Bxeunt as Nemours and Marguerite enter; Nem. Was ever Man so blessed with such
possession,
Thou Ebbing, Flowing, Ravishing, Racking Joy;
A Skin so white and soft, the yielding Mould
Lets not the Fingers stay upon the dint,
But from the beauteous Dimples slips 'em down
To pleasures that must be without a name.
Yet Hands, and Arms, and Breasts we may remember,
And that which I so love, no smelling Art,
But sweet by nature, as just peeping Violets,
Or opening Buds.

Marg. Than you do love me?


Nem. O! I could dye methinks this very hour,
But for the luscious hopes of thousand more,
And all like these, yet when I must go out,
Let it be thus, with beauty laughing by me,
Songs, Lutes and Canopeis, while I Sacrifice
To thee the last dear ebbing drop of Love.
But show me now that face.

Marg. No, you dissemble, you say the same thing to every one you meet; I
thought once indeed to have fixed my Heart upon you, but I Am off again, and am
resolved you shall never see me.

Nem. You dally, come, by all the kindness past.

Marg. Swear then.

Nem. What?

Marg. Never to touch your dear Domestic she,
That lives in Shades to all the World but me.
Do you guess I know you now?

Nem. I do, and swear, but are these equal Terms, that you shall never touch a
Man but me?


Marg. I will -- But how can you convince me? Oaths with you Libertines of
Honor are to little purpose.


Nem. But this must satisfy thee, there is more pleasure in thee after
Enjoyment, than in her and all Womankind before it; thou have Inspiration,
Ecstasy, and Transport, all these bewitching Joys that make men mad --


Marg. Unmasking And thou Villainy, Treachery, Perjury, all those Monstrous,
Diabolical Arts, that seduce Young Virgins from their Innocent homes, to set
'em on the Highway to Hell and Damnation.


Nem. Ha! Ha! my Marguerite, is it possible?

Marg. Call me not yours, nor think of me again,
I am convinced you're Traitors all alike,
And from this hour renounce you --
Not but Ill be revenged,
Yes, I will try the Joys of Life like you,
But not with Men of Quality, you Devils of Honor;
No, I will satisfy
My Pride, Disdain, Rage and Revenge more safely,
By all the Powers of Heaven and Earth I will;
I Will change my loving lying Tinsel Lord,
For an obedient wholesome drudging Fool.

Nem. Why this will make the matter easy to both,
Take you your Ramble Madam, and I Will take mine.
But is it possible for one of your nice taste
To Bed a Fool?

Marg. To choose, to choose my Lord
A Fool, now by my Will and pride of Heart,
There Is Freedom, Fancy and Creation in it,
He truckles to the Frown, and cries forgive me;
Besides the moulding of him without blushing;
And what would Woman more, now view the other
Your Man of Sense, that vaunts despotick Power,
The reels precisely home at break of day,
Thunders the House, brains half the Family,
Cries, where is my Whore, what will she Stew till Doomsday?
When she appears, and kindly goes to help him,
Roars out a Shop, a walking-shop of Scents,
Flavours of Physic, and the clammy Bath,
The stench of Orange-flow'rs, the Devil Pulvilio;
These, these, he cries, are the Blessed Husband's Joys!

Nem. I swear most natural and unaffected -- Ha! Ha --

Marg. But if he chance to use her civilly,
Take heed, there is covert malice in his Smiles,
Millions to one the Villain has been Whoreing,
And comes to try Experiments on her,
Besides a thousand under Plots and Crosses,
Prescribing silence still wherever he comes,
No chat, he cries, of Colors Points or Fashions.

Nem. Preach on Divine, Ha, Ha --

Marg. Let me not hear you ask my sickly Lady,
Whither she found Obstructions at the Waters.

Nem. Fie, that is Obscene --

Marg. Thus Damns the Affectation of our Prattle,
And Swears he will Gag the Clack, or what is worse.

Nem. Nay, hold --

Marg. Send for the new found Lock --

Nem. What Mad --

Marg. Do Villain, Traitor --
Contrive this Mischief, if thou can, for me,
Send thou the Padlock, but I Will find the Key. Exit.

Nem. Whir goes the Partridge on the purring Wing --
Yet when I see my time I must recall her,
For she has admirable things in her, such as if I gain not, the Princess
of Cleve may fix me to her, without nauseating the Vice of Constancy --
Ha! Bellamore.
Enter Bellamore. What News, my Dear, Ha -- Have thou found her? Speak.

Bell. I have.

Nem. Where, how, when and by what means?

Bell. After I had inquired after the Prince's Health,
I asked a Woman of his Lady, who told me,
She was retired into the great Bower in the Garden.

Nem. The very place where first I saw and loved her,
When after I had saved the Prince's Life,
He brought me late one evening to the view,
There Love and Friendship first began;
My Love remains and Friendship, as
Much as Man can have for his Cuckold.
Nay, I know not that Man upon Earth I love so well, or could take so much
from, as this hopeful Prince of Cleve -- Did thou see her in the Garden --

Bell. My Lord, I did, where she appeared like her that gave Acteon Horns, with
all her Nimphs about her, busy in tyeing Knots which she took from Baskets of
Ribbons that they brought her; and methought she ti'd and unti'd 'em so
prettily, as if she had been at Cross Questions, or knew not what she did, her
Face, her Neck, and Arms quite bare --


Nem. No more, if I live I Will see her to night, for the Heroic Vein comes upon
me -- Death and the Devil, what shall become of the backstair Lady then --
Hark thee Bellamore, take this Key, do thou hear Rogue? go to St. Andre's
House, through the Garden up the back-stairs, push open the door and be blessed.
Hell! cannot I be in two places at once? Hark thee, give her this, and this,
and this, and when thou bitest her with a parting blow, sigh out Nemours.


Bell. I Will do it --


Enter the Prince of Cleve. Nem. Go to Tournon for the rest, she will instruct
thee in the Management: Away. Exit Bell.
Ha! he comes up but slowly, yet he sees me,
Perhaps he is Jealous, why then I Am jealous too;
Hypocrisy and Softness, with all the Arts of Woman,
Tip my Tongue.

P. C. I come, my Lord, to ask you if you love me.

Nem. Love thee, my Cleve, by Heaven, ever yet I saw thee,
Thus were my Prayers still offered to the Fates,
If I must choose a Friend, grant me ye Powers
The Man I love may seize my Heart at once;
Guide him the perfect temper of your selves,
With every manly Grace and shining Virtue;
Add yet the bloom of Beauty to his Youth,
That I may make a Mistress of him too.

P. C. O Heaven!

Nem. That at first view our Souls may kindle,
And like two Tapers kindly mix their Beams;
I knelt and prayed, and wept for such a Blessing,
And they returned me more than I could ask,
All that was Good or Great or Just in thee.

P. C. You say you love me, I must make the proof,
For you have brought it to a doubt --

Nem. In what?

P. C. In this, you have not given me all your Heart,
You Muse of late, even on my Bridal day,
I saw you sit with a too thoughtful brow,
You sighed and hung your Head upon your Hand:
Nay in the midst of Laughter --
You started, blushed and cried 'twas wondrous well,
And yet you knew not what -- Speak like a Friend,
What is the cause my Lord?

Nem. Shall I deal plainly with you? I Am not well.

P. C. I do believe it, how happened the Distemper?

Nem. It is too deep to search,
Nor can I tell you.

P. C. Then you're no Friend.
Should Cleve thus answer to Nemours, I cannot:
Say rather that you will not trust a Man
You do not love.

Nem. By Heaven I do.

P. C. By Heaven you do? Yet it is too deep to search
For such a shallow Friend.

Nem. Of all Mankind
You ought not --

P. C. Nay, the rest.

Nem. It is not fit,
Be satisfied, I Will bear it to my Grave
Whatever it be.

P. C. You are in Love my Lord,
And if you do not Swear -- But where is the need?
You start, you change, you are another Man,
You blush, you're all constraint, you turn away.

Nem. Why take it then; it is true, I am in Love,
In Torture, Racks, in all the Hells of Love,
Of hopeless, restless and eternal Love.

P. C. Her name my Lord.

Nem. Her name my Lord to you?

P. C. To me Confusion, Plagues and Death upon me,
Why not to me? And wherefore did you say,
Of all Mankind I ought not -- There you stopped,
But would have said -- To pry into this business --
Yet speak to ease the Troubles of my Soul,
By all our Friendship, by the Life thou gav'st me,
I do conjure thee, thunder in my Ears,
It Is Chartres that thou love, Chartres my Wife.

Nem. Your Wife, my Lord?

P. C. My Wife, my Lord, and I must have you own it.

Nem. I will not tell you Sir, who it is I love,
Yet think me not so base, were it your Wife,
That all the subtlest Wit of Earth or Hell
Should make me vent a Secret of that nature
To any Man on Earth, much less to you.

P. C. Yet you could basely tell it to the Vidam,
And he to all the Court -- But I waste time,
By all the boiling Venom of my Passion,
I Will make you own it ever we part -- Dispatch,
Say thou have Whor'd my Wife, Damnation on me,
Pronounce me Cuckold.

Nem. But then I give my self the Lie,
Who told you just before, I would not speak,
Tho I had done it -- Which I swear I have not --
Beside, I fear you are going Mad.

P. C. Draw then and make it up,
For if thou do not own what I demand,
What you both know and have complotted on me,
Tho neither will confess, I swear again,
That one of us must fall.

Nem. Then take my Life.

P. C. I will, by Heaven, if thou refuse me Justice;
Draw then, for if thou do not I will kill thee,
And tell my Wife thou basely did confess
Thy Guilt at last, in hopes to save thy Life.

Nem That is a blast indeed, that Honor shrinks at,
Therefore I draw, but Oh! be witness Heaven,
With such a trembling Hand and bleeding Heart,
As if I were to fight against my Father.
Therefore I beg thee by the name of Friend,
Which once with half this Suit would have dissolved thee;
I beg thee, gentle Cleve, to hold thy hand.

P. C. I Am Deaf as Death, that calls for one or both.

Cleve is disarmed, Nemours gives him his Sword again. Nem. Then give it me, I
arm thy hand again,
Against my Heart, against this Heart that loves thee;
Thrust then, for by the Blood that bears my Life,
Thou shall not know the name of her I love;
Not but I swear upon the point of Death,
Your Wife's as clear from me, as Heaven first made her.

P. C. No more my Lord, you have given me twice my Life.

Nem. Are you not hurt?

P. C. Alas, it is not so well,
I have no Wound but that which Honor makes,
And yet there is something cold upon my Heart,
I hope it is Death, and I shall shortly pay you,
With Chartres love, for you deserve her better.

Nem. No Sir, you shall not, you shall live my Lord,
And long enjoy your beauteous virtuous Bride;
You shall, Dear Prince, why are you then so cold?

P. C. I cannot speak --
But thus, and thus, there is something rises here.

Nem. I Will wait you home, nay, shake these drops away,
And hang upon my arm --

P. C. I will do any thing,
So you will promise never to upbraid me.

Nem. I swear I will not.

P. C. But will you love me too
As formerly?

Nem. I swear far more than ever.

P. C. Thou know my Nature soft, yet Oh such Love!
Such Love as mine, and injured as I thought,
Would spleen the Gaul-less Turtle, would it not?

Nem. It would by Heaven -- You make a Woman of me. Weeping.

P. C. Why, any thing thou say to humor me,
Yet it is kind, and I must love these Tears,
I hope my Heart will break, and then we are even;
Yet if this cruel Love thy Cleve should kill,
Remember after Death thou love me still. Exeunt.

SCENE II.
Enter Tournon with the Vidam. Tour. SO let that corner be your Post, and as
soon as ever you see St. Andre come stalking in his Dream, slip to his Lady,
and when you have agreed upon the Writings, I Will be ready to bring you o^^ with
a Witness --


Vid. Thou Dear obliging --


Tour. No more of that; away, mark but how easily those that are gifted with
Discretion bring things about; in the name of Goodness let Men and Women have
their Risks, but still be careful of the Main -- Here Is a hotheaded Lord goes
mad for a prating Girl, Treats her, Presents her, Flames for her, Dies for her,
till the Fool complies for pure Love, and when the business fails, is forced to
live at last by the love of his Footmen; but she that makes a firm Bargain, is
commonly thought a great Soul, for my Lord having considered on it, thinks her a
Person of depth, and so resolves to have it out of her -- But why do I talk so
my self, when there is something to do, certainly I should have made a rare
Speaker in a Parliament of Women, or a notable Head to a Female Jury, when his
Lordship gravely puts the question, whither it be Satis or Non Satis or Nunquam
Satis, and we bring it in Ignoramus -- Ha! but who comes here? I must attend
for Bellamore.


Enter Poltrot, Celia over-hearing. Pol. My Wife and I went to Bed together,
and I Will warrant full she was of Expectation, so white and clean, and much
inclined to laugh, and lay at her full length, as who would say come eat me.


Cel. Said she so sweet Sir?


Pol. Not a bit by the Lord, not I, not I --


Cel. Alas! nice Gentleman.


Pol. A Farmer would say this was barbarously done, because he loves Beef --
But I have Plover in reserve -- Ha! St. Andre, hark, I hear him bustle, O
Lord! how my heart goes pit a pat! nay, I dreamt last night I was Gelt -- Enter
St. Andre in his sleep. The Vidam goes in -- It Is he, it is he, by the twilight
I see him -- Ay, now the politic head goes, it shall be branched by and by --
What was that stop for, there is neither Gate nor Style in your way; now by that
sudden stretch, he seems as if he would take a jump, or practice on the High
rope; O your humble Servant Sir, I Will but do a little business for you, and be
with you again. Nay, look you Sir, I have as many Bobs as Democritus when he
cried Poor lack -- There Is more Pride in a Puritans Band, short Hair, and Cap
pinched, than under a Kings Crown. Poor Jack, Citizens, Citizens, look to your
Wives, the Courtiers come, look to 'em, they will do 'em, look to 'em, they will do
'em, Poor Jack --


St. A. Ha! Ha! You Will tickle me to death -- Nay, prithee Pen -- Your Mistress
will hear us -- Thou art the wantonest Rogue --


Enter Tournon with Bellamore. Tour. Madam.


Cel. Here Is.


Tour. Here Is a Thief I took in your Chamber --


Bell. Ah Madam! retire for a moment, and I Will make you the whole Confession.


Cel. Confess and you know what follows, however I am resolved to hear what you
can say for your self. Exeunt.


St. A. Nay Pish, nay Fie sweet heart --
But I Will kiss you if I can;
I did not take you for to be
Such a kind of a Man. Re-enter Poltrot.
But I Will go call my Mother as loud as I can cry,
Why Mother, Mother, Mother, out upon you, Fie.

Pol. O Lord! O Lord! I had like to have trod upon a Serpent that would have
bit me to death. I went to take up the Cloths as gently as I could for my Life,
when a great huge hoarse Voice flew in my face, with Damme you Son of a Whore,
I Will cut your Throat; you may guess I withdrew, for of my Conscience the Fright
had almost made me unclean; but I Will to my own Spouse, and if the Lord be
pleased to bring me off safe this bout, I Will never, never go a Cuckold-making
again while my eyes are open. Exit.


St. A. Hark, my Wife's coming up Stairs -- Help up with my Breeches; so, so,
smooth the Bed -- What damned Luck's this -- So, fall a rubbing the Room again
-- Hark you Wife, Celia has been upon the hunt for you all this day, she is
below in the Garden, go, go, we'll kiss when you come back -- Now Sirrah, now
you Rogue, she is gone, come, come, lose not your opportunity, I Will keep on my
Breeches for fear -- Ay? No, no, not upon the Bed, Pish, against the back of
this Chair -- Will Not it -- How can you tell -- Try -- I Will buy thee a new Gown,
and a Fan, and a laced Petticoat, and pay thee double Wages; O! thou dear
pretty soft sweet wriggling Rogue, what would thou dodge me, Gad but I Will
have thee, Gad but I Will catch thee; Ay, and have at thee again and again. Exit.
Re-enter Poltrot.


Pol. Was ever Man of Honor thus unfortunately met with? I went into my
Chamber and trod as softly as a half-starv'd Mouse, for fear of waking my Cat,
when coming close to my Bedside, methought it rocked to and fro like a great
Cradle, and the Clothes heaved as if some Beast lay blowing there -- But the
Beast was by the Bedside it seems -- Yes, I am, and who can help it, as very a
Cornuto as ever was grafted -- I heard my beloved Wife too -- The Plagues of
Egypt on her -- Speak so lovingly and angrily together -- Nay, Prithee my Dear
-- Nay, now you are tiresome -- I shall be ashamed to look you in the face
again! Why, how will she look upon me then? O Lord -- O Lord -- What shall I do?
shall I stand thus like a Cuckoldly Son of a Whore, with my Horns in my Pocket
and not be revenged -- -- Eeter St. Andre -- But here comes as very a Cuckold
as my self, I am resolved to wake him, and we'll fall upon 'em together --
Allo, St. Andre, St. Andre.


St. A. Ti -- ti it is im -- im -- im -- possible I-I-I should be the Man,
Fo-Fo-For I cannot speak a plain word.


Pol. You're a Cuckold, a Cuckold, a Cuckold.


St. A. Why lo-lo-look you, I said it co-co could not be me, for Sir, I all the
World knows I am no Cu-Cu-Cu-ckold.


Pol. Wake, wake, I say, or I Will shake the bones out of your Body, your Horns
are a growing, your Bed is a going, your Heifer's a Plowing.


St. A. Why, let her Plo-Plo-Plow on, if the Se-Se-Seed be well Sown, we shall
have a good Cro-Crop --


Pol. Worse and worse, why then I will roar out directly and raise the
Neighbors -- Help! Ho, Help! Murder! Murder! Fire! Fire! Fire! Cuckoldom!
Cuckoldom! Thieves! Murder! Rapes! Cuckoldom!


Enter the Vidam and Bellamore. The Vidam comes up to Poltrot, shoots off a
Pistol, St. Andre and Poltrot fall down together -- Tournon enters with the
Ladies -- Tournon leads off the Vidam and Bellamore. Cel. Thieves! Thieves! Ho!
Jacques! Pedro -- Thoma --


Elia. Thieves! Thieves -- Wake! wake! my Lord.


St. A. Waking Why, what a Devil's the matter? where am I?


Elia. O! you will never leave this ill habit of walking in your sleep -- It Is a
mercy we had not all been Murdered -- You went down in your Shirt Sir, opened
the door, and let in Rogues that had like to have cut all our Throats -- But
for the future I am resolved to tie you to me with the Bed cord, rather than
endure this --


St. A. Where Is Poltrot?


Cel. Murdered Sir, here! here! here! one of the Villains discharged a Pistol
just in his Belly --


St. A. Shot in the Guts! Lord bless us! here Thom. a light! light! light! shot
in the Guts say you --


Pol. Oh! Oh! -- Lower, lower, lower -- Feel, feel, search me, lower, lower --


St. A. Cold hereabouts -- Let Us bear him to his Bed, and send for a Surgeon --


Pol. Softly! softly! softly -- Come not near me Crocodil; Oh! Oh --


St. A. Unhappy Chance, no where but just in the Guts?


Pol. Yes, yes, yes, in the Head too, in the Head Man, in the Head: Nay, and
let me tell you, you had best search your own, but bear me off or I shall
Swoon, I feel something trickle, trickle in my Breeches; Oh! Oh! Oh! Exeunt.


SCENE III.
Enter Nemours, Pedro listening. Nem. Alas! Poor Prince, I protest the
Violence of his Passion has cast him in a Fever, he dies of it -- And how then?
shall I Marry the Princess of Cleve, or stick to Marguerite as we are? for it is
most certain she has rare things in her, which I found by my last Experiment,
and I love her more than ever, almost to Jealousy; besides Tournon tells me,
the Dauphin begins to buz about her again, and who knows but in this heat of
hers, as she says, she will hang her self out to sale, but he may nick the time
and buy her -- I like not that -- No, I Will throw boldly, clear the Table if I
can, if not, it is but at last forswearing Play, shake off my new acquaintance,
and be easy with my reserve -- Hark, I am just upon the Bower Music --


Pedro. I have hitherto obeyed my Master's order, but I Am resolved to dog him
till he is lodged --


Ne. Now do I know the Precise will call me damned Rogue for wronging my
Friend, especially such a soft sweet natured Friend as this gentle Prince --
Verily I say they lie in their Throats, were the gravest of 'em in my
condition, and thought it should never be known, they would rouse up the
Spirit, cast the dapper Cloak, leave off their humming and haing, and fall too
like a Man of Honor. Exit.


Pedro. I Will face him till he enters the Bower, and then call my Lord. Ex.


Scene the Bower, Lights, Song.
The Princess of Cleve, Irene. SONG.
LOvely Selina, Innocent and Free
From all the dangerous Arts of Love,
Thus in a Melancholy Grove
Enjoyed the sweetness of her Privacy,
Till th'envious Gods designing to undo her,
Dispatched the Swain, not unlike them, to woe her:
It was not long ever the design did take,
A gentle Youth born to persuade,
Deceived the too too easy Maid;
Her Scrip and Garlands soon she did forsake,
And rashly told the Secrets of her Heart,
Which the fond Man would ever more impart.
False Florimel, Joy of my Heart, said she,
It Is hard to Love and Love in vain,
To Love and not be Loved again,
And why should Love and Prudence disagree?
Pity ye Powers that sit at ease above:
If ever you knew what it is to be in Love.
Princess C. Alas! Irene, I do believe Nemours
The Man thou represents him; yet, Oh! Heaven,
And Oh my Heart! in spite of my resolves,
Spite of those matchless Virtues of my Husband,
I love the Man my reason bids me hate:
Yet grant me some few hours ye Saints to live,
That I may try what Innocence so armed
As mine, with vows can do in such a cause!
The War's begun, the War of Love and Virtue,
And I am fixed to conquer or to dye.

Iren. Your Fate is hard, and since you honored me
With the important Secret of your Life,
I Have labored for the Remedy of Love.

Princess C. I must to Death own thee my better Angel,
Thou know the struglings of my wounded Soul,
Have seen me strive against this lawless Passion,
Till I have lain like Slaves upon the Rack,
My Veins half burst, my weary Eye Balls fixed,
My Brows all covered with big drops of Sweat,
Which strangling Grief wrung from my tortured Brain.

Ir. Alas I weep to see you thus again.

Princess C. Thou have heard me curse the hour, when first I saw
The fatal charming Face of loved Nemours,
Have heard the Deathbed Counsel of my Mother.
Yet what can this avail, spite of my Soul
The Nightly Warnings from her dreadful Shroud?
I love Nemours, I languish for Nemours,
And when I think to banish him my Breast,
My Heart rebels, I feel a gorgeing pain
That choaks me up, tremblings from Head to Foot;
A shog of Blood and Spirits, Mad-mens Fears,
Convulsions, gnawing Griefs and angry Tears.
Enter Nemours. Ha! but behold -- My Lord --

Nem. O! Pardon me,
Spare me a minute's space and I am gone.

Princes. C. Is this a time Sir?

Nem. O! I must speak or dye.

Princess C. Dye then, ever thus presume to violate
The Honor of your Friend, your own and mine --

Nem. Yet hear me, and I swear by all things Sacred,
Never to see you more.

Princess C. Speak then -- And keep your word.

P. C. Horror and Death!

Nem. Did you but know what it is to love like me,
Without a dawn of Bliss to dream all day,
To pass the night in broken sleeps away,
Tossed in the restless tides of Hopes and Fears,
With Eyes for ever running over with Tears;
To leave my Couch, and fly to beds of Flowers,
T'invoke the Stars, to curse the dragging hours,
To talk like Madmen to the Groves and Bowers.
Could you know this, yet blame my tortured Love,
If thus it throws my Body at your Feet:
Oh! fly not hence;
Vouchsafe but just to view me in despair,
I ask not Love, but Pity from the Fair.

Princess C. O Heavens! inspire my Heart.

Nem. The Heavenly Powers
Accept the poorest Sacrifice we bring,
A Slave to them's as welcome as a King.
Behold a Slave that Glories in your Chains,
Ah! with some show of Mercy view my Pains;
Your piercing Eyes have made their splendid way,
Where Lightning could not pass --
Even through my Soul their pointed Luster goes,
And Sacred Smart upon my Spirit throws;
Yet I your Wounds with as much Zeal desire,
As Sinners that would pass to Bliss through Fire.
Yes, Madam, I must love you to my Death,
I Will sigh your name with my last gasp of Breath.

Princess C. No more, I have heard you Sir, as you desired,
Enter the Prince of Cleve. Reply not, but withdraw, if possible;
Fix to your word, and let us trust our Fates,
Be gone I charge you, speak not, but retire: Exit. Nem.

P. C. Excellent Woman, and Oh! matchless Friend,
Love, Friendship, Honor, Poison, Daggers, Death. Falls.

Princess C. O Heaven! Irene, help! help the Prince my Lord.
My Dearest Cleve, wake from this Dream of Death,
And hear me speak --

P. C. Curse on my Disposition,
That thus permits me bear the Wounds of Honor!
And Oh! thou foolish, gentle, lovesick Heart,
Why did thou let my hand from stabbing both?

Princess C. Behold, it is yet my Lord within your Power
To give me Death --

P. C. I do entreat thee leave me,
I Am bound for Death my self, and I would make
My passage easy, if you would permit me:
All that I ask thee for the Heart I gave thee;
And for the Life I love in thy behalf,
Is, that thou would leave me to my self a while,
And this poor honest Friend --

Princess C. I would obey you,
But cannot stir -- I know, I know my Lord,
You think that I designed to meet Nemours
This night, but by the Powers above I Swear.

P. C. O! do not Swear, for Chartres credit me,
There is a Power that can and will revenge;
Therefore dear Soul, for I must love thee still,
If thou will speak, confess, repent thy fault,
And thou, perhaps, may find a door of Mercy:
For me, by all my hopes of Heaven, I swear
I freely now forgive thee -- Oh! my Heart --
Pedro, thy arm, let me to bed --

Princess C. And do you then refuse
My help?

P. C. In Honor Chartres, after such a Fall,
I ought not to permit that thou should touch me --

Princess C. But Sir, I will, your arm? I Will hold you all
Thus in the closest strictest dearest Clasps;
Nor shall you dye believing my Dishonor,
I swear I knew not of Nemours his coming,
Nor had I spoke those words which yet were guiltless,
Had he not vowed never to see me more:
By our first Meeting, by our Nuptial Joys,
By my dead Mother's Ghost, by your own Spirit;
Which Oh! I fear is taking leave for ever,
I swear that this is true --

P. C. I do believe thee;
Thou have such Power, such Charms in those dear Lips,
As might persuade me that I am not dying.
Off Pedro, by my most untimely Fate
I swear -- I Am reconciled; and hark thee Cleve,
If thou do Marry, Ha! I cannot speak,
Away to Bed, yet love my Memory --

Princess C. To Bed, and must we part then?


P. C. O! we must --
Were I to live I should not see thee more --
But since I am dying, by this Kiss I beg thee,
Nay, I command thee part, be gone and leave me.

Princess C. I go, and leave this Farewell Prayer behind me.
For me, if all I Have said be not most true,
True as thou think me False, all Curses on me!
The Whips of Conscience, and the Stings of Pleasure,
Soars and Distempers, Disappointments plague me;
May all my Life be one continued Torment,
And that more Racking than a Woman's Labor;
In meeting Death may my least Trouble be
As great as now my parting is with thee. Exeunt severally.

Finis Actus Quarti.
ACT V.
SCENE I.
Poltrot, Bellamore. Bell. COme, come, take her into Grace again, 'twas but a
slip:


Pol. Take her into Grace again? -- Why sure you would have her bring me to that
pass she did in England, when my Lord Hairbrain used to keep me in awe, stand
biting my Lips, twisting my Hat, playing with my Thumbs while they were at it,
and I durst not look behind me.


Bell. Mere Jealousy; you say your self you saw nothing.


Pol. No Sir, I thank you, I had more care of my Throat; neither is this the
first Fault; for once upon a time, a little while after we were Married, at
London -- a Pox of that Cuckolding Trojan Race; she was talking to me one day
out of her Window more pleasantly than ordinary -- And acted with her Head and
Body wondrous prettily -- Butting at me like a little Goat, while I butted at
her again. I being glad to find her in so good humor, what did I Sir, but stole
away, and came softly up the back-stairs, thinking to cry Bo -- But Oh! Lord --
How was I Thunderstruck, to find my Lord Hairbrain there all in a Sweat --
Kissing and Smacking, Puffing and Blowing so hard, you would have sworn they
had been at Hot-cockles --


Bell. A little Familiar perhaps, things of Custom --


Pol. Ay Sir, Kiss my Wife and welcome, but for that Zeal in her shogging and
Butting -- Noli me tangere I cry -- I am sure it ran so in my Imagination, I
have been Horn-mad ever since -- Therefore spare your pains, for I am resolute.


Enter Celia. Bell. See where she comes my Lord -- But you are resolved you say
-- However, let me advise you, have a care of making her desperate. Exit.


Pol. Desperate -- Damn her, Polluter of my Sheets -- Damn her.
Seek, Celia, not to shun me, for wherever you fly,
I Will follow -- hang upon thy knees and dye.
Poltrot, behold -- Ah! can thou see me kneel,
And yet no Bowels of Compassion feel?
Why do thou bluster by me like a Storm,
And ruffle into Frowns that Godlike Form?
Why do thou turn away those Eyes of thine,
In which Love's Glory and his Conquests shine?

Pol. What is this thing called Woman? she is worse
Than all Ingredients ram'd into a Curse.
Were she a Witch, a Bawd, a Noseless Whore,
I could forgive her, so she were no more:
But she is far worse, and will in time Forestall
The Devil, and be the Damning of us all.

Cel. Yet Honor bids you sink with her you call
So foul, whose Frailties you too sharply named;
Like Adam you should choose with her to fall,
And in mere Generosity be Damned.

Pol. No, by thy self, and all alone be cursed,
And by the Winds thy Venom dust be hurled;
For you are a Serpent equal to the first,
And have the will to Damn another World.

Cel. But am I not thy Wife? Let that atone --


Pol. My Dear Damned Wife, I do confess thou art
Flesh of my Flesh, and Bone too of my Bone,
Would mine had all been broke when first thou were.

Cel. Why then I Will cringe no longer, hark you Sir, leave off your Swelling
and Frowning, and awkward ambling, and tell me in fine, whether you will be
reconciled or no, for I am resolved to stoop no longer to an ungrateful Person.


Pol. To your Husband, to your Head, to your Lord and Master, you will not
Goodey Bathsheba, but you could stoop your Swines Flesh last night you could,
to your Rank Bravado, that would have struck his Tusks in my Guts; he had you
with a Beck, a Snort, nay, of my Conscience thou would not give him time to
speak, but hunch'd him on the side like a full Acorn'd Boar, cried Oh! and
mounted --


Cel. Are you resolved then, never to take me into Grace again for one Slip?


Pol. No, I Am the Son of a Carted Bawd if I do; a Slip do you call it? what,
when I heard the Bed crack with the Violence of my Cuckoldom! No, I will ascend
the Judge of my own Cause, proceed to Condemnation, and banish thee for ever
the Confines of our Benevolence --


Cel. What here, before the Vidam here?


Pol. Yes, Impudence, before the Vidam and the Duke Nemours; nay, to thy
eternal Confusion, I will post thee in the Marketplace; but first I Will find
out St. Andre, and tell him the whole matter, that he may know too, what a Ram
his blessed Ewe has made him, and then --


Cel. And then I Will have your Throat cut.


Pol. Ha! Tygress, cut my Throat! why thou She Bear! thou Dam of Lions Whelps,
thou Cormorant of Cormorants, why what will thou devour me Horns and all?


Cel. He that missed your Guts in the dark, shall take better aim at your
Gullet by daylight; nay, to thy Terror of Heart be it known, thou Monster of
ill nature, if I would have consented last night to have run his Fortune, which
is no small one, he would have murdered thee in thy Bed, for I heard him speak
these very words, Let him lie, In Mortuis -- and in limbo Patrum -- Where I
must have prayed for that unthankful Soul, or thou would have been Damned to
all Eternity, dying suddenly and without Repentance --


Pol. O Lord! O Lord! In Mortuis, and in limbo Patrum; what, to be tossed on
burning Pitchforks for my Sins, why, what a Bloodyminded Son of Belial is this?


Cel. In fine, since you will have the truth, he has long had a design upon
both our Bodies, to Ravish mine, and rip open yours.


Pol. Why then he is a Cannibal; Lord! Lord! Lord! Lord! why what pleasure can
it be to any Man to rip me open? to Ravish thee indeed, there is some Sense in
that -- But there is none in ripping me open; why this is such a brutish Cruelty
--


Cel. Rogue, and so I told him -- Therefore when he found that nothing could
make me consent to your Murder, he Swore, and caught me by the hair, if I
stirred, or made the least noise, he would Murder us all, set the House of Fire,
and so leave us to our selves --


Pol. And so thou were forced to consent; why then by this Kiss, I Swear from
my Soul, which might have been Damned as thou say, but for thee, I forgive
thee -- And what was he that Cuckolded St. Andre, such another Mephostophilus
as this too?


Cel. O! my Dear, there are not such a pair of Fiends upon Earth again -- Why,
they look upon it as a Favor to our Sex if they Ravish a Woman, for you must
know they were formerly Heads of the Banditti --


Pol. Well, and I must praise thy Discretion in Sacrificing thy Body, for of my
Conscience, if they had seen this Smock-face of mine, I had gone to pot too
before my Execution.


Cel. They sent their Pages this Morning to know whether it was our pleasure to
have your Throats cut: But we answered 'em all was well, and desired 'em as
ever they hoped to see us again, to stir no further in the matter.


Pol. Mum, Mum, dear sweet Soul, secure my Life and thou shall command me for
the future with as full a swing as thou can desire, only like those that use
that exercise, let it be too and fro, sometimes at home and sometimes abroad,
and we'll be as merry as the day is long.


Cel. Be thou but true to me, and like the Indian Wives, I Will not outlive thee
--


Pol. And I Will Swear now, that was kindly said, as I hope for mercy, but it
makes me weep, what burn for me -- And shall I not return, I will, I will, I
will return when thou do burn; Enter St. Andre, Elianor.

Nay, when thy Body in the Fire appears,
My Ghost shall rise and quench it with his Tears.

St. A. All Flesh is Grass, that is certain, we are all Mortal, the Court's in
Mourning for the Prince of Cleve, the Vidam of Chartres is extremely grieved --
Hark you Poltrot, sure as I am alive he died of Jealousy. Well Nelle, for
this last care of thine, I Swear to be constant to thy Sheets, and as thou
say, I think it will not be amiss to tie me to thee now and then for fear of
the worst -- Ha! Poltrot --


Pol. Ha! Bully, I heard your kind Expressions to your Nelle, and I Will Swear
I Will vie thee with who shall love most, for I Will Swear these daily Examples
make my hair stand an end -- Cut my Throat, and rip me open, he shall Cuckold
me all over first, like the Man in the Almanac, nay, he shall Ravish her while
I hold the door to my own deflow'ring.


SCENE II.
Tournon, Nemours. Nem. Resolved never to see me more, and give up her Honor
to the Dauphin, that puling sniveling Prince, that looks as if he sucked still,
or were always in a Milk Diet for the Sins of his Florentine Mother.


Tour. Bless me! you are jealous.


Nem. I confess it -- The last time I had her in Disguise, she made such
Discoveries as I shall never forget: Lose her I must not, no, I Will lose a Limb
first, therefore go tell her, tell her the Prince of Cleve's Death has wrought
my Conversion, I grow weary of my wild Courses, repent of my Sins, am resolved
to leave off Whoreing and marry his Wife --


Tour. So the Town talks indeed.


Nem. The Town is as it always was and will be, a Talk, a Hum, a Buz, and a
great Lie -- Do as I bid thee, and tell her, just as you left me, I was going
to make my Court to the Princess upon her Husband's Tomb, which is true too, I
mean a Visit by the way of Consolation, not but I knew it the only opportunity
to catch a Woman in the undress of her Soul; nay, I would choose such a time
for my life, and it is like the rest of those starts, and one of the Secrets of
their Nature -- Why they melt, nay, in Plagues, Fire, Famine, War, or any great
Calamity -- Mark it -- Let a man stand but right before 'em, and like hunted
Hares they run into his lap.


Tour. But who is the Instrument to bring you to her?


Nem. Her Uncle the Vidam, she lies at his House immured in a dark room, with
her Husband's Image in her view, and so resolves, he says, for Death. However
I Will sound her in the ebb of her Soul, if my Boat run aground it is but calling
for Marguerite, and she will weep a Tide that shall set me afloat again -- As
thus, I Will lay the Dauphin in her dish, nose her in the Tiptoe of her Pride,
Railing, Lying, Laming, Hanging, Drowning, Dying, and she comes about again.
Exit.


Tour. Go thy ways Petronius, nay, if he were dying too, with his Veins cut, he
would call for Wine, Fiddles and Whores, and laugh himself into the other World.

Enter La March. Where Is Marguerite?


La M. She follows like a Wind, with swollen Cheeks, ruffled Hair, and glareing
Eyes, the Princess of Cleve has found her Fury, nor will she yet believe it.


SCENE III.
The Princess of Cleve, Irene in Mourning, Song, as the Princess kneels at the
State. Princess C. DEad thou dear Lord -- Yet from thy Throne of Bliss,
If any thing on Earth be worth thy view,
Look down and hear me, hear my Sighs and Vows,
Till Death has made me cold, and Wax like thee:
Water shall be my Drink and Herbs my Food,
The Marble of my Chapel be my Bed;
The Altars Steps my Pillows, while all night
Stretched out, I groaning lie, upon the Floor,
Beat my swollen Breasts, and thy dear loss deplore.

Iren. Ah! Madam, what a Life have you proposed?

Princess C. Too little all for an Offense like mine;
Yet Death will shortly purge my dross away,
For Oh! Irene, where is the Joy I find it here,
Yes, I shall dye without those violent means
That might have hazarded my Soul -- O Heaven --
O thou that see my Heart, and know my Terrors,
Will thou forgive those Crimes I could not help,
And would not hide?

Iren. Doubt not but your Account
Shall stand as fair in his Eternal Book,
As any Saints above --

Princess C. Take, take me then
From this bad World, quench these Rebellious thoughts;
For Oh! I have a pang, a longing wish
To see the Luckless Face of loved Nemours,
To gaze a while, and take one last Farewell,
Like one that is too loose a Limb -- It Is gone --
It was corrupt, a Gangreen to my Honor,
Yet I methinks would view the bleeding part,
Shudder a little -- Weep -- and grudge at parting.
But by the Soul of my triumphant Saint,
I swear this longing is without a guilt,
Nor shall it ever be by my appointment.

Enter Nemours. Iren. But if he should attempt this cruel visit,
How would your Heart receive him?

Princess C. With such Temper,
So clear and calm in height of my Misfortune,
As thou thy self perhaps would wonder at.

Iren. Ha! but he is here --

Princess C. Is It possible my Lord?
Has then my Uncle thus betrayed my Honor?

Nem. Start not, nor wonder Madam, but forgive
The Vidam who has thus entrap'd your Virtue,
To end a lingering Wretch -- That dies for Love --

Princess C. For Love, my Lord, is this a time for Love,
In Tears and Blacks, the Livery of Death?
But what is your hope, if I should stay to hear you?
Ah! What can you expect from rigorous Virtue,
From Chastity as cold as Cleve himself?
You that are made, my Lord, for other Pleasures --

Nem. Is this then the reward of all my Passion?
As if there could be any Happiness
For this disconsolate despairing Wretch,
But in your Love alone?

Princess C. You're pleased my Lord
That I should entertain you, and I will,
Before this dear Remembrancer of Cleve;
We'll talk of murdered Love -- And you shall hear
From this abandoned part of him that was,
How much you have been loved.

Nem. Ha! Madam --

Princess C. Yes,
Sighing I speak it Sir, you have inspired me
With something which I never felt before,
That pleased and pained the quicknings of first Love;
Nor feared him then, when with his Infant Beams,
He dawned upon my chill and senseless Blood.
But Oh! when he had reached his fierce Meridian,
How different was his form! that Angel Face,
With his short Rays, shot to a glaring God.
I grew inflamed, burnt inward, and the Breath
Of the grown Tyrant, parched my Heart to Ashes.
Nor need I blush to make you this Confession,
Because, my Lord, it is done without a Crime.

Nem. Because for this most blessed discovery,
I am resolved to kneel an Age before you.

Princess C. Rise, I conjure you, rise, I Have told you nothing
But what you knew, my Lord, too well before:
Not but I always vowed to keep those Rules
My Duty should prescribe.

Nem. Strike me not dead
With Duty's name, by Heaven I Swear you're free
As Air, as Waters, Winds or open Wilds,
There is no Form of Obligation now;
Nay, let me say, for Duty: O forgive me,
It Is utmost Duty now to keep that Love
You have confessed for me.

Princess C. It Is Duty's Charge,
The voice of Honor and the cry of Love,
That I should fly from Paris as a Pest,
That I should wear these Rags of Life away
In Sunless Caves, in Dungeons of Despair,
Where I should never think of Man again.
But more particularly that of you,
For Reasons yet unknown.

Nem. Unknown they are,
And would to Heaven they might be ever so,
Since it is impossible they should be just;
Nay, Madam, let me say the Ghost of Cleve --

Princess C. Ah! Sir, how dare you mention that dear name,
That drains my Eyes, and cries to Heaven for Blood.
Name it no more without the Consequence,
For it is but too too true, you were the Cause
Of Cleve's untimely Death, I Swear I think
No less than if you had stabbed him through the Heart.

Nem. O! Cruel Princess, but why should I answer,
When thus you raise the shadow of a reason
To ruin me for ever? Is it a fault
To Love? Then blame not me; No, Madam, no,
But blame your self, who told it to your Husband;
But Oh! you would not argue thus against me
If ever you had loved --
You have deceived your self and flattered me;
Why am I thrown else from the Glorious Height,
Snatched in a moment from my blissful State,
And hurled like Lightning by the hand of Fate?

Prineess C. Be satisfied, my Lord, you are not flattered,
I have such Love for you, that Duties bar,
Would prove too weak to hinder our Engagement.
But there is more.

Nem. More Fancy, more Chimera!
But let it come, I Will stand the stalking Nothing,
And when the bladder'd Air would turn the Balance,
I Will cast in Love substantial, pondrous Love,
Eternal Love, and hurl him to the Beam.
But speak, and if a Hell of Separation
Must part my Soul and Body, do not Rack me,
But let the Poison steal into my Veins,
And Damn me mildly, Madam, as you can.

Princess C. Hear then, my bosom thought -- It Is the last time
I ever shall see you, and it is a poor reward
For such a Love, yet, Sir, it is all I have,
And you must ask no more.

Nem. Be Witness, Heaven,
Of my Obedience, I will ask her nothing.

Princess C. Know then, my Lord, you're free, and I am so
Free for the eternal Bond of Marriage --
My Heart too is inclined by Love like yours,
Nor can I fear the censuring World should blame us.
But now, my Lord, What Power on Earth can give
Security that Bond shall prove Eternal?

Nem. Ha! Madam.

Princess C. Silence, silence I command you;
No, no, Nemours. I know the World too well,
You have a Sense too nice for long Enjoyment,
Cleve was the Man that only could love long:
Nor can I think his passion would have lasted,
But that he found I could have none for him.
It Is Obstacle, Ascent, and Lets and Bars,
That whet the Appetite of Love and Glory;
These are the fuel for that fiery Passion,
But when the flashy stubble we remove,
The God goes out and there is an end of Love.

Nem. Ah Madam! I Am not able to contain,
But must perforce break your commands to answer,
Once to be yours, is to be for ever yours,
Yours only, without thought of other Woman.

Princess C. Why this sounds well and natural till you're cloid,
But Oh! when one satiety has palled you,
You sicken at each view, and every glance
Betrays your guilty Soul, and says you loath her.
I know it, Sir, you have the well-bred cast
Of Gallantry and Parts to gain success;
And do but think when various Forms have charmed you,
How I should bear the cross returns of Love?

Nem. Ah Madam! now I find you're prejudiced
To blast my hopes.

Princes C. It Is Reason, all calm Reason;
Nature affirms no violent thing can last,
I know it, I see it, every new Face that came
Would charm you from me -- Ha! and could I Love
To see that Fatal day, and see you scorn me,
To hear the Ghost of Cleve each hour upbraid me;
No, it is impossible, with all my Passion,
Not to submit to these Almighty Reasons;
For this I brave your noblest Qualities,
I Will keep your Form at distance, curb my Soul,
Despair of Smiles and Tears, and Prayers and Oaths,
And all the Blandishments of Perjured Love:
I will, I must, I shall, nay, now I can,
Defy to Death the lovely Traitor Man.

Nem. No. Madam, think not you shall carry't thus,
It Is not allowable, it is past example,
It Is most unnatural, unjust and monstrous;
And were the rest of Women thus resolved,
You would destroy the purpose of Creation.
What, when I have the happiness to please,
When Heaven and Earth combine to make us happy,
Will you defeat the aim of Destiny,
By most unparalled extremes of Virtue,
Which therefore take away its very Being?

Princess C. Away, I must not answer, but conjure you
Never to seek occasion more to see me;
Farewell -- It Is past.

Nem. I cannot let you go;
I Will follow on my Knees, and hold your Robe,
Till you have promised me that I shall see you,
To show you how each day by slow degrees
I dye away: This you shall grant by Heaven,
Or you shall see my Blood let out before you.

Princess C. Alas! Nemours, O Heaven! why must it be,
That I should charge you with the death of Cleve?
Alas! why met we not ever I engaged
To my dead Lord? And why did Fate divide us?

Nem. Fate does not, No --
It Is you that cross both Fortune, Heaven and Fate;
It Is you obstruct my Bliss, it is you impose
Such Laws as neither Sense nor Virtue warrant.

Princess C. It Is true, my Lord, I offer much to duty,
Which but subsists in thought, therefore have patience,
Expect what time, with such a love as mine,
May work in your behalf; my Husband's death
So bleeding, fresh I see him in the Pangs;
Nay, look, methinks I see his Image rise.
And point an everlasting Separation;
Yet Oh! it shall not be without a Tear.

Nem. O! stay.


Princess C. Let go, believe no other Man
Could thus have wrought me, but your self, to Love --

Nem. Stay then.

Princess C. I dare not -- Think I love you still --

Nem. I do -- But stay and speak it over again --

Princess C. Believe that I shall love you to my death.

Nem. I will. But live and love me.

Princess C. Off, I charge you.
Believe this parting wounds me like the Fate
Of Cleve or worse: Believe, but Oh! farewell --

Nem. Believe, but what? That last thought I implore.

Princess C. Believe that you shall never see me more. Exit.

Enter the Vidam. Vid. Well, and how goes the Game? What, on the Knee, a
gathered
Brow, and a large dew upon it? Nay, than you are a looser.

Nem. Did thou see her pass?

Vid. I did -- she wrung me by the hand and sighed,
Then looked back twice,
And tottered on the threshold at the door.

Nem. Believe that you shall never see me more -- she Lies, I Will Wager my
State, I Bed her eighteen months three weeks hence, at half an hour past two in
the Morning.

Vid. Why Faith, and that is as exact as ever an Astrologer of 'em all.

Nem. Give me thy hand, Vidam, I know the Souls of
Women better than they know themselves;
I know the Ingredients just that make 'em up,
All to loose Grains, the subtlest volatile Atoms,
With the whole Mish-mash of their Composition.
Hark there without, the voice of Marguerite,
Now thou shall see a Battle worth the gazing,
Mark but how easily my reason flings her,
And yet at last I Will swing into Friendship
Because I love her -- Enter Bellamore.

Bell. The Princess -- shall I stop her?

Nem. No, let her come,
With flying Colors, and with beat of Drum --
Like the Fanatic, I Will but rub me down,
And then have at her, Vidam, stay you here --
By Heaven I Am jealous of this changeable Stuff,
Therefore the hits will be the livelier of both sides,
The Dauphin, but no more -- she comes, she comes.

Enter Marguerite pushing Bellamore. Marg. Be gone, Villain, Devil, Fury,
Monster of a Man.

Nem. But hear me but six words in private.

Enter Poltrot, Celia. Pol. And I swear by this lascivious bit of Beauty, I
will cleave to my Celia for Better for Worse, in Searge, Grogrum or Crape,
though a Queen should come in my way in Beaten Gold --


Nem. What then, Gentlemen, I perceive there have been Wars at home --


Pol. Not a Battle, my Lord, only a Charge, a Charge sounded or so.


Nem. What was it a Trumpet, or through a Horn Sir?


Pol. A Horn Sir, a Horn Sir, no Sir, 'twas not a Horn Sir -- Only my Celia was
a little disdainful, but we are Friends again Sir, and what then Sir?


Nem. Come, come, all Friends, were Tournon here I would forgive her, a litte
Scorn in a pretty Woman, so it be not too much affected, is a Charm to new
Friendship; therefore let each Man take his Fair one by the hand, thus lay it
to his Lips, and Swear a whole Life's Constancy --


St. A. As I will to my Nelle, though I haule Cats at Sea, or cry Small-coal;
and for him that upbraids her, I Will have more Bobs, than Democritus when he
cried Poor-Jack. There Is more Pride in Diogenes, or under a Puritan's Cap, than
in a King's Crown.


Nem. For my part, the Death of the Prince of Cleve, upon second thoughts, has
so truly wrought a change in me, as nothing else but a Miracle could -- For
first I see, and loath my Debaucheries -- Next, while I am in Health, I am
resolved to give satisfaction to all I have wronged; and first to this Lady,
whom I will make my Wife before all this Company ever we part -- This, I hope,
whenever I dye, will convince the World of the Ingenuity of my Repentance,
because I had the power to go on.

He well Repents that will not Sin, yet can,
But Deathbed Sorrow rarely shows the Man.

THE EPILOGUE.
WHat is this Wit which Cowley could not name?
The rare Inducement to a perfect Fame,
The Art of Nature curious in a Frame.
Is it a Whig, a Trimmer, or a Tory,
Or an Old Fop forgotten in the Story?
It Is Honor veiled in Honesty's Disguise,
Or Caesar like a Fencer in a Prize;
It Is Pindar's Ramble, Nature in Misrule,
A Politician acted by a Fool.
It Is all Variety that Arts can give,
The Danaid's filling of a Leakey Sieve:
The Valleys Sweets, and the distilling Spring,
The brimming Bacchus that the Muses bring,
To drink the Health of England's Glorious King.
A Statesman thoughtful for a Clown reviled,
A Pestle and a Mortar for a Child.
It Is a true Principle, but hardly shown,
An Artificial Sigh, a Virgins Groan,
When the first night her Lover lays her on.
It Is like a Lass that Gads to gather May,
It Is like the Comedy you have to day,
A Bulling Gallant in a wanton Play.
FINIS.

