AN EXPLANATION OF The Lord Treasurer's LETTER TO Mr. Montagu, THE KINGS Late
Ambassador in FRANCE, March 25th. 1678.

Together with the said Letter: AND The TWO LETTERS of Mr. MONTAGV, Which were
read in the House of Commons.

Printed in the Year, 1679.

AN EXPLANATION OF The Lord Treasurer's LETTER to Mr. Montagu.
I Find so many misconstructions made of the Earl of Danby's Letter to Mr.
Montague, the King's late Ambassador in France, dated the 25th. of March,
1678, that I could not but in common Justice, give the World those true
Explanations of it, which must needs satisfy the Minds of any, (who have no
other than public designs;) that there could be no ill-meaning to the Nation
by that Letter, had it not been written by the King's Command upon the Subject
of Peace and War, wherein his Majesty alone is at all times Sole Judge, and
ought to be obeyed not only by any of his Ministers of State, but by all his
Subjects.

In the first place the Letter shows, That what was sent by the Earl, was but a
Copy of those Proposals which were consented to on the part of the
Confederates, and sent at the same time by Mr. Secretary Coventry; so that it
appears, the subject matter of the Proposals was not only known to the
Secretaries, but approved by the rest of the Council; and the Letter also shows
the reason why full direction was not then given by the Secretary to conclude
upon them; because, although his Majesty at that time, knew by Mr. Godolphin,
that those were the Propositions upon which the Confederates would make the
Peace if they could; yet the formal Powers were not then come from them, which
should enable the Ambassador in France to perfect the Treaty, if the French
King should accept it.

At the same time when this intimation was given to His Majesty of the
Confederates desiring the Peace upon those Conditions, (and as the only means
left to Save Holland, and the Interest of the Prince of Orange there,) it was
also desired of his Majesty, That whilst such formal Powers were preparing to
conclude such a Peace, his Majesty would please in their behalf to find by
some private means the Humor of the French King, Whether it were likely he
would accept those Propositions when they should be offered to Him, as
believing it might be some disadvantage to the Confederates to propose them, if
they should be refused.

And this was the Motive (at their Request, and at a time, when both Ghent and
Ipres were newly taken, and Holland under the utmost consternation) that His
Majesty, to comply with them in a Matter which so highly concerned their
Safety, did think fit for the Secrecy of it according to their desires, to have
the King of France his Mind known privately, and with all the speed possible,
that He might let the Confederates know the French King's Intentions, before
they exposed themselves to a Public Offer of what might be refused.

This is the true meaning of what is said about feeling the King of France's
Pulse, and making one Answer to be showed to the Secretary, and another to the
King himself, who endeavored to send an account into Holland of the French
King's Answer, as privately, and speedily as was possible; and unless the Peace
had been fully completed, (the advantageous terms whereof would have answered
for themselves,) his Majesty thought it might be ill resented by the
Parliament, who could not presently know, either the earnest Request of the
Confederates for the Peace, their Necessity of obtaining it, their Countries
being in a readiness for a Revolt, nor the goodness of those Conditions which
were demanded, and which made them unlikely to be granted: as is afterward
expressed in the said Letter.

As to that part of the Letter which says, (In case the Conditions of Peace
shall be accepted, the King expects to have Six Millions of Livres Yearly, for
three Years, from the time that this Agreement shall be signed between His
Majesty and the King of France; because it will be two, or three Years before
be can hope to find his Parliament in humor to give him Supplies, after the
having made any Peace with France;) it is so presently followed with this
Clause, (If you find the Peace will not be accepted, you are not to mention the
Money at all;) And so soon after that with this farther Clause; (That you
believe, this will be the last time that you shall receive any Propositions of
a Peace, if these be rejected, as you believe they will,) that it cannot be
thought to have any dangerous meaning in it, nor any great hopes of getting the
Money: but that it may be the more fully understood, you will find by Mr.
Montagu's Letter of the 18th of Jan. 1677/1678, which was read in the House of
Commons, (and for which cause I have added the said Letter.) viz. ( If the King
is for a War, you know what to do; if he hearkens to their Money, be pleased
to let me know what they offer, and I dare answer to get our Master as much
again; for Barrillon 's Orders are to make the Market as low as he can.

Now, as Offers of Money had often been made both by Mr. Montagu, and Monsieur
Barrillon, for a Peace upon French Conditions, and Six Millions of Livres had
been offered by Monsieur Barrillon for one Year; so, Mr. Montagu having
informed the King, that whatever Monsieur Barrillon should offer, he could get
as much again, his Majesty was resolved to try Mr. Montagu's power, in case the
French would consent to the Confederates Conditions; and in addition to Mr.
Montagu's own Interest in moving the French King to give the Six Millions for
more Years than one, his Majesty thought it might be a good Motive, without
prejudice to the Parliament or Nation, (which would have saved their own Money
thereby;) to say it would be two or three Years before he could hope to find
his Parliament in humor to give him Supplies, after having made any Peace with
France.

The reason why nothing was to be said to the Secretary concerning the Money,
was because Mr. Montagu in a former Letter to the King himself, had desired
that he would acquaint no body but the Earl of Danby with the business of the
Money: so that he found that employment for the Earl, of which he thought fit
after to accuse him.

As I hope I have sufficiently explained those parts of the Letter, which are
liable to misconstruction, viz. The Reasons for the Privacy of the Negotiation,
for the sake of the Confederates: The Grounds upon which the Money was
expected: The Reason why the Earl of Danby was employed in that business of the
Money, and why no mention was to be made of it to the Secretary, and the
Reasons why his Majesty would not have his Parliament to know it until the
Conditions had been perfected, (of which his Majesty would have then been able
to have given a very good account) or being broken quite off, never needed to
have been known at all.

I say, having spoke to all those Particulars, I must likewise crave liberty to
observe to you those Parts of the same Letter, which do sufficiently show that
his Majesty was not in the least to be drawn from the Interest of the
Confederates, for any private gain of Money to himself.

For you see the Ambassador had agreed to the Sum, but not for so long a
time, and no man can imagine why Six Millions of Livres should have been
refused, if either his Majesty had had any ill design at home, or would have
deserted the Confederates; but on the contrary, you see his Majesty would make
no Proposals, but what they desired; nor even those, without being pressed by
them to it: nor would he have any motion of Money to the French King, unless he
accepted those very Conditions, so desired by the Confederates; and if the
Confederates could have obtained such a Peace as they desired, and his Majesty
a good Sum of Money toward defraying those Charges he had been at, without
taxing of his People; I conceive it ought to have been esteemed good Policy, as
it has been in the former times of H. 7th, and H. 8th; rather than made a
pretense of Treason: but how the not doing any of those things excepted against
in that Letter, (and that plainly by reason of the King's great Integrity to
the Confederate Interest, which He so evidently preferred before His own
Personal Advantage) should become Treason, is beyond my comprehension.

I hear, it is made a great aggravation of this Letter, that it is dated five
days after an Act past to raise Money for an Actual War with France: But
surely every man knows, That an Act to raise Money for a War, is no
Declaration of the War.

That his Majesty has always the Sole Power of Peace and War in his own hands.

That His Ministers were never recalled from Treating the Peace at Nimiguen;
and besides, our then ill prepared Condition for a War, that of the
Confederates was then so low, that it was not above a Week after, that the
French Propositions were made at Nimiguen, upon which the Peace was concluded,
and after which Propositions (although far worse ones, than what had been
Offered by his Majesty but ten days before) the Dutch would never think of
supporting the War any longer; and so far was his Majesty from agreeing to
that Peace which was then made, that his Majesty's Ministers at Nimiguen did
not only refuse to sign it; but his Majesty used all possible means to engage
the Dutch with Him in the Offensive Treaty against France; and though He could
not procure them to do so, He sent an Army so soon as it was in readiness, to
March to their assistance, and thereby, had it been possible, he endeavored to
have encouraged them to continue the War.

Though a great deal more is to be said upon this Subject, I think this enough
to convince any man, that as this Letter did no harm, nor hindered one step of
the Preparations for War against France; so that it intended nothing of ill
either to the Kingdom, or the Cause of the Confederates, and therefore the
writer of it can deserve no blame from this Letter, if it had not been written
by the King's Command and Direction.

As I have wondered much at those strained constructions I have found upon this
Letter, so I confess I have not been able to give my self a reason how this
Letter should only find the hard fate of being loaded with such Crimes, and yet
nothing said to those Letters of Mr. Montagu's, the Originals of which were
also read in the House of Commons, which do so manifestly give his Majesty the
invitations to expect great Sums from France, if he would endeavor it; and
which does acknowledge this Earl to be so great an Enemy to France above all
other men; That it was grown a Maxim to the Statesmen there, by one who very
well understood the state of this Kingdom, That they must destroy his Credit
with our King, before they could hope to do any good in England. And I pray God
it be not found too true.

The Lord Treasurer's Letter to Mr. Montagu, the King's late Ambassador in
France, March 25th. 1678.
My Lord,
SInce my Writing to you by Mr. Brisbon, the Resolves have been altered as to
the sending you Instructions (as yet) for the proposing any thing to the French
King; for the Particulars which will be consented to on the part of the
Confederates, (and of which this is a Copy) will be communicated to you by Mr.
Secretary Coventry, but you will have no other direction from him about them,
but only thereby to be enabled to find the Pulse of the King, or his
Ministers, at least against the time that you shall receive Orders to make the
Proposals to him. That you may know from whence the nicety of that affair
proceeds, it is necessary to inform you, that for fear of its being ill
resented by the Parliament here, the King will not make any proposal at all of
Peace, unless he shall be pressed to it by the Confederates: And although by Mr.
Godolphin he is sufficiently informed that they desire a Peace upon the
Articles sent you by the Secretary, yet not having received that desire
formally, the Council will not Advise his Majesty to let his Ambassador propose
that which he is not formally empowered to make good; and so by staying for that
formal Power which by Letter his Majesty is sufficiently enabled to propose,
the time will be lost for effecting the Peace, if at all it can be had. To
supply this defect then, and to prevent the King's sending again into Holland
before he know the mind of France, I am commanded by His Majesty, to let you
know, That you are to make the Propositions enclosed to the King of France, and
to tell him, The King will undertake for the seeing them made good on the part
of Spain, and Holland, in case they shall be accepted by him. And in your
answers you must write the same things to the Secretaries by way only of having
felt the King of France's Pulse, which you must do to the King as a full answer
from the King of France, and such an one as his Majesty may depend upon
whatever that shall be. For the more dextrous management of this Affair, the
King is advised to show these Propositions to Monsieur Barrillon, but not to
give him a Copy; so that by the strength of his Memory it is expected he shall
write to his Master, and by that means only are we to hope for an answer to a
matter of this vast Importance. And consequently you may imagine what a
satisfaction we are like to reap from it when it comes. I doubt not but by your
Conduct it will be brought to a speedy Issue; which is of as great Importance
as the thing it self, there being no condition worse for his Majesty, then
this standing unresolved betwixt Peace and War. I find by Monsieur Barrillon,
that it is like some Places which are dependances upon greater Towns, may be
demanded by the King of France; but if he intend a Peace, (which you will do
very well to know his mind fully in) you may justly say, That you hope he will
neither stand upon one single Place, tho a fortified one, nor upon any Place
unfortified, which is a dependant upon those which are to be restored to Spain.
And if any thing shall be moved about Sicily to remain in the French hands till
the Peace of Sweden be concluded, you are only to say, That you are not
empowered to say any thing upon it: and you are confident the King has done all
he could to get the utmost Conditions that would be consented to: Only you are
to say, The King has again sent about Conde, not being well satisfied that
they have not left in his Power to give or refuse as he should have found it
convenient, and hops still for some good answer. In case the Conditions of
Peace shall be accepted, the King expects to have Six Millions of Livres yearly
for three years, from the time that this agreement shall be signed between his
Majesty and the King of France: because it will be two or three years before
he can hope to find his Parliament in humor to give him Supplies, after the
having made any Peace with France. The Ambassador here has agreed to the
Sum, but not for so long a time; but if you find the Peace will not be
accepted, you are not to mention the Money at all, and all care must be taken
to have this whole Negotiation as private as possible, for fear of giving
offense at home, where for the most part we hear in ten days after any thing
that is communicated to the French Ministers. I must again repeat to you, That
whatsoever you write on this Subject to the Secretary, to whom you must not
mention one syllable of the Money, you must say only as a thing you believe
they will consent to, if you had power formally to make these demands. Pray
inform your self of the bottom of what is to be expected from France, and
assure them, That you believe this will be the last time that you shall receive
any Propositions of a Peace if these be slighted, as indeed I believe they
will: so that you may take your own measures as well as the King's upon it. I am

Your Excellencie's most Faithful and obedient Servant, Danby.

Mr. MONTAGU'S Letter to the LORD TREASURER, Dated Paris, Jan. 11th. 1677/8.
My Lord,
I Have not had the honor of any from your Lordship, in answer to all those,
wherein I gave you the best account I could of matters here, by the Express I
sent. Nor indeed could I expect his Majesty could take any sudden resolution
in matters of so great moment.

The occasion of my giving you this trouble, is, to give you the best light I
can into the reason of Mr. de Rouvigny's Son's Journey into England, who will
be there perhaps as soon as this Letter. If his Father's Age would have
permitted it, I believe they would have sent him; so they have chosen the Son,
who is to make use of Lights his Father will give him, and by the near Relation
he has to my Lady Vaughan, who is his Cousin-German, and the particular
Friendship which Father and Son have with Mr. William Russell, he is to be
introduced into a great commerce with the Malecontented Members of Parliament,
and insinuate what they shall think fit to cross your Measures at Court, if
they shall prove disagreeable here; whilst Monsieur Barrillon goes on in his
smooth civil way.

I thought it my duty to his Majesty to give your Lordship this account, tho I
have not explained this matter so much in my Letter to the Secretary; wherefore
I hope you will let this be seen by none but his Majesty. What I know farther
of this, or any thing else, you shall always be acquainted with. They are here
in great pain, till it will be known what will become of the Parliament, and do
not stick to say, If that be put off for a Month, they doubt not of a Peace. I
am with all respect,

My Lord, Your Lordships Most obedient and humble Servant, R. Mountagu.

Another of Mr. MONTAGU'S Letters to the Lord Treasurer. Dated Paris, Jan.
18th. 1677/8.
My Lord,
SInce I sealed up my Letter, by my Lord Dumblane, I have had one with me who
is very exactly, as can be, informed of most things here, and has told me the
reason of Rouvigny's Journey.

His chief Errand is, to let the King know, That the King of France did hope he
was so firm to him, as not to be led away by the Grand Treasurer; who was an
Ambitious Man, and, to keep himself well with the People, would gratify their
inclinations, by leading his Master unto an unreasonable War against France.
That as for Money, if he wanted it, he should have what he would from hence.

His Instructions are, if this does not take, by the means of Will. Russell,
and other discontented people, to give a great deal of Money, and cross all
your Measures at Court.

When he gives you his Father's Letter of Recommendation, you cannot choose but
be very kind to him, since the chief part of his Journey is to do you so good
Offices. My Lord, if I might be worthy to give my advice, who see things upon
the place, There could be nothing better done, than after he has been two
days in England, for the King to give the Order to tell Monsieur Barrillon,
That he knows Rouvigny has a Relation, and Commerce with people ill-affected
to the Government; and would be therefore glad to have him retire. You cannot
imagine how it would damp them here, when they shall see their little tricks do
not pass upon us.

And Old Rouvigny that values himself upon knowing England, and having saved so
much Money as he had (by what I told you formerly) order to give, has given it
them for a Maxim, That they must diminish your Credit, before they can do any
good in England. But since their chief Quarrel to you, is the being so true to
your Master's Interest, I am sure he is too just to let them do you any hurt.

If the King is for a War, you know what to do; if he hearkens to their
Money, be pleased to let me know what they offer, and I dare answer, to get our
Master as much again: for Barrillon's Orders are to make the Market as low as
he can. I am, etc.

R. Mountagu.

FINIS.

