THE LIVES OF Clemens Alexandrinus, Eusebius Bishop of Caesarea, Gregory
Nazianzen, AND Prudentius the Christian Poet: Containing an Impartial Account
of their LIVES and WRITINGS, Together with Several Curious Observations upon
Both. ALSO A Short History of Pelagianism.

Written Originally in French By Monsieur Le CLERC; And now Translated into
English.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Baldwin, at the Oxford Arms in Warwick Lane, 1696.

Advertisement.
IT IS thought that the following Lives will not be Unacceptable to the Public.
The Author of 'em, who is well known by his Writings, justly complains, that
those who have hitherto written the Lives of the Fathers, have not done it with
such an Impartiality as is required from those who write for the sake of Truth.
Indeed, it must be confessed that Panegyricks of all sorts are very Numerous, and
that a True and Faithful Account of the Lives and Doctrine of the Fathers is
very Necessary. This Author will have it, that he has distinguished himself
from other Writers in his Lives of some Fathers, and professes a great
Sincerity. This, I think, is more than sufficient to recommend the Reading of
this Work.

But besides, it contains several Judicious Observations, and Critical Remarks
upon the Lives and Opinion^ of the Fathers, very useful, especially to those
who apply or design to apply themselves to that Study. I think that the Fathers
were far from being Infallible, but I am none of those who despise the Study of
their Writings. I confess, it does not require a Dull and Narrow-Spirited
Reader, who may grow the worse for it: But an Ingenious and Judicious one may
make a good use of it, as will appear by the following Lives, which may also
give some Light to the late Disputes concerning the Holy Trinity.

I shall further add, That the Fathers, whose Lives Monsieur Le Clerc has
written, are some of the most Famous. Every body knows that Clemens
Alexandrinus, and Eusebius Bishop of Caesarea, were very Learned Men; and that
Gregory Nazianzen was one of the greatest Orators the Christians had in his
time. Eusebius having been much concerned in the Arian Disputes, it was
necessary to give a large Account of those Controversies, which makes the Life
of that Father so much the more Curious and Useful. In short, the Reader will
find here the Lives of some of the most Celebrated Fathers who lived in the
most famous Ages of Christianity, written with great Exactness and
Impartiality; and they are, I think, sufficient to give a Notion of the Fathers.

I must not forget that Monsieur Le Clerc has taken care to show what
Philosophy those Fathers did especially apply themselves to. This is a very
Necessary Enquiry; and those that are not sensible of its Usefulness, will be
easily convinced of it, when they come to read the followinging Lives.

'Twas also thought fit to print the History of Pelagianism, though very short,
together with these Lives; because several Gentlemen may be desirous to have in
their own Tongue an Impartial Account of that Controversy, which formerly made
so great a Noise in the Christian World.

ERRATA.
PAge 9. Line 9. read Hypotyposes; p. 10. l. 4. of the r. of those; p. 16. l.
28. r. Stoics; p. 18. l. 28. r. Invisible; p. 32. l. 22. r. Writings; p. 50.
l. 2. r. Months; p. 58. l. 4. r Paedagogue; p. 64. l. 13. r. Pamphilus, (and so
elsewhere;) p. 67. l. 6. r. Year of; p. 72. l. 27. perhaps, add is; p. 73. l.
24. for (...); r. (...); p. 78. l. 12. for contained r. understood; p. 79. l.
20. r. those; p. 81. l. 1. in speaking, dele in; p. 84. l. 12. r. gave; p. 85.
l. 10. r. (...); p. 86. l. 2. r. (...): p. 105. l. 29. r. his Works; p. 110. l.
7. dele a, and r sport of the; ibid. l. 17. r. Cordova; p. 113. l. 2. r.
Lucian; p. 117. l. 4. r. Nicomedia; p. 130. l. 4. r. Bysantium; p. 133. l. 7.
r. Licinius, p. 135. l. 24. r. fit to; p. 137. l. 19. r. (...); p. 142. l. 18.
r. Arsenius; p. 146. l. 16. r. being come to; p. 151. l. 9. r. any thing else;
p. 161. l. 18. r. Personas; ibid. l. 21. (...), add signifies; p. 167. l. 13.
there is, add in; p. 173. l. 26. undeniable, add Testimony; p. 176. l. 31. r.
Aegina; p. 183. l. 3. r. patiently; p. 193. l. 9. r. Individuum's; p. 207. l.
24. r. used the Valentinians; p. 212. l. 17. related, add all; p. 213. l. 17.
r. breaking into; p. 220. l. 28. r. seized; p. 226. l. 26. r. Prosopopeia; p.
234 l. ult. r. acknowledged; p. 249. l. 9. r. Judgment; p. 254. l. 20. Deity,
and is; p. 265. l. 20. r. in a full; p. 268. l. 24. dele 'em; p. 282. l. 19. r.
Prodicus; p. 283. l. 25. r. such an Art; p. 290. l. 17. r militiae; p. 292. l.
28. r. Darkness; p. 293. l. ult. r. Mentem; p. 295 l. 9. r. Judicature; p. 301.
l. 2. r. piceasque; p. 304. l. 18. r. ingenuously; p. 305. l. 14. r. perire; p.
307. l. 23. Ninivites, add were not; ibid. l. 27. r. that People; p. 312. l.
19. r. Cyprians; p. 313. l. 17. r. foveis; p. 317. l. 10. Image, add was; p.
321. l. 2. Nature is, add of; p. 321. l. 14. r. Conditor; p. 325. l. 19. r.
moras; ibid. l. 21. r. murmureth; p. 326. l. 25. r. it is; p. 327. l. 7. r.
languente; p. 333. l. 12. Quadrants, r. Tetrasticks; ibid. l. 15. r. whereof;
p. 336. l. 14. r. Damietta; p. 338. l. 27. dele not; p. 363. l. penult. r.
facultatum; l. seq. r. exilium; p. 368. l. 1. r. nullum.

The Life OF Clemens Alexandrinus.
ALthough those that are able to read the Fathers in the Original Tongues, are
but few; yet there are a great many who ought to have some Notions of their
Lives and Writings, because they are nowadays made use of in the
Controversies which divide Christians. The Teachers of the Church of Rome omit
nothing to make Men believe, that the Fathers were of their Opinion; because
they believe, that it is not lawful to reject a Doctrine grounded upon the
Testimony of the greatest part of the Fathers. When they quote a Passage, which
they think to be agreeable to their Notions, they don't fail to say, As a Holy
Father said well. But if One objects to them some words which they cannot well
get rid of: They answer, That 'twas only his private Opinion; and reject it as
an Error.

The greatest part of the Protestants do not lay down the Consent of the
Fathers, as a Principle of their Faith; but as for the rest, many of their
Authors seldom make any other use of them, when they cite 'em, than the Roman
Catholics.

Hence it is, that in the Ecclesiastical Histories of both Parties, such Places
as seem proper to confirm the Opinion and Practices received nowadays amongst
us, are carefully observed: Whereas such things as are thought to be Defective
in their Conduct and Doctrine, are only mentioned by the bye. They persuade
themselves that the Fathers, especially those of the First Centuries, held all
the Opinions, which are looked upon as Essential where they live; and then they
think themselves obliged to heap up Praises upon 'em; and excuse, as much as
they can, the Defects which are observed either in their Writings or Lives: So
that instead of writing their History, they write, without being aware of it,
their Panegyric or Apology. Hence it is, that they who read such Books,
believe that the Ancients were Men of vast Learning, and extraordinary
Holiness. From whence they conclude, that if they have ill treated any Body,
they must needs have had some great Reasons for it; and that they were far
either from unfaithfully relating, or ill confuting the Opinions of Heretics.
They think themselves obliged to imitate their manner of Reasoning and Acting,
without much troubling themselves whether it be agreeable to the Precepts of
the Gospel, or not. Thus it comes to pass, that we have no Histories of the
First Centuries, that are faithful enough; and do not make such a Use of those
Histories as we ought to make.

I am far from thinking that I can cure so inveterate a Disease, nor is it the
Design of this Work: But at least, I think my self obliged to avoid, as much as
I can, the Way of those, who give the Public Partial Panegyricks, when Sincere
and Impartial Histories were expected from them. I have endeavored to practice
this in The History of Pelagianism,; and I shall yet endeavor to do it in the
Life of Clemens, which I am going to write in few words.

TITUS FLAVIVS CLEMENS, famous for his Learing toward the End of the Second
Century, was born at Athens, according to some Authors, who believe they can
reconcile this Opinion with the Opinion of those who call him Alexandrinus, by
saying that Athens was the Place of his Birth; and that he got the Surname of
Alexandrinus, because of his long stay at Alexandria. But his Style, though
florid enough, is often obscure and intricate, and does not much relish the
Neatness and Elegancy of the Athenian Writers. However, it is certain that he
begun his Studies in Greece, continued them in Asia, and ended his days in
Egypt.

It appears, that he was not content to be instructed only by one Master, but
that he traveled much to hear many, and so to get a more exact and full
knowledge of the Christian Religion, as well as to improve in Humane Learning.
His Masters had been Disciples of the Apostles, or had conversed with some
Disciples of those Holy Men, as it appears by his manner of speaking of them,
though he does not express himself very clearly.

He says, Str^m. l. 1. p. 274. Eusebius, lib. 5. c. 11. reads this place
somewhat differently, upon which Valesius may be consulted.
That his Writings, composed without Art, are an Image and a Picture of those
lively Discourses of the Happy Men, and truly worthy of Esteem, whom he had the
Honor to hear. The one (as he goes on) whom I saw in Greece, was of the Ionick
Sect. I have seen two in Calabria, one of whom was a Coelo-Syrian, and the
other an Egyptian. I met two more in the East, one of whom was an Assyrian; and
the other, with whom I conversed in Palestine, was of a Jewish Extraction: This
latter was the first in Merit. I stayed in Egypt, where he had hid himself, to
look for him. He was, as the Proverb says, A true Sicilian Be. He gathered the
Flowers scattered (if one may so say) in the Meadows of the Writings of the
Prophets and Apostles, by the means whereof he filled the Souls of those that
heard him with a pure Knowledge. Those Men having preserved the true Tradition
of the Blessed Doctrine, immediately after the Holy Apostles, St. Peter, St.
James, St. John, and St. Paul, as a Child who keeps what he has learned of his
Father (Although there are Few like them) have lived to our time, by the Will
of God, to shed into our Hearts the Seed which they had received of the
Apostles their Predecessors.

It Is of great moment to know what Master an Author had, to understand his
Opinions right; for then, as nowadays, the Disciples did particularly stick
to the Method of their Masters; and explained Religion, as much as they could,
according to the Principles of that Philosophy which they had learned of them.
Thus the Schoolmen, who were Peripateticks, explained Divinity by Aristotle's
Principles; and Divinity is handled after the Cartesian way, where Descartes
Philosophy is admitted.

Wherefore the Learned Men of our Age have endeavored to guess, who were those
of whom Clemens speaks. It appears, by my Translation of the words of that
Father, that he had five Masters; but Valesius allows him but four, because he
follows the Reading of Eusebius. One cannot positively affirm which is the best;
but I may say, that the Interpreters who took the word (...) for a Proper Name,
have done it without reason. It Is not likely that Clemens, who does not tell
the Names of the other, whom he acknowledges for his Masters, should name this.
Antiquity affords no Man whose Name was Ionick, and that Name may denote the
Sect of Philosophy to which that first Master of Clemens did especially apply
himself. Thales and Anaximander, Philosophers of Miletus, a Town of Ionia, were
the Heads of it.

Clemens Alexandrinus speaks well of those two Philosophers in his Writings:
Thales (says he in one place) Strom. l. 1. p. 300.
was a Phaenician, as Leander and Herodotus say. He is the only Man who seems
to be conversant with the Egyptian Prophets, and we do not read that any one
has been his Master, etc. Anaximander, a Milesian, and Son of Praxidamus,
succeeded Thales, and had Anaximenes, Son of Eurystratus, a Milesian also, for
his Successor. Anaxagoras of Clazomenes, Son of Hegesibulus, came after him; he
removed his Auditory from Ionia to Athens, and had Archelaus, Socrates 's
Master, for his Successor.

Elsewhere he says, That Thales Strom. l. 5. p. 595.
being asked what God is? He answered, That which has neither a Beginning nor
an End. And that another having asked him, whether Men can hide their Actions
from God? How can that be, answered he, since they cannot so much as hide their
Thoughts from him?

Speaking of Anaximander, Archelaus, and Anaxagoras, Philosophers of the same
Sect, he says, That the former has established Admen. ad Gent. p. 43.
the Infinite for the First Being; and that the other two said that the Spirit
governed the Infinite.

The Principles of those Philosophers may be seen more at large in Diogenes
Laertius: and one may easily perceive, that some of them do well enough agree
with those of the Jews and Christians; as, That whatever is upon the Earth came
out of the Water; That the Night was before the Day; That most Men are Wicked;
That to live Justly, we must not do what we blame in others; That Heaven is our
true Native Country, etc. It Is not therefore incredible, that a Philosopher of
that Sect should have embraced Christianity, and been the first Master of
Clemens Alexandrinus.

All that can be said against it, is, that the Succession of the Philosophers
of the Ionick Sect ended in Archelaus, Master of Socrates. But although there
were no Masters of that Philosophy, who did immediately succeed one another;
yet it does not follow but there might be some Philosophers, in several places,
who followed the Opinions of Thales, and his first Disciples. Thus Diogenes
Laertius says, in his Preface, that the Italick Sect, of which Pythagoras was
the Head, ended in Epicurus; although there has been some Pythagoraean
Philosophers many Ages after Epicurus. No Body ought to wonder that we should
say, that a Christian followed a certain Sect of Philosophy, because it is only
to be understood inasmuch as he thought it agreeable to Christianity. Thus
Justin Martyr was a Platonic; and Pantaenus, Clemens's Master, Eusebius. l. 5. c.
10.
was a Stoic.

The Name of the second, whom he saw in Great Greece, or Calabria, is
altogether unknown. Some Vales. ad Eusebius.
believe that the Assyrian was Tatianus, a Philosopher and Disciple of Justin
Martyr; and others, Baron. ad Ann. 185.
Bardesanes of Edessus in Syria, who had been a Valentinian, and never wholly
laid aside the Opinions of that Sect.

As for him who was of Jewish Origin, some believe he might be Theophilus
Bishop of Caesarea, although History does not say that he descended from Jewish
Parents. Wherefore, others conjecture that he was one Theodotus, whose Doctrine
Clemens Alexandrinus had expounded in his Hypotypoles, or Institutions of the
Christian Religion; from whence it is that the Abridgment of that Work, which
is to be found at the end of Clemen's Works, is entitled Extracts of the
Eastern Doctrine of Theodotus. But some ascribe those Extracts to Theodotus
Byzantinus, a Currier by Trade, but a learned Man, who was Excommunicated by
Pope Victor, in the Year CXCIV. because he taught, that Christ was but a mere
Man.

Lastly: The last of Clemens's Masters, whom he prefers before all the other,
and to whom he applied himself, was Pantaenus. Eusebius is of opinion, that
Clemens means Him, in the latter part of that Passage which I have citedout of
him. Indeed, Pantaenus taught in Egypt, when Clemens settled himself there; and
this latter called him his Master Eusebius. l. 5. c. 11.
in his Hypotyposes.

Pantaenus's Native Country and Parents are not known; but it is certain that
he applied himself much to the Study of Philosophy, especially that of the
Stoics, perhaps being moved with the severe Manners and Maxims of the
Philosophers, which did well enough agree with those of the Ancient Christians.

There had been Vid. Eusebius l. 5. c. 10. and Hieron. in Script. Eccl.
long before, nay, if some Authors are to be believed, ever since St. Mark the
Evangelist, a Public School at Alexandria, where the Catechumeni were taught;
which Employment was bestowed only upon Men of Learning, and an Exemplary Life.
Pantaenus was entrusted with it, and taught a long time in that City, Viva
Voce, and by Writing. He wrote some Commentaries upon the Scripture, of which
there are only some words extant Clemens. p. 808.
in the Extracts of the Eastern Doctrine of Theodotus, wherein Clemens
Alexandrinus speaks thus: Our Pantaenus, says, that the Prophets do commonly
express themselves by the Aorist, and use the Present Tense instead of the
Future and Preterit Tenses.

It Is likely that Pantaenus was a Catechist, when Clemens came to Egypt; and
that he studied some time under him, before he succeeded him. He applied
himself there, as he did elsewhere, to the Study of Philosophy, although he was
far from taking for Philosophers All those that went by that Name. Strom. l. 1.
p. 315.
We do not (says he) indifferently receive All manner of Philosophy, but that
only of which Socrates says in Plato; The same thing which is observed in
Mysteries, is also to be found in Philosophy; Many carry the Thyrsus, but Few
are truly inspired with the Spirit of Bacchus. Socrates did thereby obscurely
intimate, That Many are Called, but Few Elected: For afterward he adds, That
the Latter are, in his Judgment, those who have applied themselves to
Philosophy as they ought to do.

Clemens would not stick wholly to any Sect, lest he should take for
Philosophers such as perhaps had only the Outside of 'em, but followed that
manner of Philosophising which was then called Eclectick, that is to say, the
Method of those, who chose, out of all the Opinions of the Philosophers, those
which seemed the most rational to them, and made a System of them for their
Private Use. Vid. Laertium in Proem. and Suidam.
Potamon of Alexandria, who lived in the time of Augustus, was the first that
practiced that manner of Philosophising. Clemens could not choose a more
commodious One for a Christian Philosopher, because there is not one
Philosopher of whom all the Dogmata are agreeable to the Gospel; although a
System, that will come up very near to that of the Christian Doctrine, may be
made by collecting out of All the Philosophers what they said agreeably to the
Light of Nature, or some ancient Traditions current almost through the whole
World.

Clemens himself teaches us thus much; and assures us, that he applied himself
to the Eclectick Philosophy, for the same Reason that I have alleged. Having
said, That God had sent Philosophy to Men; Strom. l. 1. p. 288.
he adds, That he means neither that of the Stoics, nor that of the
Platonicks, nor that of the Aristotelians. But (says he) I give that Name to
the Truths which those Sects have maintained, and which may lead to Justice and
Piety. I don't call the False Opinions of Men, Divine Things. He says
elsewhere, P. 299.
That the Barbarian and the Greek Philosophy took the Fragments of the Eternal
Truths which it contains, not out of Bacchus's Mythology, but from the Reason
which did always exist. He that would join again, what has been divided, and
would make a Private System out of it, might be sure of Knowing the Truth.

A like Thought is to be met with in Lactantius, who assures us, Inst. l. 6. c.
7.
That it is an easy thing to show that the Whole Truth was divided among the
several Sects of Philosophers; and if any one would collect the Truths
scattered among the Sects, and gather them into One Body, he would not
certainly disagree from the Christians. Quod si extitisset aliquis, qui
veritatem sparsam per singulos per sectasque diffusam colligeret in unum ac
redigeret in corpus, is profecto non dissentiret a nobis.

Afterward he says, That no Body could do it, but by a Divine Revelation; but
that if it should happen, as it were by chance, that any one did it without
that help, nothing would be more certain than that Philosophy: and although he
could not defend himself by the Authority of Revelation, Truth would maintain
it self only by its own Light.

Afterward he blames those who stick to One Sect, so as to embrace all its
Opinions, and condemn all other Sects, being ready to dispute against all the
Doctrines which they have not learned of their Masters. That Design, of
collecting whatever the Philosophers said that was agreeable to the Gospel, is
undoubtedly a fine one, and may very much conduce to convince Men of the Truth
of the Christian Religion. But to do it succesfully, it is necessary to
understand both Philosophy and the Christian Religion well, and to confine
one's self to clear and undeniable Articles, such as those that are Practical,
and some few Speculative ones. The Heterodox of that time had introduced into
the Christian Religion, for want of Consideration, an infinite number of
Philosophical Doctrines, which have no relation with those of the Gospel.

Thus the Carpocratians Strom. l. 3. p. 430.
believed, as Clemens testifies, That it was lawful to Lie promiscuously with
all Women; and did actually do it, when they had supp't in a great Company, and
put out the Candles. They fell into this Conceit, because Plato would have
Women to be Common in his Commonwealth; and because they had wrested several
Places of the Scripture, to make them agree with that Opinion. But Clemens is
of opinion, that they understood neither the Scripture nor Plato well. This
latter meant only this, he thinks, That there should be no Maid in the
Commonwealth, but to whom All the Citizens might indifferently pretend;
although if she had been Betrothed to any Man, others could no more hope to
Marry her. I could easily show, that Clemens does not explain well Plato's
Meaning, if this was a fit place for it.

The Marcionites, Ibid. p. 431, and 465, and seq.
who said that Matter and Nature are Bad, and condemned Marriage, came by their
Opinion, so contrary to that of Carpocrates, by Explaining some Passages of
Scripture, by the Platonic Principles. Because the Scripture often describes
the Miseries of this World, and praises Continency, they fancied that the
Sacred Writers had the same Notions of this Life and Generation, or Birth, that
Heraclitus and Plato had. Those Philosophers believed, that the Souls did exist
before the Bodies, into which they are sent only to be punished for the Sins
which they had committed in another Life: So that, to speak properly, Birth
should be called Death, rather than a Beginning of Life; and Death Life,
because when we are born, our Souls are thrown into the Prison of the Body, out
of which they are set at liberty when we die. Hence it is that those
Philosophers, and many Poets after 'em, said, That 'twas better not to be born,
than to come into the World; and to die in Childhood, than to live many Years.
Hence it is also, that some times they speak vehemently enough against the Use
of Marriage; because, in their opinion, it did only conduce to build a Prison
for some Unfortunate Soul, which was thrown into the Body that was produced.

The Valentinians had also learned what they said concerning the Generation of
their Aeones, of Hesiod, as it will appear by comparing the Beginning of his
Theogonia with the Doctrine of the Valentinians, as it is reported by St.
Irenaeus and St. Epiphanius, who do not fail to upbraid them with their having
taken their Doctrine from that Poet. It Is likely they confounded Hesiod's
Doctrine with that of the Holy Scripture, because of some small resemblance
that is between 'em. I could easily show, that Hesiod, by the Marriages between
the Chaos, Darkness, Light, Heaven, Earth, Air, etc. meant only, that there is
some Relation or Connection between the Things which he joins, and that 'twas
this that gave him occasion to Marry them together: But my Business is only to
show, by the Example of the ancient Heretics, that the Primitive Christians
made a great use of the Heathen Philosophy, and that many have perverted it, as
Clemens has observed in several places.

As for him, although he professed to follow the Method of the Eclecticks, and
take out of every Sect what he thought fit; yet he was more inclined to the
Stoic Philosophy, because Pantaenus his last Master, and whom he esteemed
most, as we have seen, preferred that Sect before others. Wherefore it is
observed, that Clemens has a close and harsh Style, and that he affects some
Paradoxes, and to use New Words; Characters whereby the Stoic, and those that
studied in their Schools, were known. Stoicorum (says In Bruto, c. 31.
Tully) adstrictior est oration, aliquantoque contractior quam aures populi
requirunt. De Fin. lib. 4.
Nova verba fingunt, deserunt usitata: at quanta conantur? Mundum hunc omnem
oppidum esse unum, etc. Pungunt quasi aculeis, interrogatiunculis angustis.
Those that understand Greek, and have read something of Clemens, may have
easily observed all this in his Style. There are many Paradoxes in his
Paedagogus; for instance, he maintains ( Book 3. Chap. 6.) That none but a
Christian is Rich. A Paradox much like that of the Stoics, who said the same
thing of their Wise Man. Those Philosophers expressed themselves thus; (...),
That the Wise Man only is Rich: And Clemens made no other Alteration in it, but
that of (...), Wise Man, into (...), a Christian. The Reasons which he makes
use of to prove his Assertion, are not very different neither from those of the
Stoics, as may be seen by comparing what he says with Cicero's Explication of
that Stoical Maxim, in his Paradoxes.

The Study of Heathen Authors produced in Clemens milder Thoughts with respect
to them, than those which Christians have had since. He observes in many
places, Strom. l. 1. p. 314.
That whatever they say, is not false: And cites, to prove it, St. Paul's
Discourse to the Athenians, Act. 17. where that Apostle tells 'em, That he
preaches to them the same God, to whom they had erected an Altar, with this
Inscription, TO THE UNKNOWN GOD; the same God of whom Aratus had said, that We
are his Offspring. Clemens believes, that St. Paul approved what was Good in
the Inscription of that Altar, and in those words of Aratus; and gave 'em only
a clearer Knowledge of the True God, whom they already perceived, without
knowing Him well. He elsewhere Strom. l. 6. p. 635.
quotes a Book which was ascribed to St. Peter, and was entitled, KPYGA
PETPOY, The Preaching of St. Peter. It appears, that Clemens made no doubt but
that Book was St. Peter's: From whence one may conjecture, that there was
nothing in it that was inconsistent with the Orthodox Opinions of that time;
and that, if we had it, we might look upon it as the Work of a Good Christian.
The Place which Clemens quotes out of it, is too remarkable to be omitted here,
since we may know from it what many Ancients, who have not been charged with
Idolatry, thought of the Heathens: Know that there is but One God (said St.
Peter in that Book) who gave a Beginning to All Things, and is able to make 'em
End; who is Invinsible, and sees all things; who is shut up within no Bounds,
and contains all things; who wants nothing, and whom all things stand in need
of, since they exist by Him; who is Incomprehensible, Eternal, and
Incorruptible; who was not made, but made all things by his Powerful Word, that
is, by his Son, according to the Spiritual Interpretation put upon the
Scripture. Afterward he adds (as Clemens goes on,) Worship that God, not as
the Greeks do, because Honest Men among the Greeks Worshipped the same God with
us, but without perfectly Knowing Him as those who have received the Doctrine
of his Son. He does not say, Do not worship the God whom the Greeks worship;
but, Do not worship him as the Greeks do, Changing only the Manner of the
Worship, but preaching no other God: He himself explains what he means, adding,
For being led by their Ignorance, and not knowing God as perfectly as we do,
they make Statues of those things which God gave them for their use, viz. Wood,
Stone, Copper, Iron, Gold and Silver; and instead of employing those things for
their use, they themselves worship 'em. Besides, they worship Beasts, which God
gave them for their Food, the Birds of the Air, the Fishes of the Sea, the
Creeping Creatures of the Earth, Wild and Fourfooted Beasts, as well as
Weasels, Rats, Dogs and Monkeys. They sacrifice to Men, what they should eat;
and offering Dead Things to the Dead, as to Gods. they prove Ungrateful to the
True God, and so deny his Existence. And that it may appear that We and the
Greeks Know the True God, though in a different manner, he goes on thus;
Worship not God neither as the Jews; for fancying that They only know God, they
do not perceive that they worship Angels and Archangels, the Months, and the
Moons; for if the Moon does not appear, they do not observe the Sabbath which
they call First, nor the New Moon, nor the Days of Unleavened Bread, nor any
Holy Day. Lastly, he concludes, saying; As for you, Learn the Just and Holy
Doctrine which we teach you; observe it, and worship God after a new manner,
through Jesus Christ. For we read in the Scripture, that God said, I make a new
Covenant with you, different from that which I made with your Fathers upon
Mount Horeb. He has given us a New Covenant; for both that of the Jews and
Greeks is old; and We, who worship him after a Third and New manner, are
Christians. He clearly shows (as Clemens adds) That one and the same God was
known to the Greeks, after the manner of the Heathens; to the Jews, after the
Jewish manner; and to Us, after a New and Spiritual manner. He shows further,
That the same God who gave the Two Covenants, is He who gave Philosophy to the
Greeks, by which the Almighty is glorified amongst 'em, etc. As God was pleased
to save the Jews, by giving them some Prophets; so he has raised among the
Greeks the most Honest Men, whom he has distinguished from the Vulgar,
according as they were capable of receiving his Benefits, to perform the part
of PROPHETS amongst 'em in their own Tongue. We learn this not only from St.
Peter's Preaching, but also from St. Paul, when he says, Take some Greek Books
acknowledge that the Sybil teaches but One God, and the Things that are to
come. 'Read Hydaspes, and you will find that he has writ much more clearly
concerning the Son of God; and that he said, that many Kings would arm
themselves against Jesus Christ, that they would hate him, and those that are
called by his Name, etc. As the Preaching of the Gospel came in its time, so
the Law and the Prophets were given to the Barbarians in their time, and
Philosophy to the Greeks, which accustoms the Ears to the Preaching of the
Gospel. Clemens speaks after the same manner in several other places; and
testifies clearly enough, that Philosophy Vid. Casab. Exercitat. 1. in App.
Baron.
was among the Greeks, what Prophecy was among the Hebrews; and that God has
always given equally to all Men the Means necessary to be saved: Which was also
the Opinion of several other Greek Fathers.

Clemens therefore believed that the Greeks had no good Doctrine but what they
took from the Barbarians, especially from the Jews, and the Sacred Books, which
he endeavors to prove in a thousand places; and it is well known, that it was
the common Opinion of the Fathers, who undertook to censure the Philosophy of
the Greeks. The Jews said also the same thing, as it appears from a Passage of
Aristobulus a Peripatetick, who is said to have been Tutor to Ptolemy
Philometor, and who speaks thus: Plato did also follow our Laws, and has
showed, that he had studied them well. Now before Demetrius's time, nay, before
the Empire of Alexander, and that of the Perfians, they were translated by
others (than the Septuagint) as well as the History of what happened to the
Hebrews, our Fellow-Citizens, at their departure from Egypt, of what remarkable
things they did and saw; and how they took possession, by their strength, of
the Land of Canaan; and how the whole Law was given: so that it is manifest,
that the Philosopher whom I have mentioned, took several things from it; for he
was a Man of great Learning, as well as Pythagoras, who has inserted several
of our Opinions into his Doctrine. But this Author is suspected, for several
Reasons; and being the only Man who has mentioned a Translation made before
the Empire of the Persians, one may justly doubt whether this is not a Jewish
Fable. However, it appears, that in the time of this Author, whether he be
Genuine or Supposititious, the Jews charged the Heathens with having stolen the
best things they had out of the Holy Books.

It Is very likely that the Greeks had learnt many things of the Eastern
Nations, as of the Egyptians and Babylonians; for they themselves Vid. Diogen.
Laert. Proem. and ad illud Intt.
confess it. But if this Matter was fully examined, one might perhaps find,
that many things were clearly spoken of in Greece, before the Jews spoke of 'em
after the same manner; and that the latter began to express themselves as the
Greeks only since they conversed with them. I could allege some Proofs of this
Conjecture, at least, as strong as all those which the Fathers have alleged to
prove the contrary. But because I should too much wander from the chief Subject
in hand, I shall not undertake this Matter. Perhaps, some time or other, I
shall publish a Dissertation about it.

I had rather observe here, That although Clemens does often charge the Greek
Philosophers with Theft; yet he believed that God had given them part of their
Knowledge by the Ministry of Inferior Angels, whereas he instucted the
Christians by the Ministry of his Son. Strom. l. 7. p. 702.
The Lord of all Men, of the Greeks as well as the Barbarians, persuades those
that will believe in Him: For he does not force him to receive Salvation, who
may choose and do what is in his power, to embrace the Hope which God offers
him. It Is He who gives Philosophy to the Greeks, by the Ministry of Inferior
Angels, Ibid. l. 1. p 309.
((...).) For the Angels have been long ago dispersed among the Nations, by the
Command of God; but the Opinion of those that Believe, is the Gift of the Lord.
Afterward he proves at large, in the same place, that God is the Savior of
the Heathens, as well as the Jews.

As to the Ministry of Angels, to reveal Philosophy to the Greeks, Clemens, and
those who have been of the same Opinion, came by it partly by reason of what
Socrates said concerning his Demon, who warned him of several things, and of
whom Ibid. l. 1. p. 311, and 334.
Clemens seems to speak, in such terms as may make one believe that he was
persuaded that Socrates spoke the Truth. And this agrees well enough with the
Opinion of the same Father, and several others, who believed, after several
Heathen Philosophers, that every Man had a Tutelar Angel, who might sometimes
advize him.

After what has been said, it is no wonder that Clemens should ascribe a kind
of Prophecy Ibid. l. 5. p. 601.
to Plato, especially if it be considered, that the words of that Philosopher
suit Jesus Christ so well, that the Condition which the Savior of the World
was reduced to, when he was nailed to the Cross, can scarce be better described
now. He De Rep. l. 2. p. 423. ed. Ficin.
describes a Perfect Virtue; and says that one might bestow that Name upon the
Virtue of a Just Man, who yet should be accounted a Wicked, for being a strict
Observer of Justice; and who, notwithstanding the ill Opinion which the World
should have of him, would walk on in the way of Virtue even to Death, although
he should be Whipped, although he should suffer several Torments, and be kept in
Chains; although his Eyes should be burnt out with a red-hot Iron; although he
should be exposed to all sorts of Misery, and at last be Crucified.

However, Clemens did not equal the Heathen Philosophy to the Doctrine of
Christ. He acknowledges, that before his coming into the World, it was only, as
it were, a Degree and Preparation to Christianity; and that the Philosophers
could only be looked upon as Children, if compared to the Christians. He thought
that Faith was Necessary, since the Gospel had been published through the whole
World. Strom. l. 7. p. 704.
The Savior (says be) having given his Commands to the Barbarians, and
Philosophy to the Greeks, has shut up Unbelief until his Coming; in which
time, whosoever does not believe in Him, is without Excuse.

All the Books of Clemens are full of these Sentiments; and he defends them
every where so clearly, and so fully, that it plainly appears, that in his time
those Opinions were not (at least so commonly) looked upon as dangerous; for it
is not likely that they would have made him a Catechist, after his Master
Pantaenus, or bestowed so many Praises upon him, as they have done since, if he
had been looked upon as a Man infected with dangerous Opinions. St. Chrysostom
maintained the same thing, concerning the Salvation of Heathens, in his 38th.
Hom. upon St. Matthew.

'Twas necessary to observe, in few words, those Opinions of Clemens; because,
without it, several places of his Writings cannot be understood; and because
'twas upon this account that he kept whatever he thought to be Rational in the
Doctrine of the Heathens, rejecting only what seemed to him False, or
inconsistent with the Doctrines of the Gospel, or what had been blamed by
Christ and his Apostles. Thus All the Greek Philosophers, even those who were
for a Fate, having believed that Men are Free by their Nature, and can abstain
from doing Evil, as they are able to apply themselves to Virtue: And Christ and
his Apostles having not undertaken to take them off from this Opinion, Clemens
openly maintains, That Men have a liberty of Doing Evil, or Abstaining from it.
Strom. l. 1. p. 311.
Neither Praises (says he) nor Censures, nor Rewards nor Punishments are Just,
if the Soul has not the power of Sinning or not Sinning, and if Sin is
Vnvoluntary. The Pagans knew nothing of what was called since, Original Sin:
And Clemens observing, that the Sacred Writers do not upbraid the Heathens with
their Ignorance in this Matter; nor teach them, that even Newborn Children
deserve the Fire of Hell; he denies that Children are any ways corrupted. The
beforementioned Heretics, who condemned Marriage, faid, amongst other
Reasons, That Men did only thereby bring Polluted Children into the World,
Ibid. l. 3. p. 468, 469.
since David says of himself ( Psalm. 51.) That he was conceived in Sin, and
shapen in Iniquity. And Job maintains ( chap. 14. ver. 4, 5.) That none is free
from Pollution, even though he should live but one Day. Hereupon Clemens
exclaims thus; Let them tell us how a Child new-bown has sinned; or, how he
who has done nothing yet, is fallen under Adam 's Curse. Afterward, he
explains that Passage of David, as if the Prophet had meant only, that he was
descended from Eve, who was a Sinner.

It must be further observed, That a Man with such a Disposition of Mind, could
scarce avoid believing that the Philosophers were of the same Opinion with the
Apostles, as soon as he perceived some Likeness between their Terms. Thus Plato
having spoken of the Three Chief Deities whom he acknowledged ( In the Life of
Eusebius.
as I shall show elsewhere) in Terms like those that were used by the Primitive
Christians, speaking of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; Clemens believed that
the Doctrine of that Philosopher was the same with that of the Christians. I
think ( says Strom. l. 5. p. 598.
he) that Plato understood nothing else by it but the Holy Trinity; and that
the Third Being mentioned by him, is the Holy Spirit, as the Second is the Son,
by whom all things were made according to his Father's Will. Wherefore, when he
speaks of Christ's Divinity, he does not describe it otherwise than the
Platonicks did the Reason. Strom. l. 5. p. 598.
The Nature of the Son (says he) is the most Perfect, the most Holy; that which
has the greatest share in the Empire and Government, and the most like Him who
only is Almighty. It Is that Excellent Nature which governs all things according
to the Father's Will, which Rules the World well, which Acts by an Unexhausted
and Unwearied Power, and which sees the most secret Thoughts. The Son of God
never leaves the Post from which he sees all things: He is neither divided nor
separated; he does not go from one place to another; he is every where, and is
confined within no Bounds. All Spirit, All Paternal Light, All Eye; he sees all
things, understands all things, knows all things, and dives, by his Power, into
the Powers themselves. To that Paternal Reason, who has received that Holy
Administration, the whole Army of Angels and GODS is subjected, because of Him
who put them under him.

Clemens had another Opinion concerning the Humane Nature of Christ; which
perhaps he entertained, lest he should make the Body of Christ inferior to that
of the Gods of Homer. The Gods of that Poet, Iliad. 1. verse. 342.
neither ate Bread, nor drank Wine. And Our Lord, according to Paed. l. 1. p.
202.
Clemens, needed no Milk when he came into the World, and was not nourished
with Meat, which he took only out of Condescension, and which did not undergo
the same Change in his Body, which it does in ours. Hence it is, that Vid.
Diss. P. Allix. de Sanguine Christi.
Origin his Disciple believed that Christ had no Blood, but a Liquor like that
which Homer ascribes to his Gods, and calls IOP.

Plato says, in several places, that God inflicts no Punishment upon Men, but
for their Good, and not at all out of mere Vengeance. Which Paed. l. 1. p. 116.
and Strom. l. 4. p. 536.
Clemens observes, so as to make one believe that he approves it. Plato said
further, That the Souls are purged with Fire in another Life; and that after
they have been purged, they are restored to their former state. Strom. l. 5. p.
549, 592.
Clemens believed that the Apostles had the same Thoughts, when they spoke of a
Fire which is to consume the World. And Vid. Huet. Orig. l. 2. quaest. 11.
Origin his Disciple concluded from those Principles, That the Devils and
Damned Men should be one day delivered from their Sufferings.

The Apostles describe the Place wherein Wicked Men shall be tormented, under
the Notion of a Lake of Fiery Brimstone: They use the same word with the
Pagans, to denote the State of the Souls after Death, viz. ADS: They say, that
Men descend into it, and that Christ descended into it. This was enough to make
Clemens exclaim thus: P. 592.
What? was Plato ignorant of the Rivers of Fire, and the Depth of the Earth,
which the Barbarians call Gehenna, and which he Prophetically ((...)) named
Tartarus? He has mentioned Cocytus, Acheron, Pyriphlegethon, and such like
Places where Wicked Men are punished, that they may be mended. Clemens did also
believe, with most of the Ancient Fathers, Strom. l. 6. p. 637, and seq.
That Christ did really descend into Hell, and preached there to the Damned
Souls, of which he saved those that would believe in Him.

I could allege many other Instances, whereby it would appear, that Clemens
explained the Opinions of the Christians, by the like Doctrines which he found
in the Philosophers. But the beforementioned Examples will suffice to those
who have neither Time nor the Means to read that Author. Those who will consult
the Original, will find enough of themselves.

One may further learn one thing from thence, which most of those who apply
themselves to the reading of the Fathers, do not much mind; and without which,
it is almost impossible to understand them well, in an infinite number of
places: viz. That before One begins seriously that Study, the Heathen
Philosophers, especially Plato, must be carefully read. Without this, One cannot
well apprehend what Grounds they go upon, nor succesfully examine the strength
of their Reasonings, nor guess how they came by so many Opinions that are so
different from those which are now entertained in our Schools.

Now to return to the Life of Clemens: The Ancients do unanimously say that he
succeeded Pantaenus in the Office of Catechist. He performed it with success;
and many Great Men came out of his School, as Origin, and Alexander Bishop of
Jerusalem.

His Method of Instructing the Catechumeni, consisted in teaching them what was
Good in the Heathen Philosophy, and so leading them by degrees to Christianity;
which they more readily embraced, when they had relished many of those Maxims
derived from the Light of Nature, and scattered in the Writing of the
Philosophers, whom they saw every Body had a great Respect for, than if they
had been roughly told, that they ought to renounce all their Opinions, and look
upon the rest of Mankind, not only as Men that were guilty of Error, but that
had said nothing that was True. Strom. l. 1. p. 278.
As Plow-men do not cast the Seed into the Ground, but when they have watered
it; so (says Clemens) we draw out of the Writings of the Grecians, wherewith to
water what is earthly in those whom we instruct, that they may afterward
receive the Spiritual Seed, and be able to make it easily spring forth.

In effect, the Light of the Gospel supposes that of Nature, and does not
destroy it. We don't find that Christ and his Apostles undertook to give us a
complete System of all the Doctrines that have some relation with Religion;
they supposed that we were already provided with several Thoughts received in
all Nations, upon which they reasoned: else they should have, for Example,
exactly defined all Virtues, which they have not done, because they found in
the Minds of all Men some Idea's, which, though imperfect, yet were most true.
So that they were content to add what was wanting in them, or to take from them
what ill Customs might have unfitly added to 'em.

Besides the Office of Catechist, Clemens was promoted to the Priesthood, in
the Beginning, as it is thought, of the Empire of Severus; because Eusebius,
writing the Events of the Year CXCV. gives Clemens the Title of Priest. About
that time he began to defend the Christian Religion against Heathens and
Heretics, by a Work which he entitled Stromata, of which I shall speak
hereafter; because in that Work, according to a Chronological Supputation, Lib.
1. page 336.
he does not go higher than the Death of Commodus: From whence Lib. 6. cap. 6.
Eusebius concluded, that he compiled it under the Empire of Severus, who
succeeded that Emperor.

Severus being exasperated against the Christians. Vid. Dodwel. Diss. Cyp. XI..
41, and seq.
perhaps because of a Rebellion of the Jews, with whom the Heathens confounded
those who professed Christianity, began to persecute them violently. That
Persecution having begun at Antioch, went as far as Egypt, and forced many
Christians to leave the Places of their Abode, wherein they were too well
known, to give way to the Violence of the Persecution.

This seems to have given Clemens occasion to prove, that it was lawful to run
away in time of Persecution. Strom. l. 4. p. 503, and seq.
Having said, that Martyrdom cleanses from all Sins, and exhorted those who are
called to it, to suffer it; he observes. That we ought to show, as well by our
Manners as our Words, that we are persuaded of the Truth of the Christian
Religion. Afterward he explains that place of the Gospel, When they persecute
you in this City, flee ye unto another. The Lord (says he) does not command us
to fly, as if to be Persecuted was an That Reasoning is grounded upon the
Principles of the Stoics, who denied that Pain was an Evil.
Evil; and does not bid us avoid Death by flying, as if we ought to fear it. He
will not have us to engage or help any Body to do ill, etc. Those who do not
obey, are rash, and expose themselves, to no purpose, to manifest Dangers. If
he who kills a Man of God, sins; he who presents himself before a Judge's
Tribunal, is also guilty of his own Death, etc. He helps, as much as lies in
him, the Wickedness of him who persecutes him. If he exasperates him, he is
really the cause of his own Death, just as if he had exasperated a Wild Beast
that devoured him.

A little while after the Apostles, some had been seen to look for Martyrdom:
but some having challenged the Executioners, and having scandalously fallen short
of Christianity, at the sight of the Torments, that Conduct Vid. Dodwel. Diss.
Cyp. XII* 49.
was found dangerous; and those who willingly offered themselves to Martyrdom,
were Condemned, as it appears by many Passages of the Ancients, and that of
Clemens, which I have just now quoted.

As we ought not to avoid Martyrdom, when it cannot be done without renouncing
Christianity, or a Good Conscience; so we ought to preserve our Lives as long
as we can, whilst it is likely that we do Christians greater service, by
prolonging it if we fly, than by losing it for the sake of Truth, by staying in
those Places where the Persecution rages, and which we may come out of, without
ceasing to profess the Truth.

Those who blame, or make some difficulty to justify some Protestant
Ministers, who came out of a Kingdom, wherein they could not stay without
imminent Danger, if they continued to perform their Functions; should before
prove, that such a Conduct would have been more advantageous to Christianity,
than their Retreat. Methinks the Solution of that Question, which has been
lately moved, viz. Whether they did well to retire? depends upon this.

Clemens seems about that time to have left Alexandria, since we read that he
made some stay at Jerusalem with Alexander, who a little while after was Bishop
of that City, and to whom he dedicated his Book entitled, The Ecclesiastical
Rule against those who follow the Opinions of the Jews. Whilst he staid there,
he was very useful to that Church, as it appears by a Letter of Alexander to
the Church of Antioch, of which Clemens was the Bearer, Eusebius. l. 6. p. 11.
wherein that Bishop says, That he was a Man of great Virtue, as the Church of
Antioch knew, and would know it again; and that being at Jerusalem, by an
Effect of God's Providence, he had confirmed and increased the Church of God
there.

From Antioch, Clemens returned to Alexandria, where it is not known how long he
lived. All that can be said, is, that he survived Pantoenus at least some
Years; and that he was not Old when he writ his Stromata, since he himself
Strom. l. 1. p. 274.
says, That he made them, to serve him as a Collection in his Old Age, when his
Memory should fail.

History is silent concerning his Death; but we may believe that his Memory was
Blessed at Alexandria, if we consider those words of the Bishop of Jerusalem,
whom I have just now mentioned, who, in a Letter to Origin, says, Eusebius. ib. c.
14.
That they both acknowledged for Fathers those Blessed Men who went out of this
Life before them, and with whom they should be in a short time, viz. the
Blessed Pantoenus, and Pious Clemens, of whom he had received great Help.

Amongst the many Works which Clemens wrote, there are but Three extant that
are considerable. The First is, An Exhortation to the Heathens: Wherein he
confutes their Religion, and endeavors to persuade them to embrace
Christianity. The Second is entitled Paedagogus: In which he directs the
Manners of Young Men, and gives them some Rules to live like Christians;
wherein he mixes some Maxims extremely severe, and very remote from our
Customs. The Third is, his Stromata, that is to say, Hangings; which he
entitled so, Ibid. l. 1. p. 276. l. 4. p. 476. and l. 7. p. 766.
because of the Variety of Matters which he handles in it.

He shows what Conformity there is between several Opinions of the Heathen
Philosophers, and those of the Jews and Christians: He Censures what was Bad,
as he thinks, in the Heathen Philosophy; Defends and Explains the Christian
Religion; Refutes the Heretics; and shows every where a great Erudition. But
he observes little or no Order, as he himself says at the End of the Seventh
Book. He takes occasion from one thing to pass to another, without framing any
Plan of what he is to say, and without having any other Design but to collect
the most useful things he had learned by Study and Meditation.

His Style in this latter Work, is more harsh than in the two foregoing ones,
wherein, notwithstanding, there is more Affectation, than Elegancy and
Neatness. He pretends that he had some Reason for it: But there are Two great
Inconveniences in such a Method. The First is, That for want of Order, not only
the strength of the most solid Proofs is not perceived, but also an Author
confounds himself, often repeats the same thing, and heaps up an infinite
number of Arguments which prove nothing. The Second is, That a Carelessness of
Style, often makes what one says unintelligible; for it is not only Elegancy,
but Clearness, that is wanting in it.

Now, an Affected Obscurity in Difficult Matters, as those are which Clemens
treats of, is so much the more to blame; because it is no easy thing to be
understood, even in Matters that are clear of themselves, if One does not
express himself neatly. As we are to speak, only to be understood; so there is
nothing can excuse an Author for not speaking clearly, but an absolute
impossibility of expressing himself better. And indeed we are apt to believe,
that those who have an Obscure Style, have no clear Head; and that they speak
so, because they do not apprehend things more clearly than they speak 'em.

It Is true, that the affected Ornaments of a far-fetch't Eloquence ought to be
despised; but Clearness cannot be reckoned among those Ornaments.

It must needs be confessed, that there are but few Fathers, whose Writings are
not liable to the same Observation with those of Clemens. Most of 'em, whilst
they excuse themselves for not being Eloquent, do whatever they can to appear
so after their way, as may be seen by a thousand high strokes, and strained
Metaphorical Expressions, which their Writings are full of; and we see but few,
who thought that the greatest care a Writer should take, consists in exciting
in the Minds of his Reader clear Idea's of what he says, by using Words without
any Equivocation.

There is extant besides, an Homily of Clemens, entitled, What Rich Man is
Saved? It was printed in Greek and Latin, by Combefis, at Paris 1672; and at
Oxford, 1683: With several other Greek and Latin Fragments. Those who took care
of the German Edition (at Colen, 1688.) of Clemens's Works, should have printed
it with the rest of his Works; it would have made their Edition more
considerable, which otherwise is not much more valuable, as those that use it
will find. They have only followed the Paris Edition, 1641, without adding any
thing to it, except New Faults.

There is, at the End of the Volume, An Abridgment of the Doctrine of
Theodotus, and of the Doctrine called Eastern in Valentinus's time. The
greatest part of it is only an Interpretation of some Places of the Holy
Scripture, which some think to have been taken out of the Eighth Book of
Clemens Alexandrinus's Hypotyposes, (as I have already observed.) Lib. 6. cap.
14.
Eusebius tells us, that he had interpreted the Holy Scripture after a
compendious manner in that Work, without omitting (says he) the Disputed
Writings, as St. Jude 's, and the other Catholic Epistles, St. Barnabas 's
Epistle; St. Peter 's Apocalypsis; and the Epistle to the Hebrews, which he
assures to he St. Paul 's, etc.

God. CIX.
Photius, who had seen that Work, says also, that the Design of it was, to
Explain the Holy Scripture; but he accuses the Author of maintaining, That
Matter is Eternal; That the different Forms which it receives, are imparted to
it by virtue of I know not what Decrees; That the Son is in the number of
Things Created; That there has been Many Worlds before Adam; That Eve was
formed out of him, after another manner than what the Scripture relates; That
the Angels having been conversant with some Women, had Children by them; That
the Reason was not made Flesh, though it seemed so to Men; That there are Two
Reasons of the Father, the least whereof appeared to Men, and was made Flesh.

If we had those Books still, we might perhaps more clearly know that they are
only some Platonic Doctrines, some of which Photius did not well understand,
because of the Equivocation of the Terms; and the other were not in Clemens's
time looked upon as Impieties, as they have been since Systems of Divinity were
compiled among Christians.

In the first Ages, when no Systems were entertained in the Schools, and
explained to the Youth, as they are now, every one Philosophized, as well as he
could, upon Matters of Speculation; and explained Speculative Doctrines
according to the Philosophy he had learned: Except some Opinions, which either
because they had made a great Noise, or for some other Reasons were condemned
by the Bishops, they were very free in their Thoughts. If any one doubted of
it, he might convince himself of the Truth thereof, by the strange Opinions
which have been entertained by some of the Fathers, who were rank't among the
Orthodox, and for which they were not censured in their time. One may see many
Examples of it in the Fourth Chapter of Dallaeus's Book de Vsu Patrum; which,
notwithstanding the Panegyrists of Antiquity, will always be accounted a Good
Book by those that know Antiquity. Such was, for Example, St. Hilary's Opinion,
who believed that Christ felt no Pain when he was scourged.

But Photius suspects that the Heretics corrupted the Works of Clemens; and
Ruffinus had the same Thoughts, as it appears by his Apology for Origin, which
is in the IV. Tome of St. Jerome's Works. Yet if there was no more in them, than
what Photius cites, there would be no reason to believe that they were much
corrupted, though it cannot be absolutely denied. The reason of it is, that
whatever that learned Patriarch may say, those very Opinions, if well
understood, are to be found in the other Works of Clemens, and are agreeable to
the Principles which he follows every where.

1. He approves Strom. l. 5. p. 599.
clearly enough the Opinion of Heraclitus, who believed that the Matter of the
World is Eternal; and he shows that he esteems him, for having distinguished the
Matter of the World from its Form; the first whereof is immutable, and the
second subject to change.

2. As to the Reasons why Matter receives certain Forms, Photius knew no more
of it than Clemens.

3. If Clemens had said that the Supreme Reason was Created ((...),) one ought
to observe, that See the Life of Eusebius.
to Create, Produce, Beget, signify the fame thing in Plato; and that it does
not follow from thence, that he believed the Reason was Begotten or Produced
out of Nothing.

4. It was Plato's Opinion, That the Form of the World does altogether change
in a certain number of Years; and that many such Changes happened before the
Revolution in which we are, began. One may read his Politicus concerning this,
wherein he maintains, that the Revolution of all the Stars, must cause an
Universal Change in the World. Thus, in his Opinion, what was said, That Men
had their Original from the Earth; happened in the Beginning of a Revolution.
Page 175.
It Is what (as he goes on) our Predecessors said, who lived at the End of the
foregoing Change, and were near the following, as well as those who were born
in the Beginning of this. The Stoics believed also the same thing, as Strom.
l. 5. p. 549.
Clemens reports, who does not seem to dislike their Opinion, and fails not to
confirm it by the Authority of Plato.

5. The same Philosopher thought that the First Men were Androgynes, and had
Four Feet, Two Heads, and so with the other Members, but that God divided them
afterward into Two, (as may be seen in his Feast.) Some Rabbis have said
something like it, and grounded their Opinion upon this, That it is said, That
God Vid. Breschith Rabba, in sect. VIII.
Created Man Male and Female. This seems to be only an ingenious Fancy, not an
Opinion which those Authors did seriously entertain. It may be, that Clemens
took some delight in making some Reflections upon Plato's Opinion, with so much
the greater freedom, because, perhaps, he believed, as his Disciple Origin,
that there was abundance of Allegories in the Beginning of Genesis.

6. As for the Angels that were in Love with Women, Clemens Pad. l. 3. p. 222.
Strom. l. 3. p. 450. l. 5. p. 550.
says, in more than one place, that he thought the same thing; and most of the
Ancient Greek and Latin Fathers have explained so the Beginning of the Sixth
Chapter of Genesis. Photius cannot blame that Opinion, without censuring, at
the same time, all Antiquity; but it is his Custom to treat ill the most Ancient
Authors, when he finds in them some Opinions that were not received in his
time, or some Expressions which he does not think energick enough to express
such Thoughts as, in his judgment the Ancients should have had; because 'twould
have been an Heresy, not to think so, in his time.

7. The Incarnation being a Mystery which we do not comprehend, and Clemens's
Style not being, for the most part, very clear, he might have expressed himself
so as not to be well understood by Photius; which is so much the more easy to
believe, because that Patriarch commonly explains the Thoughts of the Ancients
agreeably to the Opinions and Ways of Speaking of his time.

The Writings of the Ancients are full of Equivocal Terms, which they use in
such a sense, as they had no more in the following Ages. Terms which signifying
Spiritual and Obscure Things, and very compounded Idea's, must necessarily be
difficult to understand; because they took no care to Define them, and make an
exact Enumeration of the Idea's which they fixed to them. Perhaps it did not so
much as come into their Mind, that this was very necessary to be well
understood. At least One may observe, that when they endeavor to explain
themselves about those Obscure Matters, they use Terms as Obscure as the
foregoing.

8. One may observe an Example of it, concerning the Two Reasons mentioned by
Photius. Those who will carefully read the Second Tome of Origin upon St. John,
may observe, that he establishes a First or Supreme Reason, which is Christ's
Divinity; and many Inferior Reasons, which are made according to the Image of
the Precedent. It might be said, in that sense, that None but the Second
Reasons became Flesh, because none but they animate Humane Bodies; for although
the First was united to the Humane Nature of Christ, it did not supply the
Place of a Soul.

So that although Clemens had said what Photius pretends, yet he could not be
charged with Heresy upon that account: But he did not say so, as appears by
the Passage which Photius himself quotes out of him: The Son is called Reason,
as well as the Paternal Reason; but it is not that which was made Flesh: Nor is
it the Paternal Reason neither, but a Divine Power (which is, as it were, an
Emanation of that same Reason) which became Spirit ((...)) and is come into the
Hearts of Men. By those Terms, The Son, we must not understand the Only
Begotten Son of God, but the Man; as it clearly appears by what follows.
Clemens, perhaps, called him only (...); because he might have before clearly
enough denoted whom he meant by that word. Photius, who did not well apprehend
the Meaning of that Passage, might easily mistake the Series of that Discourse:
As the Jesuit Schottus, otherwise a Learned Man, was altogether mistaken in
the Latin Translation of those Words, as one may presently observe, by
comparing it with mine.

Lastly, We have a Latin Work In Bibliot. Pat.
ascribed to Clemens, and entitled, Commentariola in Primam Canonicam S.
Petri, in Epistolam Judae, and Tres Epistolas S. Joannis Apostoli. There is
indeed several things in those Notes, which do not differ from Clemens's
Doctrine; but we cannot know whether they are an entire Translation of part of
the Hypotypoles, or only some Extracts corrected according to the Interpreter's
mind.

It Is well known, that when the Latins translated some Greek Writings, they
were very apt to make such Alterations in them as they thought fit, (as
Ruffinus has been upbraided with it.) Nay, there is no need to look so far for
Examples of that ill Custom, since we have one with relation to part of
Clemens's Hypotyposes, of which Cassiodorus speaks thus: Lib. 1. de Just. Div.
Script.
Clemens Alexandrinus explained, in the Athenian Language, the Canonical
Epistles, that is, the First Epistle of St. Peter, the First and Second of St.
John, and that of St. James, wherein there is many subtle things; but also some
unwarily spoken, which we have caused to be so translated into Latin, as to
take away what might give scandal; that his Doctrine thus purified, might be
more safely read. Vbi multa quidem subtiliter sed aliqua incaute loquutus est,
quae nos ita transferri fecimus in Latinum, ut exclusis quibusdam offendiculis,
purificata doctrina ejus securior posset hauriri.

Clemens also composed Five Tracts, which are lost: 1. The Rule or Canon of the
Church, against those that followed the Opinions of the Jews. 2. Concerning
Easter. 3. Concerning III Speaking. 4. Some Disputes about Fasting. 5. An
Exhortation to Patience, directed to the Neophytes.

Having thus made some Particular Remarks upon every one of his Works, and some
General Ones on that Occasion; what remains, is only to take notice of Three
Things.

1. He often cites Suppositious Writings, as if they had been acknowledged by
every Body, as one may observe by that Place of St. Peter's Preaching, which I
have alleged; and another of St. Paul, which seems to have been taken out of
the Book of his Travels; upon which Eusebius and St. Jerome may be consulted.

Which may make one believe, that the great Reading of that Learned Man, gave
him no refined Palate. One need not be a great Master of this sort of Learning,
to perceive, that what he cites out of them, does not suit the Style of the
Apostles, and is not agreeable to their Principles. It cannot be doubted, but
that they believed, that the God whom the Jews worshipped, was the True God,
Maker of Heaven and Earth, and Father of Our Lord Jesus Christ, who says so
himself.

Nor can the Jews be charged with having served the Angels, the Month, and the
Moon, with any probability; and the Reason which the Author of St. Peter's
Preaching gives for it, is so ridiculous, that none but such as will be
deceived, can be deceived by it. It Is true, that some Huet. in Orig. T. 2. p.
212.
Learned Men have otherwise explained that Accusation which that Author lays
upon them; but one may easily see, by what follows, that he understood it in a
more simple manner than they do.

However, that Book being manifestly Supposititious, Ibid. T. 14. in Joan.
Origin dealt much more prudently than his Master; since being to refute
Heracleon a Valentinian, who drew some Consequences against the Old Testament,
from those pretended words of St. Peter, he begins with saying, That one should
enquire whether that Book is truly St. Peter 's? whether it is not
Supposititious? whether it be not Interpolated? and then he shows, that the
Jews worshipped the Creator of the World.

But it is the Custom of many Ancients, to make use of all sorts of Arguments
and Books, to bring over Men to their Opinions. If any should use the same
Method now, they would presently be accused of Simplicity, or want of Honesty:
But every Age has its Customs. However, it is certain, that the Rules of Good
Sense have always been the same; and it is not less certain, that Great Learning
makes not a Man more Exact and Judicious, according to that famous Maxim of
Heraclitus, which Clemens cites some where, (...).

2. Clemens is wont to explain the Scripture Allegorically, without making his
Allegories look likely, as 'twas the ordinary Custom of the Ancients. One may
see what Huetius says concerning the Origin of Allegories, in his Origeniana,
lib. 2. chap. 2. qu. 14. But if one carefully reads what Clemens says of it in
the Fifth Book of his Stromata, where he does somewhat enlarge upon this
Matter, one may easily perceive, that that which chiefly induced him to believe
that the Holy Scripture is full of them, is, because the Egyptians and the
Greeks were wont to hide the Secrets of their Philosophy under some Emblems and
Fables. It Is true, that the Jews had the same Thoughts, even before the Coming
of Christ. It Is true also, that in the remotest Times, that Nation expressed
her self not only by clear Words, but also by symbolical Actions, as it appears
by several places of the Old Testament. However, there is not one Example, by
which it appears, that they designed to hide the Doctrines of the Jewish
Religion; which, on the contrary, they express very clearly, and after a simple
manner.

There are but some few places of the History of the Beginning of the World,
which may be turned into Allegories with some likelihood; and only with respect
to some Circumstances, which do not at all concern the Essential part of the
History, nor belong to the Worship of God, Good Manners, or the Doctrines,
without which they could not serve God, nor be Good Men, according to the Law.
In all the rest of the History of the Hebrews, there is nothing that looks like
an Allegory, every thing in it is simple and easy to be understood; which
makes one believe, that those that wrote it, were no Allegorists; and that if
there is any thing in the most ancient Events of the History of Mankind, that
may be understood that way, the Hebrews took that turn, only because Tradition,
or the Memoirs upon which they wrote, were so worded.

It does not appear, that they designed to Philosophize, or teach any Doctrines
of Natural Philosophy, either clearly or obscurely; and those Places wherein
Philo endeavors to find some Philosophical Doctrines, are so violently
wrested, that any Body may see the Sacred Writers never thought of what he
makes them say.

Indeed, if we reflect upon the Origin of Allegories among the Heathens, we
shall find that they came out somewhat late: And when the Philosophers
undertook to give an Account of the Fables, or ancient Histories of the Gods,
that is, to save the Honor of their most ancient Historians, who were accused
of having absurd Notions of so excellent Natures, as those of the Gods were; so
they were obliged to make those, whom those scandalous Histories offended,
believe, that the Poets meant quite another thing than what they said, and from
thence comes the word Allegory. For a Heracl. Pont. Alleg. Hom. page 412. Ed.
Amstelod. Westenianae.
Discourse, which taken in its proper sense ((...)) signifies quite another
thing than what is meant by it, is properly an Allegory. Thus some Histories
were turned into Allegories among the Grecians, lest they should believe that
the Gods of Greece had been only Vicious Men.

The Jews, who had never applied themselves to the Study of Critics and
Philosophy, were no sooner among the Greeks, but they admired that Method of
Explaining Religion; and made use of it to explain the Sacred Writings after a
manner more agreeable to the Taste of the Heathens; as may be seen by the
Example of Philo, who explains all the Old Testament after the Platonic way.
Nay, they went so far, as to explain Allegorically not only such Places as
might have some difficulty, but also the clearest and plainest, without so much
as excepting those which concern Manners, and which being literally understood,
contain a most excellent sense for the Conduct of one's Life; nor the plainest
Histories, and from which one may draw most useful Instructions, without
looking for any other sense, but that which offers it self to the Mind. Philo
is full of such like Examples.

The Christians imitated the Jews afterward, and were not contented to explain
the Old Testament Allegorically: They did the same with respect to the New,
though neither Christ nor his Apostles have proposed any Doctrine after an
Emblematick manner, but what they explained clearly enough, to save the trouble
of seeking its meaning, by having recourse to Allegories, in which there is no
certainty. For it must be confessed, that according to that Method, if the Sacred
Writers had said quite another thing than what they said, or, if you will, the
quite contrary; yet one might find as good a sense in them, as those, that will
try it, will presently observe. Hence it is, that the Pagans themselves, who
had been the Contrivers of that strange way of interpreting ancient Books,
could not abide that the Christians should make use of it; as the Christians in
their turn laughed, at the strained Interpretations of the Heathens. Nay, some
Pagans, more quick-sighted than others, thought they were ridiculous.
Wherefore, the Christians and the Jews would have done much better to keep
close to the Letter, than to use so uncertain a Method to defend the Holy
Scripture against the Pagans.

3. Although several Opinions of Clemens Alexandrinus may justly be accounted
Erroneous; yet if we consider every particular Opinion which he held, and is no
more admitted amongst us, we shall observe, That some of them are looked upon as
Erroneous, only because the contrary Opinions have been introduced, I know not
how, into most Schools, though Men have had no New Light concerning them. As
soon as a Famous Man has maintained a Doctrine, without being contradicted by
Men of an Equal Reputation or Authority, or even without any Opposition; such a
Doctrine takes root so well, that Men use themselves, by degrees, to look upon
the contrary Opinion as an Error, without knowing why.

Opinions are often introduced as Customs, which owe their Beginning to the
Example of some few Persons, whom others imitate. They so affect Men's Mind,
that any other besides those which he follows, seem to him ridiculous. A
Garment which is not commonly seen, seems Extravagant, though it was
Fashionable in former Times: The same may be said of an Opinion which is grown
old, it is disliked, because no Body follows it at present. For Example, Paed.
l. 1. p. 101.
Clemens believed, that Angels had Bodies: And it was also the Opinion of Vid.
Origeniana Huetii, l. 2. c. 2, 5.
Origin, and most of the Fathers. Yet that Opinion is branded as an Error,
without any Reason: For although the Scripture teaches us, that Spirits have
neither Flesh nor Bones, and that Angels are Intelligences; yet it says no
where, that they are not clothed with Bodies. There has been no Revelation
since upon that Matter, nor have we found out any convincing Reason that can
persuade us the contrary. Notwithstanding, it is commonly said that it is an
Error, because the Schoolmen have said so. I confess, that the Fathers, who
have ascribed Bodies to the Angels, have alleged no evident Reason to prove
it: But all that could be concluded from thence, is, that They affirmed a thing
which They knew not no more than We.

Thus we should have suspended our Judgment, and affirmed nothing concerning a
Subject which was equally unknown to us. Such a Suspension suited not with the
Dogmaticks, who can hardly confess that they know not all things; and believe
it is the part of a Witty Man, to Determine himself speedily upon all sorts of
Questions. Indeed, without this, it is not possible to frame a System as
complete as it ought to be, to be accounted a Learned Man: And it would be a
shameful thing to confess, that a Thousand Questions might be asked upon every
Article; which could not be answered, if one should say nothing but what one
knows. The same Principle may be applied to several other Doctrines of Clemens;
concerning which, 'twere better ingeniously to confess one's Ignorance, than to
condemn some Opinions about which we are in the dark.

Hence it is, that notwithstanding those Opinions, some Ancients have bestowed
many Encomium's upon him. Hist. Eccl. l. 6. c. 13.
Eusebius says, That his Books are full of Useful Learning. Cat. Scrip. Eccles.
and in Ep. ad Magnum Orat. T. 2.
St. Jerome says, That he has writ very fine Works, full of Learning and
Eloquence, which he took out of the Holy Scripture, and Profane Authors. And
elsewhere, Clemens (says he) Priest of the Church of Alexandria, the most
Learned of our Authors, in my judgment, wrote Eight Books of Stromata; as many
of Hypotyposes; a Book against the Pagans; and Three Volumes, entitled the
Paedagouge. Is there any thing in his Books, but what is full of Learning, and
taken from the bottom of Philosophy? Cyril of Alexandria affirms, in his VIth.
and VIIth. Books against Julian, That he was a Man of wonderful Learning, who
dived to the bottom of Greek Learning, with such an Exactness as few before him
could attain to. Haeret. Fab. l. 1. c. 6.
Theodoret says, That that Holy Man surpassed all others by the extent of his
Learning.

What has been said, is sufficient to have a Notion of the Doctrine of
Clemens; I shall only add a word concerning the Cologne Edition, 1688. Two
sorts of Faults may be observed in it, whereof some are Common to it, with many
other Editions of the Books of the Ancients; and the other are Particular to it.

As to the First, one may observe, That the Editions wherein there is no
Distinctions and Paragraphs, want a thing which seems not to be of great moment
in it self, but yet does very much conduce to the understanding of an Author.
The Beginning of a new Section, is as it were an Advertisement to the Reader,
who only by casting his Eye upon a Page, sees how many Arguments, and what
Matter it contains. Else the want of distinct Paragraphs does somewhat confound
the Mind, and forces the Reader to be more attentive to understand what he
reads, and to look for a Connection where there is none, or confound two
Arguments. Now, one should always endeavor to lessen, as much as can be, the
Trouble of the Reader, who takes Pains enough to understand the Things
themselves.

Paragraphs produce, in some respects, the same effect as the Distinction of
Chapters; which cannot be neglected, without breeding Confusion. It Is true, the
Ancients often neglected to divide their Books or Discourses into certain
Parts: But if it be well considered, the want of Order in many of their
Writings, was the true cause of that Neglect. 'Twas easier to pass from one
subject to another, by reason of some small Connection that was between 'em, or
confusedly to write down a crowd of Thoughts, than to reduce 'em into a certain
Order: as it would be more easy to heap up the Materials of a House, than to
give every one of them its due place. Those who desire some Examples of Books
without Order, need only cast their Eyes upon Seneca or Tertullian, who both
said, with a great deal of Enthusiasm, whatever came into their Mind, scarce
ever having a Notion of any Order, which they designed to follow. If those
Authors were printed so as to divide their Reasonings by Paragraphs, they might
be much better understood.

The other Fault, which those that take care of the Editions of Ancient
Authors, often commit, is, that they do not distinguish in a different
Character the Quotations from the Words of the Author: From whence it comes to
pass, that those who do not read them attentively, ascribe to one Author what
belongs to another. This Dr. Cave has done, in his English Life of Clemens
Alexandrinus, which has been very useful to me in the writing of this.
Clemens, in the abovementioned place, concerning the Philosophy which he
approves, cites Socrates, who, in Phaedo, applies to the Philosophers this
Proverb, which was used in the Mysteries, There are many who carry the Thyrsus,
but few that are truly filled with the Spirit of Bacchus. P. 380. Ed. Ficin.
Socrates adds immediately after, These, as I believe, are only those who
applied themselves to Philosophy as they ought to do, OF the Number whereof I
have endeavored to be, as much as I could, etc. The whole Passage being in
Roman Characters, Dr. Cave thought that those words, Of the Number whereof,
etc. were Clemens's; whereas they are Socrates's as may be seen in Plato, and
even by reading the rest of the Page wherein Clemens cites 'em. If the whole
Passage had been printed in Italick Letters, Dr. Cave would not have mistaken
it: Which ought not to seem strange to those who know, that to write the Life
of an Author, collected out of several places, so many things must be heeded
all at once, that it is a hard matter not to confound one's self.

Besides, by distinguishing the Matters by Paragraphs, and Quotations by
different Characters, those who have read an Author, may more easily find out
again such places as they want; which is no small Advantage.

As to the Edition of Cologne, there are Three Index's; the first, of the
Places cited by Clemens; the second, of the Contents; and a third, of Greek
Words and Phrases, either worthy of Observation, or such as that Author has
used in a particular Sense. If those Index's were Complete and Correct, they
would be undoubtedly very useful; but they are neither: There is a great many
Faults in the Numbers, and the Sense of Clemens is often misrepresented in
them. That Passage of Job, There is none but is polluted, is referred to the
25th. Chapter of his Book, whereas it is in the 14th. There is in the Index,
Peccato originali infectae omnium animae and corpora, 468. d. On the contrary,
Clemens confutes that Opinion in that place; but Sylburgus, or another who made
that Index, in all probability, thought of what Clemens should have said, in
his judgment, rather than what he did really say.

There is besides a Fourth Index before the Book, which contains a Catalogue of
the Authors cited by Clemens; but the Pages in which they are cited being not
marked, it is altogether useless.

'Twere to be wished, for the Commonwealth of Learning, not only that Kings were
Philosophers, or Philosophers Kings; but also, that Printers were Learned Men,
or Learned Men Printers; and that we might see again the Age of the Manutius's
and Stephens, to give us good Editions of the Writings of the Ancients, and
make that Study more Easy, which is Difficult enough of it self, without
increasing the Difficulties by our own Negligence.

The Life OF EUSEBIUS, Bishop of Caesarea.
THE same Reason that induced me to give the Public the Life of Clemens
Alexandrinus, obliges me to give an Account of that of Eusebius of Caesarea. It
will be so much the more Curious to those who cannot consult the Originals,
because there happened more Remarkable Things in Eusebius his time, than in
Clemens's, and because the former was in a Higher Station than the latter.

Eusebius was born in Palestine, and perhaps at Caesarea; at least Ap. Socrat.
l. 5. c. 8.
he seems to intimate, in the beginning of his Letter to the Christians of that
City, That he was Instructed in the Christian Faith, and Baptized there. He was
Born toward the End of the Third Century, though we cannot find exactly the
Year of his Birth. He began early to apply himself to Learning, especially to
Divinity, as it sufficiently appears in his Writings, wherein may be seen, that
he had carefully read all sorts of Profane Authors; and that all the Writings
of the Christians who wrote in Greek, and those of the Latin, that were
translated into that Tongue, were known to him. He had the advantage of the
curious Library which the Martyr Pamphilius, his particular Friend, had
collected at Caesarea. Its affirmed, Hieron. Epist. ad Chron. and Heliod.
Antipater Bostrencis in Council. Nicaen. II. Act. 5.
That being become Bishop of this City, he entreated Constantine (who passed
through it, and who had bid him ask some Favor in behalf of his Church, that
he would permit him to make a search into all the Public Registers, to extract
the Names of all the Martyrs, and the Time of their Death. However, he has
committed Faults enough in Chronology, as Joseph Scaliger, and a great many
other Learned Men have observed; and especially in relation to Martyrs, as Mr.
Dodwel has lately shown in his Dissertation de Paucitate Martyrum. But it was
no easy Matter to escape these kind of Faults in such a Work as his
Ecclesiastical History, which was the first of that sort that was ever
undertaken; the Primitive Christians taking no care of the History of their
Times.

Eusebius is commonly called the Son of Pamphilius: Whether he was really his
Son, as some affirm; or his Nephew, according to the Opinion of others; or in
fine, as most believe, by reason of the great Friendship between them. This
Pamphilius was of Beryte in Phoenicia, and Priest of Caesarea; he held Origen's
Opinions, for whom he wrote an Apology, of which there remains to us but a part
of it in Latin, among the Works of Origin and St. Jerome. He made it in Prison,
where he was put in the Year 307, under the Emperor Decius, and where Eusebius
did not forsake him. He could write only the five first Books, having been
hindered from finishing Phot. Cod. CXVIII.
this Work, by the Death which he sustered for the Gospel, two years after he
had been thrown into Prison. But Eusebius finished it, in adding thereto a
sixth Book, and published it after his Death. Pamphilius had for Master Id.
Cod. CXIX.
Pierius Priest of Alexandria, who likewise suffered Martyrdom, and was also of
Origen's Opinion, whose Assiduity and Eloquence he imitated; which got him the
Name of Second Origin. It Is not amiss here to relate the Judgment which Photius
makes of his Works:

He advances several things (says he) remote from those which are at present
established in the Church, perhaps according to the Custom of the Ancients: Yet
he speaks after a pious manner of the Father and the Son, excepting that he
assures us, that they have Two Essences ((...),) and Two Natures ((...),) using
the words Essence and Nature, as it appears by what precedes, and follows in
this Passage, for that of Hypostasis, and not in the sense of the Arians. But
he speaks of the Holy Spirit in a dangerous and impious manner; for he
attributes to him a Glory inferior to that of the Father and the Son. -- Yet
he was Catechist of Alexandria, under the Patriarch Theonas, who was
Consecrated in the Year 282.

Pamphilius being dead, as has been said, Eusebius retired to Paulinus Bishop
of Tire, his Friend; where he was Witness, as he tells us L. 8. c. 6.
himself, of several Martyrdoms, the History of which he has left us, in his
Book of the Martyrs of Palestine. From thence he went into Egypt, where he
found the Persecution yet more violent, and where he was thrown into Prison.
But this Persecution having ceased, he was set at liberty, and a while after
elected Bishop of Caesarea, after the Death of Agapius. It Is not certainly
known in what Year this Election was made, but at least, he was already Bishop,
when Paulinus dedicated a stately Church in the City of Tire, which he had
built there, which was in the Year 316, in the 10th. of Year Constantine's
Reign; for it was the Custom of the Christians, Ant. Pagi Diss. Hypat. par. 2.
c. 3. n. 12, 13.
as well as of the Pagans, to Consecrate their Churches in the time of the
Decennales of the Emperors, or of any other Solemnity. Eusebius recites a fine
Oration, spoken at this Dedication; L. 10. c. 4.
and though he does not say, that it was he himself that spoke it, yet the
Style of this Oration, and the modest Manner after which he mentions him that
made it, gives one reason to believe, that he has suppressed his Name only
through Modesty. One might imagine, that he was then but Priest, were it not
manifest, that it was very rare, in that Age, for Priests to speak in public,
where there were Bishops present.

It was about this time, that Alexander Bishop of Alexandria had a bickering
with one of his Priests named Arius, touching the Divinity of Jesus Christ,
which gave birth to Arianism. Eusebius having had a great share in the Disputes
of Arianism, we cannot recount his Life, without writing the History of it: And
to know wherein consisted these Disputes, we must necessarily ascend higher,
and enquire what Principles of Philosophy were in use in that time among the
Christians, and how they came to be introduced. This is so necessary a
Digression, as will appear in the Sequel, that it is to be supposed the Reader
must approve of it.

There was never any Philosopher that made himself so Famous as Plato, and no
Books read with more Pleasure than his, whether from the Subjects, and lofty
Thoughts found therein, or by reason of the Elegancy and Nobleness of their
Style, which never any Philosopher could equalize. He was born under the Reign
of Artaxerxes, sirnam'd Long-hand, Four hundred twenty six Years before Christ,
and died aged Fourscore Years, in the time when Philip of Macedon made himself
to be feared of all Greece. Alexander his Son having made himself Master of
Asia, which his Successors divided among them; one may reasonably believe, that
the Sciences of the Greeks there, established themselves with their Empire, and
their Customs.

Ptolemy the Son of Lagus, one of Alexander's Successors, undertook to collect
into his Library of Alexandria all the Books he could find, and drew thither
several Learned Men of Greece. Vid. Hody de LXX. Int. c. 9.
He was Learned himself, and omitted nothing, for the inspiring into his Sons
the love of Learning.

His Son Philadelphus marched, in this respect, in his Father's steps, as all
those who have any knowledge in the History of this Prince, do well know. The
Syrian Monarchs seem likewise to have cultivated the Sciences; seeing that
Suidas relates, that Euphorion of Chalcis in Eubea, Poet and Philosopher, was
Library Keeper of Antiochus the Great, Two hundred Years before our Savior's
time. Plato was too famous then, and his Works in too great esteem, not to have
had place in these Libraries. One may also believe, that Asia, which was then
full of Greek Philosophers, wanted not Platonists.

Among the Opinions of Plato, there are not any more remarkable, than those
which he had touching the Divinity, the Praeexistence and Immortality of the
Soul. He held that there is only One Supreme, Spiritual and Invisible God, whom
he calls The Being, or, The Being it Self, The Very Being, The Father and Cause
of all Beings, etc. He placed under this Supreme God an Inferior Being, which
he calls Reason ((...)) The Director of Things Present and Future, the Creator
of the Universe, etc. In fine, he acknowledged a Third Being, which he calls
the Spirit or Soul of the World. He added, That the First was the Father of the
Second, and the Second had produced the Third. We may consult hereupon his
Timoeus, to which we should adjoyn his II, and VI. Letter. In the second, which
is directed to Dionysius, who complained, that Plato had not sufficiently
instructed him touching the First Nature, or First Being, this Philopher thus
expresses himself: Every thing is about the King of all things, and every thing
is because of Him: He is the cause of all good things: The things of the Second
Order, are about the Second: the things of the Third are about the Third. He
calls this a Riddle; forbids Dionysius to speak of it before the Ignorant;
enjoins him to burn his Letter as soon as he has read it, and protests he will
never write again of this Matter. In his Sixth Letter, he enjoins Hermias,
Erastus and Corisca to swear, in taking to witness, The God who is the Director
of things present and future; and the Lord, who is the Father of this Director,
and of this Cause. The Obscurity which he affects in this occasion, lest he
should draw on him the Rage of the Superstitious Populace, hinders us from
understanding what he would say; unless we collate together all the Passages
wherein he speaks of the Divinity, and consult his Interpreters and Disciples.
Here Is how one of 'em Hierocles de Provid. apud Photium. Cod. CCLI.
explains his Master's meaning: Plato believed, That God the Creator sustains
the Visible and Invisible World, which was made out of Nothing; That his Will
suffices to make Beings exist; That by the Conjunction of a Corporal Nature,
and another Incorporeal, he has made a most Perfect World, which is Double and
Single at the same time, in which one may distinguish the High, the Middle, and
the Low; That he calls High, the Heavenly Beings, and the Gods; the Middle, the
Aetherial Intelligences, and Good Demons, which are the Interpreters and
Messengers in what relates to the Good of Men; The Low, the Terrestrial
Intelligences, and the Souls of Men, or Men Immortal; That the Superior Beings
govern the Inferior; but, that God, who is the Creator and Father of 'em,
Reigns over All; and, That this Paternal Empire is nothing else but his
Providence, by which he gives to every sort of Being what belongs to it. -- We
may hereby understand what Plato calls the things of the Second and Third
Order. We shall not busy our selves in seeking from whom Plato might have
learned this Doctrine, whether from the Chaldeans, or from the Old Testament,
as some of the Fathers have believed.

Although Plato's Disciples are agreed with their Master, in respect of these
Three Principles; yet there is to be found in their Writings diverse Enquiries
touching their Nature, and diverse Ways of Speaking, which are not to be seen in
those of this Philosopher, who never dared to write all he thought on this
Subject. Plotinus particularly, who lived in the Beginning of the Third
Century, has treated of thein in several places of his Praesertim En. V. l. 1.
a. c. 3. ad 8.
Enneades, but especially in the Book which is entitled, Of the Three
Hypostases, which are the Three Principles of all things. Here Is whereunto his
Doctrine may be reduced.

1st. There are Three Principles: the Being, the Spirit, or the Reason of the
Being; and the Soul of the World, which is the Reason of the Spirit. There is
also, according to him, a Reason of the Soul of the World; but it is Reason
obscure ((...).)

2dly. The Being has begotten the Reason; not by an Act of his Will, or by a
Decree, but by his Nature; as Fire begets Heat, or as the Sun produces Light.
The Reason has also begotten the Soul of the World, and perhaps termed Father
in this respect.

3dly. These Three Hypostases differ in Number, although there be a most strict
Union between them; which makes, that one may say at the same time, that they
are different, and that they are the same thing. The First is more Excellent
than the Second, and the Second more Excellent than the Third.

4thly. The Terms which Plotinus uses, are worth observing.

1. He calls not only Essence ((...)) after Plato, the Nature of the Being, of
the Reason, and of the Soul of the World; but he likewise uses the word ((...))
Matter; and says, that the Matter of the one is more perfect than that of the
other. Having pretended that Parmenides had said before Plato, that there are
Three Principles; he expresses himself in these terms; Parmenides holds
likewise the Opinion of the Three Natures.

2. It Is observable, that the word Hypostasis ((...)) signifies two things,
with this Philosopher; first, the Existence of a thing, considered
abstractedly; and in the second place, the thing it self which exists, as it is
taken in the Title of this Book, of the Three Hypostases, which are the
Principles of all things, (...), and in the Title of the Third Book of the same
Enneade, of Intelligent Beings.

3. As he says, That the Reason is the Father of the Soul; he says likewise,
That the Reason begets and makes the Soul. For we must observe, that in this
matter, Plato and his Disciples use indifferently the words, to Beget, to Make,
to Produce, etc. and that Begotten and Made, is the same thing here, in their
mouths. We need only read Plato's Timoeus.

4. Plotinus says, That the Father and the Reason are one and the same thing
((...)) because they coexist and forsake not one another. He says, that the
Supreme Being, and whose Essence consists in Existing, in a manner wholly
particular, has begotten by his Nature the Spirit; and that he cannot be
without him, no more than a Luminous Body can be without Light.

The Spirit on his part, whose Essence consists in having perpetually a lively
conception of the Being, cannot exist ((...)) without this. They cannot be
separated ((...)) one from the other, because there is nothing between them, as
there is nothing between the Spirit and the Soul.

5. He says, That that which is begotten, resembles ((...)) its Cause, just as
the Light resembles the Sun.

6. He says, That the Spirit is the Image ((...)) of the Being, as the Soul is
the Image of the Spirit.

St. Cyril of Alexandria, in his Eighth Book against Julian, cites a Passage of
Porphyry, out of his Third Book of the Philosophical History, whence it
appears, that the Platonists disputed among themselves, whether there could be
more than Three Hypostases in the Divinity: Plato (says Porphyry) has taught,
That the Divine Essence may extend it self even to Three Hypostases; to wit,
the Supreme Divinity, or the Good it self; after it, the Creator, who is the
Second; and the Soul of the World, which is the Third, etc. But there are Men
who pretend, that we must not reckon the very Good, or Good it self, among the
things which he has produced; and that being of a perfect Simplicity, and
incapable of Accidents, he has Communion with nothing: so that it is by the
Spirit that we must begin to reckon the Trinity (...).

However, Porphyry's Master, whom we have already cited, seems Ennead. V. lib.
8. cap. 12.
to say, that there may be more than Three Hypostases, in these remarkable
words:

God has begotten an excellent Being, and has brought forth all things in Him.
This Production has cost him no Pain; for pleasing himself in what he begat,
and finding his Productions good, he has retained them all in Himself,
tempering his Brightness and theirs. Those which have there remained being more
excellent, there is only his only Son ((...)) Jupiter who has appeared without,
by whom, as by the Supreme Son of the Divinity, and as in an Image, one may see
what the Father is, and the Brethren which have remained in the Father, (...).

The Platonists likewise used, in speaking of the Union which they conceived to
be between the different Orders of their Divinities, the terms of ((...)) of
different Essence; and ((...)) Co-essential. By the first, they denote the
different sorts of Beings; and by the second, what is of the same kind. Here Is
a Proof taken out of Jamblichus, in his Book of the Mysteries of the Egyptians,
Sect. 1. chapter 19. He speaks of the Manner after which the Superior Gods are
united to the Inferior, according to the Platonic Philosophy: The Divinities
(says he) of the Second Order turning themselves toward the First Intellectual
Beings, and the First giving to the Second the same Essence ((...)) and the
same Power; this entertains their Union. What we call Union in the things which
are of different Kinds ((...)) as the Soul and the Body, or which are diverse
Species ((...)) as Material things, or which are otherwise divided; this Union,
I say, happens to 'em from Superior things, and destroys it self at a certain
time. But the more we elevate our selves to Superior things, and to the
Identity ((...)) of the First Beings, and in regard of the Species, and in
regard of the Essence; when we ascend from the Parts to the Whole, the more we
acknowledge the Union ((...)) which is Eternal, and the more we see what is the
Union properly so called, and the Model whereon all the rest have been formed,
and that it has about it, and in it self, the Diversity ((...)) and the
Multiplicity.

Porphyry had asked, Whether a kind of Being is formed ((...)) mixed with our
Soul and Divine Inspiration, which made the Prophets able to foresee the
Future.. 3. c. 21.
Jamblichus answered, No: and gives this Reason for it; which is, That when One
thing is formed of Two, the Whole is of one and the same Species, of the same
Nature, and Co-essential ((...),) and that this does not happen in the case
proposed by Porphyry.

One may see hereby the Subtilty with which the Platonists handled these
Matters, and the Terms they used. But we should take notice of two things, in
endeavoring to form to our selves an Idea of their Sentiments. The first, That
we must not always suppose they had a clear and distinct Knowledge of what they
would say themselves, and that they saw all the Consequences of their Opinions:
So that it would be perhaps in vain, to endeavor to draw out of their Writings
a clear Idea of their Sentiment, touching the Three Principles of all things;
because, perhaps they themselves conceived not clearly what they said; at
least, their Style is so different on this occasion, from that which is
observable in the Passages of their Writings, wherein they speak of things
which they may know, that it is apparent, they contained not the subject of the
Three Principles, like an infinite of others, which they have known how to
express in an even, clear and elegant manner.

The Second thing we should observe, is, That in so difficult a Matter, we must
content our selves with what they say positively, without attempting to draw
farfetch'd Consequences from their Principles, which we cannot understand but
by halves; otherwise we are in danger of attributing to them such Notions as
they never had. Neither must we endeavor to reconcile, in so abstracted a
Subject, the Contradictions which seem to appear in their Doctrine; nor
conclude, that they could not mean things in such a manner, because then they
must contradict themselves. It was the Custom of these Philosophers, to affect
certain apparent Contradictions, in using the same Terms in diverse Senses.
Besides, its obvious enough to imagine, that they may have sometimes
contradicted themselves, on a Subject whereof they had no distinct Idea.

These two Remarks were necessary, to prevent the Questions which might be
offered on these Matters; and to show, that in writing the History of these
Doctrines, one should keep wholly to Facts, and the Terms of the Authors we
treat of.

A Second Opinion of the Platonists, which has made a great noise in the World,
is that of the Prae-existence of Souls, in places above the Moon, See Plato's
Timoens.
of the Faults which they may have there committed; of their banishments from
these happy Abodes, to come to inhabit in differently disposed Bodies,
according to the different Merits of these Souls; in fine, of their return into
places whence they drew their Original. We shall not trouble our selves to
explain this Doctrine, because it belongs not to the Relation in hand; having
only made mention of it, for a particular Reason which will appear in its place.

The Kings of Egypt and Syria, having carried the Sciences of the Greeks into
Asia, the Jews, who were in great numbers in these two Kingdoms, and who were
obliged to converse with them, learned of them their Opinions; and made no
difficulty of embracing those, which did not appear to 'em contrary to their
Religion. Their Books containing nothing inconsistent with sundry of the
Platonic Doctrines; they believed therefore that these Doctrines might be
true, and received them so much the more easily, in that they thought they
might hereby defend their Religion against the Pagans, and make them relish it
the better. Plato every where affirmed the Unity of the Supreme Being, yet
without denying that there are other Beings which may be called Gods, to wit,
the Angels, which is agreeable to the Expressions of the Old Testament. And
this is apparently one of the things which made the Jews better relish the
Opinions of this Philosopher.

But we should give some particular Proofs of this: The Author of the Book of
the Wisdom of Solomon, was plainly of the Opinion of the Prae-existence of
Souls, as it appears from these words of chap. 8. ver. 19, 20. For I was a
witty Child, and had a good Spirit: Yea, rather, being good, I came into a Body
undefiled. The same Author has used the word ((...)) Reason, in some places,
where Plato would have used it, were he to have said the same thing. Thus in
chap. 18. ver. 15, 16. in speaking of the Deliverer of the Israelites, he says,
Thy Almighty Reason descended from Heaven, out of thy Royal Throne, as a fierce
Man of War into the midst of a Land of Destruction, and brought thine unfeigned
Commandment, as a sharp Sword; and standing up, filled all things with Death;
and it touched the Heaven, but it stood upon the Earth. In chap. 9. ver. 1. he
says, That God has made all things by his Reason. It cannot be alleged, that
he has been the only one of the Jews that has spoke in this manner; seeing that
Philo, who lived a little while after Our Savior, is full of the like
Expressions; as several of the Learned have observed. Its known that this
Author has so well imitated Plato, that he has been called the Jewish Plato. He
believed that there was One only Supreme God, as all the rest of the Jews do,
whom he calls TO ON, the Being through Excellency. But he further acknowledged
a Divine Nature, which he calls LOGOS, the Reason; as well as Plato: And
another whom he calls likewise the Soul of the World. His Writings are so full
of these manner of speaking, that there is no nead of offering Vid. Defens.
Fid. Nicen.. 1. c. 1. and. 16, 17.
Instances.

The Jews were of these Opinions when Our Savior and his Apostles came into
the World: And this is perhaps the Reason why we find, accordingly as it has
been observed by several learned Men, several Platonic Phrases in the New
Testament, especially in the Gospel of St. John.

It Is well known, that Amelius the Platonic Philosopher, having read the
beginning of this Gospel, remarked, that this Apostle spoke like Plato. In
effect, this Philosopher might have said, according to his Principles, The
Reason was in the beginning with God. She it is who has made all things, who
is Life, and the Light of Men, etc. We find several Passages in Philo, like to
this. This Jewish Philosopher calls Reason, the Priest, the Mediator between
God and Men, the Eldest Son of God, etc. Wherein it is observable, that he
mixes his Jewish Notions, with the manners of Speaking of Plato. He has
likewise used in one place, the term Paraclete De Vit. Mos. p. 521. Edit. Genesis
Graeco-Lat.
, Intercessor, in speaking of the Reason: It was necessary (said he) that the
High Priest who is to offer Sacrifices to the Father of the World, should have
for Intercessor -- him of his Sons, whose Virtue is the most perfect, for to
obtain the Pardon of Sins, and abundant Graces. He had said, Quod Det. Pot.
Insid. p. 137.
that Moses denoted by the Manna, and by the Rock of the Desert, the same
Reason: The Prophet (says he) calls elsewhere this Rock, Manna; a name which
signifies the same thing, to wit, the Divine Reason, the most Ancient of
Beings. Our Savior Christ calls himself, Paraclete, in St. John, chap. 14.16.
when he promises his Apostles to send them another Paraclete. He says likewise,
that he is the True Bread, in opposition to the Manna, which could be no more
than a Shadow of it. And St. Paul says, that the Stone of the Desert, was
Christ, 1 Cor. 10.4. These ways of speaking which are found, in St. John, to be
the True Bread, the True Vine; and which denote, that he to whom they are
applied, is able to produce in Men's Spirits as much Efficacy, in another kind
of things, as the Bread and Wine produce in the Body: These ways of speaking, I
say, were particular to the Platonists, as has been observed elsewhere.

We might give several other Examples of Platonic Phrases, to be met with in
the New Testament: But it will be sufficient to remark here, That the Apostles
apply to our Savior Christ, Passages of the Old Testament, which Philo had
applied to the Reason; and that this Jewish Philosopher has given to this same
Reason most of the Titles which the Apostles have given to Jesus Christ.

The Pagans, who had then embraced the Gospel, and who were in some measure
versed in the Heathen Philosophy, remarking this resemblance of Terms,
persuaded themselves that the Apostles believed the same things, in respect of
these Matters, as the Platonic Jews and Pagans. And this seems to be that
which drew several Philosophers of this Sect into the Christian Religion, and
given such a great Esteem to the Primitive Christians, for Plato. Justin
Martyr, in his First Apology, says, Page 48. Edit. Col. An. 1686.
That Jesus Christ was known in part by Socrates; for the Reason was and is
still the same which is in every Man: It is She that has foretold the Future by
the Prophets; and who being become subject to the same Infirmities as we, has
instructed us by her self. -- He says moreover, Page 51. ^^^sd. edit.
That the Opinions of Plato, are not remote from those of Jesus Christ. And
this has made likewise St. Augustine to say, That if the ancient Platonists
were such as they were described, and were to rise again, they would freely
embrace Christianity, in changing De. Ver. Rel. c. 3. Vid. and Ep. LVI.
some few Words and Opinions, -- which most of the late Platonists, and those
of his time had done: Paucis mutatis verbis atque sententiis, Christiani
fierent, sicut plerique recentiorum, nostrorumque temporum Platonici fecerunt.

Tertullian affirms, in his Apology, Cap. XXL
That when the Christians say, That God has made the Universe by his Word, by
his Reason, and by his Power; they speak only after the sage Heathens, who tell
us, That God has made the World by his ((...)) Word, or Reason.

Clemens Alexandrinus has likewise believed that Plato held the Doctrine of the
Blessed Trinity (as I have observed in the Life of that Father.)

Origin against Celsus, does not deny, but that Plato spoke the truth, in
speaking of Lib. 6. page 270, and 280.
God, and of his Son: He only maintains, that he did not make such a just Use
as he ought of his Knowledge. He does not say, that the Foundation of the
Christian Doctrine is different in this from that of Plato, but that this
Philosopher had learned it from the Jews.

Constantine, in his Harangue to the Cap. IX.
Saints, after having praised Plato, in that he was the first Philosopher who
brought Men to the Contemplation of Intellectual Things, thus goes on: He has
spoken of a First God, who is above all Essences, wherein he has done well. He
has likewise submitted to him a Second, and has distinguished Two Essences in
number, ((...),) the Perfection of the one being the same as that of the other;
and the Essence of the Second God taking his Existence from the First. For it
is He who is the Author and the Director of all things, being Above All. He
that is after him, having executed his Orders, attributes to Him, as to the
Supreme Cause, the Production of the Universe. There is then but One, to speak
properly, who takes care to provider for All, to wit, the Reason, who is God,
and who has set all things in their Order. This Reason being God, is likewise
the Son of God; for who can call (...) otherwise; without committing a great
Fault? He that is the Father of all things, is justly said to be the Father of
his own proper Reason. HITHERTO (...) TO HAS SPOKE LIKE A WISE MAN. ((...),)
but he has varied from the Truth, in introducing a multiplicity of Gods, and in
giving to each of 'em his Form. -- We might cite several other such like
Passages, whereby one might see, that several among the Fathers of the first
three Centuries, have believed that the Opinion of Plato, and that of the
Apostles, was the same.

If we consider, that the Question here, is about things of which we have
naturally no Idea; and which is even Incomprehensible, supposing Revelation;
and of which one can only speak in metaphorical and improper Language, it will
then appear to us no wonder, if since the Apostles times, there have arose
several Opinions on this Subject. Thus the Ebionites are charged to have denied
the Pre-existence of Our Savior's Divinity, and to have held that he was only
a mere Man. These Ebionites have remained a long time, seeing that not only
Justin Martyr and St. Irenaeus do mention them, but St. Jerome seems to take
notice that they were in his time. It Is affirmed, That Artemon, under the
Emperor Severus, and Paulus Samosatenus Bishop of Antioch, under the Emperor
Aurelius, maintained the same Opinions.

Cerinthus, on the contrary, held the Pre-existence of the Reason, which he
called the Christ; and affirmed, that she had descended on Jesus, in the form
of a Dove, when he was Baptized; and that she ascended up into Heaven, when he
was Crucified. It is indeed very difficult to affirm, that this was precisely
the Opinions of these Heretics, because we have nothing remaining to us of
them, and that we cannot fully trust those who speak of 'em only with
detestation, seeing it might easily be, that their great Zeal has hindered them
from well comprehending them. And this is a Remark which we must make, in
respect of all the Ancient Heretics, whose Opinions are denoted to us only
from the Writings of their Adversaries.

About the Middle of the Third Century, Sabellius of Ptolemais in Lybia,
produced a new Opinion, which was condemned in Egypt, and afterward every
where. He was charged with Synod. Constable. ap. Theod. l. 5. c. 9. Damas is apud
eundem, c. 11.
confounding the Hypostases, and for denying the Properties which distinguish
the Father, the Son, and Holy Ghost; and for having said, That the Father is
the same as the Son. Whereas Plato and his Followers reckoned Three Numerical
Essences. It seems, that Sabellius would acknowledge but One, whom he called
the Father, the Son, or Holy Spirit, in diverse regards. It Is said that some
others had maintained the same thing before and after him, as Noet and Beryllus
of Botsra.

A while after Sabellius, appeared Paulus Samosatenus Bishop of Antioch, who
was (as we have said) of the Ebionites Sentiment, in relation to our Savior's
Divinity. Although the word (...) had been used in the Platonic Philosophy, to
signify what is of the same kind, as has been observed already, (and as may be
seen in Bull's Defense of the Nicene Council,. 2. chap. 1.) Yet the Council
which met at Antioch, to Condemn Paul of Samosotia, Condemned likewise this
Term. But its hard to find in what sense it was taken, because the Acts of this
Council are lost, and we know nothing of them, but by what St. Athanasius, Vid.
Bull. Def. Fid. Nic.. 2. c. 1. and. 10, and seq.
and some others extremely interessed to uphold this word, have said in their
Disputes against the Arians. If we believe them, the Fathers of the Council of
Antioch said, that the Father and the Son were not consubstantial, in the same
sense wherein we say that two pieces of Money made of the same Metal are
consubstantial, because that these pieces suppose a pre-existent Matter, of
which they have been formed: Whereas the Father and the Son do not suppose the
like substance. Paulus Samosatenus said, that if the Son had not been made God,
we must suppose that he is of the same kind of Essence as that of the Father;
and that thus there must have been an anterior substance to the one and to the
other, of which they must have been formed. St. Athanasius assures us, In lib.
de Syn. Arim. and Seleu. Tom. 1. p. 919, and seq.
that the term of Homoousios was condemned at Antioch, in as much only as it
might include the Idea of a Matter anterior to things which we call
Coessentials.

These are the chief Heretical Opinions touching the Divinity of Jesus Christ,
which appeared before the Council of Nice. As for the Fathers, which are
respected as Orthodox, they have not varied from the Expressions of the
Platonists; and as these have sometimes said, that the Reason is different from
the Supreme Being; and sometimes, that they are both one. The Fathers have
expressed themselves in the same terms. The Platonists have said, That the Father
could not be without the Son, nor the Son without the Father; as the Light
could not be without the Sun, nor the Sun without Light: And the Fathers have
said the same thing. Both one and the other have acknowledged that the Reason
has existed before the World, and that she has produced it; and as Plato speaks
in his Timaeus, and Plotinus in his Enneades, of the Generation of Reason, as
if the Good it self had produced it, to create and govern the World: So the
Fathers have said, that the Son has proceeded in some manner from the Father,
before the Creation of the World, to manifest himself to Men by his Production;
and that hence it is that the Scripture calls him the Son of God, and his
Firstborn.

Sometimes they say there was a time in which the Son was not; sometimes, that
he was from Everlasting as well as the Father; sometimes they affirm they are
Equal; and elsewhere they say the Father is Greatest. Some of them believe that
the Father and Son are two Hypostases, two Natures, two Essences, as appears
from the passage of Pierius, related by Cod. CXIX.
Photius; others deny it. To bring Instances of all this, would be too great an
Enlargement for this place; and there being enough to be seen in Bull's Book
which we have already cited.

If it be demanded at present, what Idea's they fixed to these Expressions; it
cannot be affirmed that they have been clear. First, Because whatever
Endeavors are used to understand what they say, a Man can get no distinct
Notion thereof. And, Secondly, Because they acknowledge themselves, that it is
a thing Incomprehensible. All that can be done on this occasion, is to relate
the Terms which they have used, to the end that it may be seen how they have
heretofore expressed themselves on this Matter. However, learned Men have given
themselves a great deal of trouble to explain the Passages of the Fathers who
lived before the Council of Nice, without considering, that all their
Explications are fruitless; seeing the Fathers, in acknowledging, that what
they said was Incomprehensible, acknowledged at the same time, that they fixed
no Idea on the Terms they used, unless such as were general and confused.

Had the Matter staid here, there had never been such great Disputes on the
Sentiments of the Ancients, touching this Mystery; seeing the Dispute does not
so much lie on the Terms they have used, as the Idea's they have fastened to
them, which cannot be reduced to any thing that is clear. Sometimes they use
Terms which seem perfectly to agree with those which have been used since; but
there is found in some other places of their Works, Expressions which seem to
overthrow what they had said; so that one cannot form any Notion of what they
thought.

Lactantius, for Example, answers thus to the Heathens, who asked the
Christians, how they said they acknowledged but One God, seeing they gave this
Name to the Father, and to the Son? Instit. l. 4. c. 29. p. 403. Ed. Oxon.
When we call the Father God, and the Son God, we do not say that each of them
is a different God: And we do not separate them; because the Father cannot be
without the Son, nor the Son separated from the Father: He cannot be called
Father, without his Son; nor the Son be begotten, without his Father. Seeing
then that the Father makes the Son, and that the Son is made, the one and the
other has the same Intellect, One only Spirit, and One only Substance; VNA
VTRIQVE MEN'S, VNVS SPIRITVS, VNA SVBSTANTIA. -- These are Words which seem to
be decisive; and had Lactantius held to these Expressions, he had never been
accused of Heterodoxy: But if he be questioned what he means by the word Vnus,
whether it be a Numerical Unity, or an Unity of Consent and Resemblance, he
will appear determined to this latter sense: Ib. p. 104.
When any one (says he) has a Son whom he dearly loves, and who dwells in the
House, and under the governing Power of his Father, although the Father grants
him the Name and Authority of a Master; yet, in the terms of Civilians, here is
but one House, and one Master. So this World is but one House belonging to God;
and the Son and the Father who inhabit the World, and who are of one Mind
(Vnanimes) are One only God; the One being as the Two, and the Two as the One.
And this ought not to appear strange, seeing the Son is in the Father; because
the Father loves the Son, and the Father is in the Son, by reason of his
faithful Resignation to his Father's Will; and that he does nothing, nor never
did do any thing, unless what the Father has willed, or commanded him. -- We
may read further, the 6th. Chap. of the 4th. Book, which begins thus; God, who
has conceived and produced all Things, before he began this curious Work of the
World, begat a Spirit Holy and Incorruptible, that he might call him his Son.
Although he has produced infinite others, whom we call Angels, for his
Ministry; yet he has vouchsafed to give the Name of Son to his Firstborn, who
is clothed with the Virtue and Majesty of his Father. -- That which is
particular in this, is, That though Lactantius says, That the Son is Coeternal
with the Father; yet he says, there was a time when he was not: L. 2. c. 9. in
Ed. Betuleii.
Sicut matter sine exemplo genuit auctorem suum; sic ineffabiliter Pater
genuisse credendus est Co-aeternum. De Matre natus est qui ante jam fuit; de
Patre qui aliquando non fuit. Hoc fides credat, intelligentia non requirat, ne
aut non inventum putet incredibile, aut repertum non credat singular. It Is
true, this Passage is not to be found in some Manuscripts; and that several
learned Men have fancied that some fly Heretic has corrupted Lactantius's
Works: But in other places, wherein all the Manuscripts do agree, Lactantius
expresses himself after the same manner: And it may be replied, with as much
likelihood, that it has been the Orthodox Revisors who have cut off what they
thought not fit to be made public.

Lactantius has been long since charged with Heterodoxy; but in this respect,
he has been no more faulty than other Fathers, who lived before the Council of
Nice, whose Expressions are as different as those of the Platonists, in matter
of the Trinity. And this has made Father Peteau and Mr. Huet to charge them
with favoring the Arian Sentiments; whilst other learned Men have maintained
that they have been far from them. Each of them cites his Passages; which
examined apart, seem to decide for him: But when one comes to compare these
Passages with one another, it cannot be comprehended how the same Persons could
speak so differently. In this comparison, their Expressions are found so
obscure, and so full of apparent Contradictions, or real ones, that a Man feels
himself obliged to believe that the Fathers had done a great deal better in
keeping themselves to the Terms of the Apostles; and to have acknowledged, that
they understood them not, than to throw themselves into such Labyrinths, by
endeavoring to explain them.

To show further, That the Expressions of the Fathers are only fit to produce
confused Notions, and such as are contrary to those which all Christians at
this day hold; we need only read Tertullian, who having said, in his Apology,
chap. 21. That the Nature of Reason is Spiritual; adds, Hunc ex Deo prolatum
didicimus, and prolatione Generatum, and idciro Filium, and Deum dictum ex
unitate substantiae, nam and Deus Spiritus est. But what means Prolatione
Genitus? The Terms of Unity of Substance, may signify, not only of the same
Substance in Number, but moreover, of a like Substance, that is to say,
spiritually and equally perfect. And what he adds, seems to favor this last
sense; Etiam cum radius ex sole porrigitur, portio ex summa, sed Sol erit in
radio, quia Solis est radius; nec separatur substantia, sed extenditur. The
Substance of a Ray, after what manner soever we conceive it, is not the same in
Number as that of the Sun: And Tertullian says, that it is the same of the Son;
Ita de Spiritu Spiritus, and de Deo Deus; Thus a Spirit is born of a Spirit,
and a God of a God. Vt Lumen de lumine accenditur, manet integra, and indefecta
materiae matrix, etsi plures inde traduces qualitatum mutueris; As when we
light one Torch by another, the Light which has lighted the other, remains
entire, and without being wasted, although we light several Torches, who have
the same qualities. Ita and quod de Deo profectum est, Deus est, and Dei Filius
and unus ambo. Ita de Spiritu Spiritus, and de Deo Deus modulo alternum numerum
gradu, non statu fecit, and a matrice non recessit, sed excessit; So what
proceeds from God, is God, and Son of God, and both are but one; so the Spirit
which is born of a Spirit, and the God who is born of a God, makes Two, in
respect of Degree, but not in respect of his State; he has not been separated
from the Womb, or from his Original, but is gone out of it.

These Words of Tertullian do not appear at first sight agreeable with Arius's
Opinion; but at most, they contain nothing that is clear; for one might have
demanded of Tertullian, whether by this Prolation he speaks of, the Reason has
existed as Light from a Torch, lighted by another Torch, exists as soon as it
is lighted? Should he allow it, he might have been told, that to speak
strictly, there must have been Two Gods; seeing that, in fine, two Spirits,
though exactly equal, and strictly united, are two Spirits. If this be so, the
second Spirit being not formed of the same Numerical Substance, as that of the
first, one might say with Arius, that he has been extracted from nothing; and
there would be in this regard, nothing but a Dispute about Words, between Arius
and Tertullian. But if it be answered for Tertullian, That his Comparison is
not good; it will be asked, Why he made use of a Comparison which may lead into
Error, especially having said before, that he was of Plato's Opinion touching
the Reason? If he meant, that the Father has produced in his proper Substance,
without multiplying it, a Modification, in respect of which, one may call the
Substance of the Father, Son; why does he say, Spiritus ex Spiritu, ex Deo,
Deus? For, to speak properly, the Father has produced neither a Spirit, nor a
God, but a new manner of Being in his proper Substance.

It is further to be observed, That this Comparison is not of Tertullian alone,
but of Justin Martyr, and a great number of Fathers besides, before and after
the Council of Nice; and that there is no Passage which appears of greater
force than that, yet the Equivocation of it is apparent.

The Fathers have likewise used the term Hypostasis, as well as the Platonists,
in two senses; sometimes for the Existence taken in an abstracted manner, and
sometimes for the thing it self, which exists. The Equivocation of this Term,
and that of the Words, One and Many, which (as has been showed) are taken
sometimes from the Unity, and the Plurality Specificials; and sometimes from
the Unity and Plurality Numericals, have caused great Controversies among the
Fathers, as diverse learned Men have Petavius, Curcellaeus, Huetius, etc.
observed. But it is sit we should take notice of one thing, which is, that
Bull, who has writ prolixly on this Matter, has not a word of the Numerical and
Specific Unity; without which, a Man cannot comprehend what the Fathers mean,
nor draw any Conclusions from them against the Heretics. Yet when they say
there are three Hypostases, or three Essences, or three Natures, he constantly
takes it as if they said, there are three Modifications in one only Numerical
Essence. He supposes, that the (...) Essence, and (...) Nature, signify
Manners of Existing of one Numerical Essence, only because that without this,
those who have thus spoken of it, would not have been Orthodox, or of the
Opinion at present received, which the Council must have approved of, seeing
otherwise it would not have been admitted as it is. He supposes, on the
contrary, for the same Reasons, that when the Fathers deny there are Three
Hypostases, they do not barely mean, that there are not Three Essences of
different Kinds, but that they are not Three in Number. But others will deny
there is any place, where the words Nature and Essence can be taken for what we
at this day call Personality, which is to say, for a Modification; and that it
appears from the Passages which he cites, that the Fathers held the Numerical
Unity.

And this was the Condition of the Christian Church, when the Quarrels of Arius
disturbed it. Whence may be seen, that it was no hard matter for the two
Parties to cite Authorities of the Ancients, whose Equivocal Expressions might
be interpreted in diverse senses. The Obscurity of the Subject, the vain
Subtilty of Humane Understanding, which would know every thing, the Desire of
appearing able, and the Passion which mingles it self in all Disputes, gave
Birth to these Controversies, which for a long time tore Christianity into
pieces.

Arius being a Priest of Alexandria, about the Year 318, undertook, as it
seems, to explain more clearly the Doctrine of the Divinity of Jesus Christ,
which had been till that time taught in the Christian Church, under the Veil of
those Terms which we have recited. He said, that to beget, in this subject, was
nothing else but to produce: whence he concluded, that the Divinity of Jesus
Christ had been extracted out of nothing by the Father. Here Is how he expresses
himself, in a Letter which he wrote to Eusebius Bishop of Nicomedia: Ap. Theod.
l. 1. c. 5.
We make profession to believe, that the Son is not without Generation, and
that he is not a part of that which is unbegotten, nor of any other
Pre-existent Matter whatever; but that by the Will and Council (of God) he has
been perfect God ((...),) before all Time and Ages; that he is his only Son,
and that he is not subject to change; that before he was begotten or created,
he was not. -- Arius was counted an able Sozom. l. 1. c. 15.
Logician, and was in good esteem with his Bishop Alexander; but speaking
freely his mind, he drew on him the harred of one Epiphan. in Haer. LXIX.
Melece. Bishop in Thebais, who had caused a Schism in Egypt, although he did
not much vary from the common Opinions, only because he would not receive into
Communion the Priests who had fallen in the Dioclesian Persecution, but after a
long Penance, and would have them for ever deprived of their Office.

One may see the History of this in St. Epiphanius, who accuses him for having
((...)) an affected Devotion, and taking up a particular way of living, to to
make himself admired by the People. Arius had moreover another Enemy, named
Alexander, and Surnamed Baucalas Philost. l. 1. c. 4.
, who was also an Associate Priest with him. He joined himself to Melece, to
complain to the Bishop of Alexandria, that Arius sowed a new Doctrine touching
the Divinity of our Savior Christ. He could the better spread his Opinions, in
that having a particular Church at Alexandria committed Epiph.
to his care, he preached there what he thought fit. He drew such a great
number of People into his Opinions, that there were Seven hundred Religious
Votaries who had embraced them, and consequently a greater number among the
Ordinary People. It Is said, that he was a Man of large Shape, of a severe
Countenance, yet of a very agreeable Conversation.

Sozom.
Alexander thought, that in a Matter wherein one might easily equivocate, it
were best to let the two Parties explain themselves, to the end it might
appear, that he had accorded them more by Persuasion than Force. He brought the
two Parties to a Conference, in demanding of them the Explication of a Passage
of Scripture, in the Presence of the Clergy of his Church: But neither one nor
the other of these Parties would yield, endeavoring only to vanquish. Arius
his Adversaries maintained, that the Son is of the same Essence ((...)) as the
Father, and that he is Eternal as he is; and Arius pretended that the
Generation denoted a Beginning. There was another Meeting called, as fruitless
as the first, in respect of the Dispute; but by which, it seems, Alexander, who
had before not any precise determined Sentiment on this Matter, was induced to
embrace the Opinion of Arius his Adversaries. He afterward commanded this
Priest to believe the same thing ((...)) and to abandon the opposite Opinion.

But it being seldom known that Men yield Obedience to these kind of
Injunctions, Arius remained still in the same Opinion, as well as several other
Bishops and Ecclesiastics who had approved of it. Alexander, angry at his not
being obeyed, Excommunicated him, with all those of his Party, and obliged him
to depart out of Alexandria. There were, among others, five Priests of this
City, and as many Deacons of the same Church, besides some Bishops of Egypt, as
Secondas and Theonas. To them were joined a great number of People, some of
which did in effect approve the Doctrine of Arius, and others thought that he
had been condemned with too high an hand, without entering into the Discussion
of the Controversy.

After this Severity, the two Parties endeavored to make their Opinions and
Conduct be approved by Letters which they sent every where. They exposed not
only their Reasons, but endeavored to render odious the opposite Party, by the
Consequences they drew from their Opinions and in attributing to them strange
Expressions. Some Bishops, as Eusebius of Nicomedia, exhorted Alexander to
reconcile himself with Arius, and others approved his Conduct, and advised him
not to receive him into his Communion till he retracted.

The Letters of Alexander and Arius are too considerable to be here omitted:
Here Is then the sum of them:

Arius wrote to Ap. Epiph. in Hes. LXIX. and Theoder. l. 1. c. 5.
Eusebius of Nicodemia, to entreat his Protection against Alexander, who had
excommunicated him, and driven him out of Alexandria, because he could not
grant him, that the Father and the Son are Coeternal; that the Son co-exists
with the Father without Generation, having been always begotten, and not
begotten at the same time, without letting it be imagined that the Father has
existed so much as one Moment before the Son. -- He added, That Eusebius Bishop
of Caesarea, Theodotus of Laodicea, Paulinus of Tire, Athanasius of Anazarba,
Gregory of Beryta, and Aetius of Lydea, condemning the Sentiments of Alexander,
had been likewise struck with an Anathema, as well as all the Eastern People
who were of the same Opinions, except Philogonius Bishop of Antioch, Hellanicus
of Tripoly, and Macarius of Jerusalem, one of which said, That the Son was an
Eructation, the other a Projection; and the other, that he was not begotten, no
more than the Father. -- To this Arius added the Explanation of his Opinion,
which we have already related.

The Bishop Sozom. II.
of Nicomedia having received this Letter, called a Synod of his Province of
Bythinia, which wrote Circular Letters to all the Eastern Bishops, to induce
them to receive Arius into Communion, as maintaining the Truth, and to engage
Alexander to do as much. We have still a Letter of Eusebius to Paulinus Bishop
of Tire, wherein he not only entreats Paulinus to intercede for Arius, but
wherein he exposes and defends his Sentiments with great clearness. He says, He
has never heard there were Two Beings without Generation, nor that the One has
been parted into Two; but that this single Being had begotten another, not of
his Substance, but perfectly like to him, although of a different Nature and
Power: That not only we cannot express by Words the Beginning of the Son, but
that is even Incomprehensible to those Intellectual Beings which are above Men,
as well as to us. -- To prove this, he cites the 8th. of the Proverbs, God the
Lord possessed me in the beginning of his ways, before is works of old: I was
set up from Everlasting, and he has begotten me before the mountains were
brought forth. He says, That we must not search in the Term of Begetting, any
other signification than that of Producing; because the Scripture does not only
use it in reference to the Son, but moreover in speaking of Creatures; as when
God says, I have begotten Children, and I have brought them up, but they have
rebelled against me.

But these Letters not having had the Success which Arius expected, he sent to
get leave of Paulinus, of Eusebius, and Patrophilus Bishop of Scythopolis, to
gather those who were of his Opinion into a Church, and to exercise among them
the Office of a Priest, as he was wont to do before, and as was done at
Alexandria. These Bishops having Convocated the other Bishops of Palestine,
granted him what he demanded, but ordered him however to remain subject to
Alexander, and to omit nothing to obtain Communion with him.

There is extant a Letter of Arius, directed to this Bishop, Apud Epiph. II.
and written from Nicomedia, which contains a Confession of Faith, according to
the Doctrine which Arius affirmed that Alexander himself had taught him;
wherein, after having denoted his Belief touching the Father, which includes
nothing Heterodox, he adds, That he has begotten his only Son before the times
Eternal; that it is by him, that he has made the World; that he has begotten
him, not only in Appearance, but in Reality; that this Son subsists by his own
Will; that he is unmovable; that he is a Creature of God that is perfect, and
not as other Creatures; that he is a Production, but not as other Productions:
Nor as Valentinian said, a Projection of the Father: Nor as Manes affirmed, a
Consubstantial Part of the Father: Nor as Sabellius called him, a Son Father
((...):) Nor as Hieracas spoke, a Lamp lighted by a Lamp, or a Torch divided
into two; that he did not exist before he was begotten, and became a Son; that
there are three Hypostases (that is to say, different Substances) the Father,
the Son, and the Holy Spirit; and that the Father is before the Son, although
the Son was created before all Ages. Arius adds, that Alexander had several
times preached this Doctrine in the Church, and refuted those who did not
receive it. This Letter is signed by Six Priests, Seven Deacons, and Three
Bishops, Secondus of Pentapolis, Theonas of Lybia, and Pistus whom the Arian
Bishops had Established at Alexandria.

Alexander Socrat. l. 1. c. 6.
wrote on his side Circular Letters, wherein he sharply censures Eusebius of
Nicomedia, in that he protected Arius, and recommended him to others. He joins
to this the Names of those who had been Excommunicated, and explains their
Doctrine, wherein he contents not himself to set down what we have seen in
Arius's his Letters, touching the Beginning which he attributes to the Son; he
says moreover, that this Priest maintained, that the Son is one of the
Creatures; that we cannot call him the Reason and Wisdom of the Father, but
improperly, seeing that he himself has been produced by the Reason and Wisdom
of God; that he is subject to change, as other Intelligent Creatures; that he
is of another Essence than God; that the Father is Incomprehensible to him, and
that he does not so much as know what his proper substance is; that he has been
made for our sakes, to serve God as an Instrument in Creating us; and that
without this, God had never begotten him. Alexander adds, That having assembled
near a hundred Bishops of Egypt and Lybia, they had Excommunicated Arius and
his Followers, by reason of his Opinions. -- He afterward comes to prove this,
and shows first. The Eternity of the Son, by this passage of St. John, In the
Beginning was the Reason. 2. That he cannot be reckoned among the Creatures;
because the Father says of him, in the 45th Psalm, My Heart has uttered
(eructavit) a good Word. 3. That he is not unlike the Essence of the Father, of
which he is the perfect Image, and the Splendour, and of whom he says, He that
has seen me, has seen the Father. 4. That we cannot say, There was a time in
which he was not, seeing that he is the Reason, and the Wisdom of the Father;
and that it will be absurd to say, There was a time in which the Father was
without Reason and Wisdom. 5. That he is not subject to change; because the
Scripture says, He is the same yesterday and to day. 6. That he was not made
because of us; seeing St. Paul says, That it is because of him, and by him,
that all things are. 7. That the Father is not Incomprehensible to the Son;
seeing he says, As the Father knows me, so I know the Father.

This Letter, wherein Eusebius of Nicomedia is extremely ill treated, shock't
this Bishop to the utmost Point; and having great access to the Court, because
Constanstine made then his abode at Nicomedia; this occasioned diverse Bishops
to be at his devotion: But he could not engage Alexander to forget what had
past, to speak no more of this Controversy, and to receive Arius into
Communion. The Quarrels every day grew hotter, and the People were seen to
range themselves, some taking Arius's side, others Alexander's; and the
Comedians being Gentiles, this gave them occasion to make a Sport of Christian
Religion on their Theaters.

Each side treated one another with the odious Name of Heretic, and
endeavored to show, that the Sentiments of the opposite Party overthrew the
Christian Religion; but it appears, that neither the one nor the other Party
could yet persuade the Emperor, seeing he wrote to Alexander and to Arius, a
long Letter, of which Hosius Bishop of Cordavia was the Bearer, wherein he
equally chides them: He says, he found that the Controversy Apud Eusebius. de
Vit. Constable. c. 64. and Seq. and Socrat. l. 1. c. 7.
had begun in this manner; That Alexander having demanded of each of his
Priests, what they thought of a Passage of Scripture, or rather, on an idle
sort of Question ((...),) Arius inconsiderately answered what he should not
have thought, or rather concealed, if he had thought it, That from thence had
come his Excommunication, and the Division of the People. And therefore he
exhorted them to a mutual pardoning of one anther, and to receive his Opinion,
which was, That it had been better not have troubled the Ecclesiastics with
this Question; and that those who were asked it, should have held their
Tongues, because the matter concerned what was equally incomprehensible to both
Parties, and which served only to raise Disturbances among the People. He could
not conceive, how for a Question of very small importance, and in which, if
they well understood one another, they would find they agreed in the main, they
should make such a bustle, and divide themselves in so scandalous a manner.

I do not say this (adds he) as if I would constrain you to think the same
thing on a most vain Question, or however you will please to call it. For one
may, without dishonouring the Assembly, and without breaking the Communion, be
in different Sentiments in such inconsiderable things. We have not all the same
Wills in all things, neither are we all of us of the same Temper of Body and
Humors.

The Emperor's Letter (says Socrates) gave them admirable Advice, and full of
Wisdom; but the Mischief was grown too great, and neither the Emperor's
Endeavors, nor his Authority who brought the Letter to Alexandria, could
appease it.

Alexander had taken care to write every where, to hinder the spreading of
Arius his Opinions. We have still Ap. Theod. l. 1. c. 4.
a long Letter which he wrote to the Bishop of Constantinople, wherein he
vehemently inveighs against the Arian Faction, and endeavors to render it
odious, in saying, That Arius maintained, That the Son was of a Nature capable
of Evil, as well as of Good, although it actually remained without Sin, and
that it was for this, that God had chosen him for his Eldest Son. He proves the
Eternity of the Son, and that he was not extracted from Nothing; because he was
in the Beginning, and that all things have been made by him. Yet he holds. That
the Son has been begotten, and that only the Father is without Generation,
although the Subsistence or Substance of the Son ((...)) Valesius renders that
word in that Letter sometimes Subsistentia, and sometimes Essentia and
Substantia, although it be in the same continued Discourse.
be incomprehensible to the Angels themselves, and that there is none but
melancholy Persons who can think of comprehending it. He afterward shows, That
the Manner after which Jesus Christ is the Son of God, is infinitely more
excellent than the Manner after which Men are; seeing he is so by his Nature,
we only by Adoption.

He accuses Arius with following the Doctrine of Ebion and Artemas, and for
having imitated Paul of Samosatia, Bishop of Antioch, whose Doctrine had been
embraced by Lucien (Martyr) who by reason of this, had separated himself from
the Communion of three following Bishops of this City. He joins to him three
Bishops of Syria, who seem to have been Paulinus, Eusebius and Theodotus, and
reproaches them with using Passages which relate to the Humiliation of Christ,
to attack his Divinity, and to have forgotten those which speak of the Glory of
his Nature, such as this is; The Father and I are one: Which the Lord says
(adds he) not to denote that he is the Father; nor to say, that two Natures, in
respect of the manner of existing ((...)) are but one; but because the Son is
of a Nature which exactly keeps the Paternal Resemblance, being by his Nature
like to him in all things, the unchangeable Image of his Father, and a Copy of
this Original. He afterward defends himself largely against the Consequence
which Arius drew from his Adversaries Sentiments, which consisted in accusing
them, for denying the Generation of the Son, in making him Eternal. -- He
affirmed, That there is an infinite difference between the Creation of the
World, and the Generation of the Son, although this last be wholly
Incomprehensible, and that he cannot explain it.

In the mean time, the Division increased so greatly among the People, that in
some places it came to a Sedition, wherein the very Statues Eusebius. de Vit.
Cons. l. 3. c. 4.
of the Emperor were thrown down, who appeared to favor the Arians, because he
would have 'em tolerated. There was moreover the Controversy about Easter, the
one denying that it should be celebrated at the same time as the Jewish, and
the others affirming it; but this Contest had not produced a Schism, as
Arianism had done.

Constantine, seeing that these Letters had been fruitless, thought there was
no better way to allay these Controversies, than to call a Council from all
Parts of the Roman Empire. It was perhaps Hosius who gave him this Advice, at
least if we may believe L. 1. c. 7.
Philostorgus, the Bishop of Alexandria being gone to Nicomedia, there
assembled some Bishops of his Opinion, with whom Hosius and he consults to find
out means to set up their Opinion, and to get that of Arius condemned; and a
little while after, the Emperor called a Council at Nice, a Town of Bythinia.
Eusebius. in Vit. Constable. l. 3. c. 6.
This was in the Year 325; and to the end that nothing might hinder the Bishops
from coming, Constantine took on himself the Charges of their Journey. The
Historians are not agreed in reference to the Number of 'em, some setting down
more than Three hundred, and Eustathius of Antioch, says there were 270. Theod.
l. 8. Constantin. 300. Socr. II. 9. Eusebius 252. Vit. Constable. l. 3. c. 9. S.
Athanas. 318.
others less. We must not wonder at this diversity, seeing there are few
Passages in Ecclesiastical History, wherein appears more Confusion and Neglect,
than in the History of this famous Council. And therefore have we been obliged
to extract what we are going to say, out of diverse Historians; because none of
the Ancients has been complete in his Relations. As to the diversity obserable
among the Historians on the same Facts, we have followed either the most
ancient, or those which have appeared most probable.

Eusebius, who was present at the Council, has past very lightly over the
Circumstances of this History apparently, lest he should either offend the
Arians, or the Orthodox. This Affair has never been since discoursed of with an
entire Dis-interests, Reports having been often related as certain Facts. In a
word, There has never any thing happened, whereunto one may apply with more
reason these words of Tacitus; Maxima quaeque ambigua sunt, dum alii quoquomodo
audita pro compertis habent, alii vera in contrarium vertunt, and gliscit
utrumque posteritati. Eusebius vaunts very much the Bishops which were here:
But Socrat. l. 7.
Sabinus, a Macedonian Bishop of Heraclea, a Town of Thrace, treats them as
Ignoramus's, in his Collection of Councils. There was likewise a great number
of Priests and Deacons who came in company with the Bishops.

The Council opened the 14th. of June, and therein were regulated several
things, which we shall not here take notice of, designing only to remark what
past in relation to the principal Question therein decided, to wit Arianism. As
soon as ever the Bishops were arrived, they made particular Assemblies without
any interruption, and sent for Arius Sozom. l. 7. and 19.
to them, to inform themselves of his Opinions. After they had heard from him
what he thought, some of 'em were for condemning all sorts of Novelties, and to
content themselves in speaking of the Son, in the same terms their Predecessors
had used; and others affirmed, that the Opinions of the Ancients were not to be
received without examining. There were seventeen Bishops (according to Ib. c.
20.
Sozomen) who favored Arius his new Explications, the chief of which were
Eusebius of Nicomedia, Eusebius of Caesarea, Menophantes of Ephesus,
Patrophilus of Scythopolis, Theognis of Nice, Narcissus of Neroniadas, Theonas
of Marmarica, and Secondus of Ptolemais. These Bishops drew up a Confession of
Faith Theodor. l. 1. c. 7. ex Athanasio.
according to their Sentiments: but they had no sooner read it in the Assembly,
but it was cried out upon as false; 'twas torn in pieces, and they were
reproached with it, as Persons who would (as they said) betray the Faith and
Godhead of Christ. A Letter of Eusebius of Nicodemia, wherein he expressed his
Thoughts, had the same lot.

Afterward, a Creed was undertaken to be made, wherein the Opinions contrary
to those of Arius were established. It was immediately observed, that the new
ways of of speaking which the Arians used, were to be condemned. That the Son
had been extracted from Nothing; That he was a Creature; That there was a time
wherein he was not, etc. And Scripture Phrases were to be used, such as these;
That the Son is Only-Begotten, the Reason, Power, Wisdom of the Father, the
Brightness of his Glory, and Character of his Power. The Arians having showed
that they were ready to admit a Confession expressed in these terms: the Orthodox
Bishops feared lest they should expound these terms in an ill sense. And
therefore they were for adding, That the Son is of the Substance of the Father;
because this is that which distinguishes the Son from the Creatures. Hereupon
the Arians were asked, whether they acknowledged, That the Son is not a
Creature, but the Power, the only Wisdom and Image of the Father; That he is
Eternal, and like to the Father in all things; in fine, True God. The Heterodox
having spoken among themselves, believed that these Expressions might very well
agree with the Notion they had of the Divinity of the Son, and denoted they
were ready to receive them.

In fine, It being observed, that Eusebius of Nicomedia, in the Letter which
was read, rejected the Term of Consubstantial ((...),) it was thought, that the
Orthodox Doctrine could not be better expressed, and all Equivocation excluded,
than in making use of it; and so much the rather, in that the Arians seemed to
be afraid of it. This Circumstance is owing to Lib. 3. de Pid. ad Grac. cap.
ult.
St. Ambrose, whose words are these; Auctor ipsorum Eusebius Nicomediae
Episcopus, Epistola sua prodidit, dicens; si verum inquit, Dei Filium increatum
dicimus, homoousion, Consubstantialem cum Patre incipimus consiteri. Haec cum
lecta esset Epistola in Concilio Nicoeno, hoc verbum in tractatu fidei
posuerunt Patres quod viderunt Adverfariis esse formidini, ut tanquam evaginato
ab ipfis gladio ipsum nefandae caput Haereseos amputarent.

The Orthodox conceived then their Sentiment, touching the Divinity of the Son,
in these terms; Socr. l. 1. c. 8.
We believe in one only Lord Jesus Christ, Son of God, only Son of the Father;
that is to say, of the Substance of the Father, God, born of God, Light of
Light, True God, born of the True God, begotten, not made, Consubstantial with
the Father.

The Arians in vain complained, that these words were not to be found in
Scripture: They were told, That those they were wont to use, were not there
neither, being wholly new; whereas it was near six-score Years since, that
several Bishops had used the word Consubstantial.

The Fathers of the Council, during this Time, were not so busied in
vanquishing the Arians, and in making several Regulations, which I shall here
omit, but that they remembered their private Grudges. Several Churchmen (says
L. 1. c. 17.
Sozomen) as if they had been assembled to prosecute their particular Affairs,
as it commonly happens, thought this a sit time to get those punished who had
offended them. Each of 'em presented Requests to the Emperor, wherein they
accused one or other, and signified the Wrong they had done them. This
happening every Day, the Emperor set one apart, in which they were every one
of 'em to bring his Grievance. The Day being come, the Emperor took all their
Requests, and caused them to be thrown into the Fire, and exhorted them to a
mutual Forgiveness, according to the Precepts of the Gospel. He afterward
enjoined them to labor in clearing up the Points of Faith, of which they were
to be Judges; and a fixed Day, wherein the Question of the Constubstantiality
should be decided.

The Day appointed Eusebius. Vit. Constable. l. 3. c. 10.
being come, Constantine convocated all the Bishops into an Hall of the Palace,
where he had caused Chairs to be set on both sides. The Bishops entered first,
and the Emperor came in afterward, and did not sit down at the Head of the
Assembly on a Gilded Seat which he caused to be there placed, till the Bishops,
by Signs had given him leave. Being set down, Eusebius of Caesarea, who was at
his Right Hand, harrangu'd him, and thanked him for the care he had taken to
preserve the Purity of the Catholic Faith. Constantine afterward began to
speak, and made a Discourse in Latin, wherein he represented, That he had no
greater Affliction, than the Divisions he observed among Christians; exhorting
the Bishops very earnestly to Peace. An Interpreter afterward turned the
Speech into Greek, for the Eastern Bishops understood not Latin.

Although it seems that Business was prepared in particular Assemblies
beforehand, yet there arose at first a great Controversy: And Constantine had
the patience to hear long Contests, wherein he exercised the Office of
Moderator, in endeavoring to accord those whose Sentiments or Expressions
appeared remote, in upholding the Arguments which seemed to him weak, and in
giving Praises to such who seemed to speak well. Eusebius of Caesarea long held
out against the Use which they Socrat. l. 1. c. 8. and Theod. l. 1. c. 12.
would make of the word Consubstantial. He offered another Confession of Faith,
wherein it was omitted, and wherein he called the Son barely, God born of God,
Light of Light, Life of Life, Only Son, Firstborn of all Creatures, Begotten
of his Father before all Worlds. The Emperor approved this Confession of Faith,
and exhorted the Fathers of the Synod to follow it, in adding thereto only the
word Consubstantial.

Afterward the Confession was read, which had been drawn up with this Word,
the Terms of which have been already recited. Anathema's were joined thereto,
against those who should use, on this Occasion, other Terms than those of the
Holy Scripture; which must be understood, with an Exception of those which the
Council thought fit to Consecrate.

This Proposition was particularly condemned, That the Son existed not before
he was begotten. Eusebius and others requested; That the Terms of the Symbol,
and Anathema's might be explained. 1. It was said, That the word Begotten, and
not Made, was used; because this last word expresses the Production of
Creatures, to which the Son has no likeness, being of a Substance far more
excellent than they, begotten by the Father in an incomprehensible manner. 2.
As for the word Consubstantial, it is proper to the Son, not in the sense
wherein it is taken, when we speak of Bodies, or Mortal Animals, the Son being
Consubstantial with the Father, neither by a Division of the Divine Substance,
of which he possesses a part, nor by any change of this same Substance. The
meaning of which is only this, That the Son has no Resemblance with the
Creatures which he has made; but, that he is in all things like to his Father,
by whom he has been begotten; or, That he is not of another Hypostasis, or
Substance, but of that of the Father. 3. Those were condemned, who said, That
the Son was not before he was born, seeing that he existed before his Corporal
Birth, and even before his Divine Generation, according to Constantine's
Argument: These words of Eusebius's Letter are not to be found but in
Theodorit, Socrates having retrenched them.
For before (said he) that he was actually Begotten, he was in Power in his
Father, in a manner Unbegotten, the Father having been always Father, as he is
always King and Savior, and all things in Power, being eternally in the same
Condition.

It will perhaps seem, that this is pure Arianism, and that this is to deny the
Eternity of the Son. But we must observe, that in the style of that time, to
Exist before the World, and to be Eternal, is the same thing; seeing, that to
prove his Eternity, this Passage is cited, Vid. Ep. Alexandri Ep. Al. supra
laudatam.
In the Beginning was the Word: And it sufficed to show, that he was Begotten
before there was any Time. So that we must not reject these words as
Supposititions, merely for this reason: And it is so ordinary to find hard
Expressions, in those who attempt to explain, in any sort, this
incomprehensible Mystery, that if one might hence judge of them, one would be
apt to declare them all Heretics; which is to say, to anathemamize the
greatest part of the Ancients.

Besides this, De. Deret. Nicaen. Tom. 1. page 251.
St. Athanasius, who openly treats Eusebius as an Arian, makes allusion to one
part of this Passage, and draws thence a Consequence which Eusebius, without
doubt, would not have owned, which is, That the Arians believed that the
Divinity of Jesus Christ did not exist before his Corporal Birth.

After these Explications Eusebius subscribed, as he himself testifies in the
Letter above recited, Athanas. ibid.
although he had refused it the day before. The long and formal Opposition
which he had made against the word Consubstantial, caused it to be suspected
that there was want of Sincerity in this Subscription. In fine, Arius and his
Party were anathematized, and all their Books condemned, and particularly a
Poem which Arius had entitled Thalia.

Most of the Arian Bishops subscribed, after Eusebius his Example, to this
Confession of Faith, and the Anathema's, after the Explication abovementioned.
Yet there were some of 'em who refused at first to sign, Socr. l. 1. c. 1.
the principal of which were Eusebius of Nicomedia, Theognis of Nice, Maris of
Calcedon, Theonas of Marmarica, and Secondus of Ptolemais. They were
immediately Excommunicated by the Council, and were to be sent afterward, as
well as Arius, into Exile, by Constantine. The Council wrote a Circular Letter
Ib. Socr. l. 1. c. 9.
to the Churches of Egypt, denoting to 'em in what sort they had carried
themselves in the business of Arius, and what had been ordered touching Melece
the Schismatical Bishop, and the Observation of Easter.

Constantine wrote also to the Church of Alexandria, to assure it, that after a
full and mature Examination, Arius had been condemned by the common Consent. He
greatly vaunted of the Moderation and Learning of the Bishops, making no
mention of their Quarrels, according to the Custom observed in Public Acts,
and such like Occasions, where every thing is suppressed which may give an ill
Opinion of the Decrees of these kinds of Assemblies.

In another Letter directed to the Bishops and Churches, he enjoins the Name of
Porphyrus to be given to Arius, and his Followers to be called Porphyrians.
This Porphyry was a famous Platonist, who had written against the Christian
Religion, and whose Books Constantine had caused to be burnt. Lucas Holstenius
has written his Life, which is to be found at the end of the Book Of the
Abstinence of Animals.

Constantine designed to declare hereby Arius an Enemy to the Christian
Religion, and not in any manner reproach him with being a Platonist, touching
the Trinity; seeing Constantine did not disapprove, as we have seen, the
Sentiments of Plato.

It Is true, the Arians have been upbraided with their too great application to
the reading of this Philosopher, and other Heathen Authors: Revera de Platonis
and Aristophanis (says Advers. Lucif. T. 2. p. 142. Ed. Gryph.
St. Jerome) in episcopatum allegentur: Quotus enim quisque est qui non apprime
in his eruditus sit? Accedit ad hoc quod Ariana hoeresis magis cum sapientia
seculi facit, and argumentationum rivos de Aristotelis fontibus mutuatur. Thus
the Orthodox and Heretics equally approved the Sentiments of Plato, each of
them apparently explaining them according to his Hypothesis.

Constantine further ordered, in the same Letter, to burn all Arius's Books; to
the end, that not only his pernicious Doctrine be destroyed, but that there
remain no monument of it to Posterity. -- He likewise declared, That if any one
concealed any of his Books, and did not bring them to be burnt, he should be
put to death after it had been proved upon him. -- There is moreover another
Letter of this Emperer, wherein he enjoins all Churches to celebrate Easter,
according to the Canons of the Council.

Eusebius and Theognis either actually believing that the Creed of the Council
might admit an Arian fence, Socrat. l. 1. c. 14.
or affrighted by the Emperor's Severity, offered to sign the Creed, but
refused to anathematize Arius, affirming that Opinions were attributed to him
which he had not. Eusebius so ordered, by the means of his Friends, about the
Emperor, Ex. Epist. Constable. ad Nicomed. ap. Theod. l. 1. c. 20.
that what he desired was granted him, which is to say, that they were
contented with his subscription to the Creed. Theognis and Maris did as much;
and the Letter of the Council to the Churches of Egypt mentions only Theonas
and Secondus who had absolutely stood out. Philostorgus likewise acknowledges
L. 1. c. 8, and 9.
that all the Arian Bishops subscribed except two; and reproaches the rest with
their insincerity, in that they had explained after the Arian fashion the Terms
of the Council, by the Advice of Constantia the Emperor's Sister. He adds, That
Secondus setting out to go into Exile, said to Eusebius; You have subscribed
Eusebius, that you might not be banished; but for my part, I believe what God
has revealed to me, which is, that you shall be carried into Exile, before the
year comes about.

Arius, if we believe the Orthodox, had not the Courage to resolve on
Banishment with Secondus and Theonas: He pretended a desire to be better
instructed, and sought an occasion of conferring with Athanasius Deacon of
Alexandria, Athanas. T. 1. p. 111.
whose Acts are still extant. If this Relation be true, one may conjecture,
that Arius designedly defended himself but ill, the better to yield to his
Adversaries Reasons, as he did, to obtain his Grace. He acknowledges, at the
end of this Conference, the Equality and Consubstantiality of the Son with the
Father; after which, he shows himself entirely reclaimed from his Error. The
Fathers of the Council received him, as a Penitent, without settling him in his
Employ; and the Emperor only forbad him to go to Alexandria. Euzoius and
Achillas, Colleagues of Arius, were also pardoned; and In Lucif. p. 145. T. 2.
St. Jerome adds to them eight Bishops, of which he names but three, and one
Priest, Eusebius of Nicomedia, Theognis of Nice, Saras Priest of Lybia, and
Eusebius Bishop of Caesarea. It appears from the sequel of the Dialogue, that
the Arians denied that the Bishops of their Party were reconciled at Nice; but
St. Jerome grounds himself on the Acts and Subscriptions of this Council, which
yet he had not then at hand, excusing himself from naming the four other
reconciled Bishops by a Rhetorical Figure, and reliqui, quos enumerare longum
est. There needed not so much time for to set down four Names, but without
doubt he did not remember them.

The first who signed the Council among the Orthodox, was Hosius Bishop of
Cordova; afterward, Vitonius and Vincent, Roman Priests, sent by Sylvester;
after them, the Bishops of Alexandria, Antioch and Jerusalem; and, in fine, the
other Bishops. Those who favor the Pretensions of the Church of Rome, say that
Hosius signed in Quality of Legate from the Bishop of that City, but the most
ancient Historians have not a word of it.

The Council ending the 25th. of August, Constantine took his farewell of them,
in a very fine Harangue, Eusch. in Vit. ejus, c. 21.
wherein he exhorted the Fathers to thoughts of Peace, and to a mutual
Forbearance; but which was of little effect, as will appear by the sequel.

Thus ended this famous Council, the Circumstances of which would be better
known to us, if the fear of offending great Persons, the Zeal of some, the
Passion of others, and the Respect which Posterity has had for the Decisions of
so famous an Assembly, had not hindered contemporary Authors from writing the
History with the Exactness and Impartiality remarkable in good Historians; and
retained those who have lived since, from saying what they knew (perhaps) that
was disadvantagious. St. Athanasius, in a little Treatise already cited, and
where he seems at first to be willing to enter on this History, transported by
the Zeal of which he was full, falls on Controversy and Invectives, when one
might expect him ready to relate Circumstances. Sozomen says, That he did not
dare to relate the Creed of Nice; L. 1. c. 10.
because some of his pious and learned Friends in this Matter, advised him to
suppress the things which the Initiates and the Priests alone should
understand, and that according to their Council, he had concealed what was to
be kept silent.

A while after, the Sozom. l. 1. c. 25.
Emperor being to celebrate the Feast of his Vicennales, which is to say, of
the Twentieth Year of his Empire, invited the Bishops to Byzantia, which he
thought of re-establishing, in giving it the new Name of Constantinople, where
he magnificently treated them, and made each of 'em apart a Present; after
which, they returned to their Bishoprics. It seems, that it was about this
time, that he wrote very obliging Letters to Socrat. l. 1. c. 9.
Eusebius of Caesarea, in giving him order to procure him fifty Copies, fairly
written, of the Holy Scripture.

As to Eusebius of Nicomedia, and Theognis his Friend, they were no sooner
returned into their Bishoprics, but they began again to preach Arianism
publicly, Ex. Epi. Constable. ad Nicom. l.
and received into their Communion some Persons of Alexandria, who had been
thence expelled for this Opinion.

Constantine advertised of this, sent them into Exile, three Months after the
Council, and established at Nicomedia one Amphion for Bishop, and Chrestus at
Nice. Thus was Secondus's Prediction accomplished, and Insincerity punished.

Two Months after, Alexander Bishop of Alexandria died, which occasioned great
Disturbances in that City. The Sozom. II. 17. Philost. III. II.
Orthodox say, that Athanasius Deacon of this Church, whom Alexander had
brought along with him to Nice, by reason of his Knowledge, had been denoted
several times by this Bishop for his Successor, but that he had hid himself a
little before his death, for fear of being Elected, and that having been found,
he was chosen by a Plurality of Voices.

The Heterodox affirm, on the contrary, that the Meletians being reunited to
the Catholics, after the death of Alexander, fifty four Bishops of Egypt took
an Oath to elect by common Consent his Successor, but that seven among them
broke their Oaths, and chose Athanasius, without the Participation of the rest.
Some even assure, that the Voices were divided, and the Election not being made
quick enough, Athanasius shut himself up with two Bishops into St. Denys's
Church, and caused himself to be Consecrated, maugre the other Bishops, who
made the Church-doors be broken open, but too late, the Ceremony being over.
Hereupon they Excommunicated him; but having strengthened his Party, he wrote in
the Name of the City of the Emperor, to give him Notice of his Election; which
was approved by this Prince, who believed these Letters came effectually from
the Magistracy of Alexandria. There may have been Passion on the side of the
Hererodox; but heating our selves as we do, for the Truth, as well as for
Error, and upholding sometimes the right side by indirect ways, it would not be
safe to reject whatever the Heterodox say, or blindly receive whatever the
Orthodox relate.

It seems, about this time, Constantine made his Constitution Eusebius. in ejus
Vit. l. 3. c. 64.
against the Meeting of all Heretics, wherein he forbids them to assemble
either in public or private, gives their Chapels to Catholics, and
confiscates the Houses wherein they are found to meet, performing their
Devotions. Eusebius adds, That the Emperor's Edict moreover contained, that all
Heretical Books should be seized on; and that Constantine's Threatenings obliged
a great number of Heretics and Schismatics to range themselves on the side of
the Orthodox Church. But some doing it sincerely, and others by force, the
Bishops applied themselves carefully to distinguish them, and received only
into the Church those who were real Converts. The Arians had been ruined by
particular Edicts, so that all Heresies seemed to be abolished in the Roman
Empire.

But Constantine, who had at first slighted the Subject of the Dispute between
Arius and Alexander, as consisting only of different Expressions, and who
afterward had considered it as a Point of the greatest importance, returned
again to a good Opinion of Arius; whether he acted according to his present
Interests, or that he suffered himself to be led by those who were most about
him; or that, in fine, he really changed his Opinion. Socrat. l. 1. c. 25. ex
Ruffim.
Constantia, Sister of Constantine, and Widow of Lucinus, had among her
Domestics, a Priest, a Friend to Arius, who held the same Opinions as he did,
and who persuaded this Princess that Arius held not those Opinions he was
charged with, in the manner as they were usually expressed; that Alexander had
accused him through Envy, because he was esteemed by the People; and that the
Council had done him wrong. Constantia, who much confided in this Priest,
easily believed him, but dared not speak her Mind to the Emperor; and being
fallen dangerously sick, all that she could do before she died, was to recommend
this Priest to her Brother, as a Man highly Virtuous, and much devoted to the
Service of her Family. A while after she died, and this Priest having gotten
the Favor of Constantine, held to him the same Discourse, telling him, That if
he pleased to admit Arius to come before him, and to explain his Opinion, he
would find, that at bottom, his Doctrine was the same as that of the Council
which condemned him.

Constantine, surpised at the oddness of this Discourse, answered, That if
Arius would sign the Nicene Creed, he would let him come into his Presence, and
would send him honorably to Alexandria.

This Priest having assured him of it, Constantine sent Word to Arius to come
to Court; and Arius not daring at first to do it, the Emperor wrote a Note to
him, in which he ordered him to come immediately at his Charge. Arius obeyed
this reiterated Order; and being come to Constantinople with Euzoius, they
presented to the Emperor a Confession of their Faith, wherein they barely said,
They belev'd that the Son was begotten of the Father before all Ages; and that
the Reason, who is God, had made all things, as well in Heaven as in Earth.

If Constantine was fully satisfied with this Declaration, either he had
changed his Mind, or given small Attention to it, or little comprehended the
Sense of the Nicene Creed. However it was, it appears by the sequel, that the
Arian Bishops came by degrees into Favor, and that the Emperor treated Arius
with great Kindness, and permitted him to return to Alexandria.

It Is not punctually known when Arius was recalled; but it is certain he had
been already, when Eusebius and Theoguis were, which happened three years after
the Council of Nice, in the Year 328, according to the Relation of L. 3. c. 18.
Philostorgus; these two Bishops wrote from the Place of their Banishment a
Letter, wherein they complain, Socrat. l. 1. c. 14.
That they had been condemned without being heard, although their Conduct had
been approved of in the Council of Nice, where having well examined the word
Consubstantial, they had in fine approved of it. -- They added, They had only
refused to Anathematize Arius, because they knew he was not such a one as he
was described; and seeing this was acknowledged by his being recalled, it could
not be just, that they who suffered only on his account, should remain in Exile
after his Revocation. -- This Letter was directed to the principal Bishops,
whom Eusebius and Theognis entreated to interceed for them with the Emperor.

In speaking of the Repeal of Arius, they directly attribute it to these
Bishops; Your Piety (say they) has thought fit treat him gently, and to recall
him.

A learned Man Valesius ad locum.
observes in this place, that Eusebius and Theognis attribute to the Bishops
what the Emperor had done, seeing it was he that had recalled Arius; and that
the Ecclesiastical Historians attribute likewise sometimes to the Emperor the
Actions of the Bishops; as when Socrates says that the Council of Nice forbad
Arius's return to Alexander, whereas it was the Emperor. But in truth, the
Emperor did then few things of his own pure motion, being only the Church-mens
Tool; which falls out but too often, even among the greatest Princes.

The Letter of Eusebius and Theognis produced the effect which they hoped from
it. They were recalled, with Theonas and Secondus, who would sign nothing. The
two first being returned to their Bishoprics, drove out thence those who had
gotten into their Sees, when they were sent to their Places of Banishment. They
are charged with having immediately after sought out ways to make Athanasius
undergo the same Punishment which they came from suffering, by getting it told
the Emperor, that he had been elected in a manner little Canonical, and with
endeavoring to induce the same Athanasius, both by Prayers and Threatenings, to
permit Arius to return to Alexandria. However, they could not then accomplish
their purpose; and we shall see in the sequel, the Bickerings which they had
with this Bishop.

Since the Council of Nice had been dismissed, and that they had been banished,
this Usage, and the Decisions of Nice, had but only outwardly allayed the
Disputes, which lasted still when they were recalled. Eusebius assures us, that
the Bishops of Egypt had been ever since over head and ears in Quarrels. And L.
1. c. 23.
Socrates says, that he found, from the Letters of the Bishops of those times,
that some were scandalized at the word Consubstantial; Examining (says he) this
term with too great application; they fell foul on one another, and their
Quarrels did not ill resemble a Combat in the dark. It appears, they
bespattered one another with Calumnies, without knowing wherefore. Those who
rejected the word Consubstantial, thought the others hereby introduced the
Opinions of Sabellius and Montanus, and treated them as impious, as denying the
Existence ((...)) of the Son of God. On the contrary, those who stuck to the
word Consubstantial, imagining the others would introduce a Plurality of Gods,
had as great an aversion for it, as if they would have reestablished Paganism.
Eustathius Bishop of Antioch accused Eusebius Bishop of Caesarea of corrupting
the Nicene Faith. Eusebius denied it, and charged, on the other side,
Eustathius with Sabellianism. Thus the Bishops wrote one against another. They
all accorded in saying the Son has a particular Existence, and that there is
only one God in three Hypostases; yet they could not agree, nor remain quiet.

This is the effect of equivocal Terms, which were introduced into
Christianity, without well defining them; and the bad custom of most of the
Ancients, who never speak calmly of these Matters; who have thought of nothing
less than the expressing themselves clearly, and who seem to prove they spoke
sincerely, when they testified to believe, that the Mystery about which they
disputed was Incomprehensible, by expressing themselves thereon in an
unintelligible manner.

Eustathius Bishop of Antioch Socrat. l. 1. c. 24. Theod. l. 1. c. 21. Sozom.
l. 1. c. 19.
accusing of Arianism Eusebius of Caesarea, Paulinus of Tire, and Patrophilus
of Scythopolis; and these Bishops accusing him in their turns of Sabellianism;
to know who had Reason on their side, a Synod was assembled at Antioch, in the
Year 329, the Conclusions of which were disadvantageous to Eustathius. It
consisted of Bishops who had signed the Nicene Creed only by force, among whom
were the two Eusebius's, Theognis of Nice, Theodotus of Laodicea in Syria,
Narcissus of Neroniada, Aetius of Lydda, Alphaeus of Apamea, and Theodorus of
Sidon.

As soon as ever they arrived at Antioch, a Woman of ill Fame presented her
self to 'em with a little Child, which she said to have had by Eustathius, and
desired them to do her Right against him, as refusing to receive his Child.
Eustathius made great Protestations of his Innocence; but this Woman having
been believed upon her Oath, he was Deposed. Theod. and Sozom.
Some Authors affirmed, that the Arian Bishops had suborned her, to have an
occasion for the Deposing of Eustathius; and that the true cause of his
Deposal, was his adherence to the Nicene Creed. Others say, it was the
pretended Sabellianism of which he was accused; and some have contented
themselves with saying, there were other Accusations for which he had been
deposed. Whereupon Socrates makes this remarkable Reflection; Loco cit.
The Bishops are wont to deal thus with all those whom they Depose; accusing
and declaring them Impious, without showing wherein.

A Bishop was afterward to be substituted in Bustathius's Place, and the Arian
Bishops cast their eyes on Eusebius of Caesarea. But there arose a violent
Sedition hereupon; some willing to retain Eustathius, and others accepting
Eusebius. They had come to Fisticuffs, had not the Emperor taken care, by
sending one of his Officers, who appeased the People, and made them understand
how Eustathius deserved to be sent into Exile, and in effect he was sent into
Thrace.

However, Eusebius did a thing which made him receive very honorable Letters
from the Emperor, which he has inserted in the Life of this Prince, which is,
that according to the Canons, he refused to pass from one Church to another.
Constantine heaped up Praises on him, by reason of this refusal, and wrote to
the Council, and the Church of Antioch, to let him remain where he was. So that
instead of Eusebius, there was elected Euphronius Priest of Cappadocia, whom
the Emperor had named with George of Arethusa, to the end the Council might
choose which they pleased.

Soc. 1.27, and seq. Soz. 2.27, and seq. Theod. 1.26, and seq.
Having deposed Eustathius, the Arian Bishops labored co procure the return of
Arius to Alexandria; where Athanasius would not permit him to enter, as has
been already said. They engaged the Emperor to write to this Bishop; but
Athanasius still defended himself, in that he could not receive into the Church
those who had forsook the Faith, and been excommunicated; so that Constantine
wrote to him an angry Letter, that he should receive into the Church those he
ordered him, under pain of Banishment.

The Obstinacy of this Bishop, who would part with none of the Advantages which
the Council of Nice had granted to his Predecessor against the Meletians, had
also drawn on him the Enmity of these Schismatics. The Council had ordained
that Melece should only retain the Name of Bishop, without Exercising the
Function of his Office, and without ordaining any Successor; and that those
whom he had Ordained, should have no part in Elections. However, Melece, at his
death, had ordained one John for his Successor, and the Meletian Priests would
have the same Privileges as others. Athanasius could not consent to any thing
of this, and equally ill treated the Meletians and Arians.

This Conduct reunited the two Parties, who had been till that time opposite.
The Meletians were of the Nicene Opinion; but by conversing with the Arians,
they soon entered into their Sentiments, and joined together, to induce
Constantine to accept of several Accusations against Athanasius; as having
imposed a kind of Tribute on Egypt, in ordering it to furnish the Church of
Alexandria with a certain number of Linen Garments; in having supplied a
certain seditious Person with Money, named Philumenus; in having caused a
Chalice to be broken, overthrown the Table of a Church, and burnt the Holy
Books; for having misused several Priests, and committed diverse Violences; in
having cut off the Arm of a Meletian Bishop, named Arsenius, and keeping it to
use in Magical Opperations.

Constantine acknowledged the Innocence of Athanasius, in regard of the two
first Accusations; and for the rest, he referred it to an Assembly of diverse
Bishops which was at Caesarea in Palestine; where Athanasius not appearing, he
was cited to a Synod at Tire, in the Year 334, and which consisted of Bishops
of Egypt, Lybia, Asia, and Europe.

Athanasius was in suspense, whether he should present himself to this Synod,
which consisted of his principal Enemies: Yet Constantine having threatened him
with Banishment if he refused, he therefore appeared, and justified himself of
the Accusation touching the Arm of Arsinius, by bringing in this Person into
the midst of them, and deriding his Accusers. It Is said moreover, that a Woman
being introduced into the Assembly, accused him for having dishonored her,
after she had entertained him in her House, although he knew she had made a Vow
of Virginity. But it appeared, that she did not so much as know Athanasius,
seeing she took one Timotheus a Priest for him, who pretended to be the Bishop
of Alexandria.

The business of the broken Chalice, and the misusing the Priests, was a little
more difficult. Athanasius began by an Appeal from Eusebius of Nicomedia, and
the rest of the Bishops of his Party. He afterward said, That he whose Chalice
was pretended to have been broken, and whose Name was Ischyras, was not a
Priest. However, without any regard to these Reasons, there were sent some
Arian Bishops, to take Informations against him at Alexandria, with Ischyras
his Accuser; but he protested highly against this Proceeding, and went to
Jerusalem, where the Emperor was.

In the mean time, the Informations from Egypt were received, and Athanasius
being loaded with them, he was deposed in his absence, and forbid to go to
Alexandria. Arsenius having been admitted into Communion by the Council, and
made Bishop of Hypsyle, a Town of Egypt, subscribed to the Deposition of
Athanasius, although he had justified him, in reference to one of the
Accusations brought against him. The Sentence of the Council bore, That he had
flighted the Emperor's Orders, and made the Assembly wait for him in an
indecent manner; That he came to Tire with a great multitude of People, and
endeavored to make a Disturbance there; That he had for some time refused to
purge himself of the Crimes laid to his Charge, and uttered Injuries to diverse
Bishops; That he would not submit to their Judgment; That he was convicted of
breaking a Chalice, by the Informations made against him at Alexandria.

Thus was Athanasius condemned by his Enemies, who were his Judges, as Arius
had been anathematized by Alexander his Predecessor, and several other Bishops,
who had declared themselves against him, before the Convocation of the Council.
The same usage has been observed in all the Assemblies of Bishops which have
met since; the Clergy having this Advantage above the Laity, that they can be
both Judges and Parties.

After the Deposal of Athanasius, the Emperor wrote to the Fathers of the
Council, to repair as soon as possible to Jerusalem, to celebrate the
Dedication of the Church of the Apostles, which was now finished. Where being
arrived, they were magnificently received, and made several Orations, for the
greater Solemnity of the Festival, which happened to be very luckily, in the
same Year in which the Tricennales of the Emperor In the Year 335.
were to be celebrated, which is to say, the 30th. Year of his Reign. In Vit.
Constable. l. 4.46, and 33.
Eusebius particularly made several Harrangues before the Emperor, who took a
great deal of pleasure in hearing them, insomuch that he would hear standing a
long Oration which this Bishop made on the holy Sepulcher. Eusebius well
remembers this Honor the Emperor did him, and the Praises he gave to his
Oration touching Easter, and carefully inserts, in the Life of Constantine, all
the Letters he had received from the Emperor; perhaps, not out of
Acknowledgment, but rather to do himself Honor, Baronius ad haec Tempora,
as he has been reproached with it.

The Bishops assembled at Jerusalem, Socrat. l. 1. c. 33.
having ended the Dedication of the Church which Constantine had newly built,
and there received into Communion Arius and Euzoius, on the Emperor's
Recommendation. Eusebius and Theognis say, that Arius had been kindly received
by the Bishops; but in no sort, that he was received into Communion: Which was,
perhaps, for some years refused him, to try his Sincerity. Afterward they
wrote to the Church of Alexandria, that she might receive them; and be assured,
she would enjoy henceforward a full Tranquillity, Envy having been driven out
thence, by the deposal of Athanasius. Sozom. l. II. 28.
In the mean time, this Bishop had gotten to Constantinople, to complain to the
Emperor of what he had suffered; but he could obtain no Audience from him; all
that he could be heard to say, was, That he entreated the Emperor to cite to
Constantinople the Bishops which were at Jerusalem, to have another Examination
of his Affair.

Constantine wrote to Jerusalem, and complains in his Letter, that in a time
wherein the Barbarians began to acknowledge the True God; The Christians, who
would be thought to have the Mysteries of God in their keeping, (for he durst
not say that that they kept them,) labored only to entertain Divisions and
Hatred among them, not to say, for the Destruction of Mankind. -- And therefore
he desired that the Bishops assembled at Jerusalem, would meet at
Constantinople, to examine once for all, the Affair of Athanasius, and put some
end to it. This Letter being to Jerusalem, some of the Bishops returned to
their Diocesses, and others to Constantinople. These last persuaded (according
to some Sozom. id.
Authors) the Emperor, that Athanasius had effectually broken a Chalice; or
(according to Socrat. l. 1. c. 35.
others) that he had threatened to stop the Convoy of Provisions which went
every year from Alexandria to Constantinople, of which three Bishops were
Witnesses. The Emperor, provoked by these Accusations, ordered him to retire to
Triers, a Town of the Belgic Gaul, where he remained about two years.

The Bishops who were met at Constantinople, Id. c 36.
deposed, after this, Marcellus of Ancyra, as being fallen into the Opinion of
Paul of Samosatia. One Asterius, who had taught Rhetoric in Cappadocia, having
embraced the Christian Religion, had wrote some Books, wherein he spoke of the
Divinity of the Son, in the same terms as Arius. Marcellus undertook to refute
them; but far from establishing the Preexistence of the Son, he denied the
Divinity of Jesus Christ existed before his Birth; or at least expressed himself
in such a manner, that one might believe he regarded the Reason or the Word,
not as a Being that has his particular Existence, but as I know not what kind
of Accident, such as is the Word, or the Sound which is made in speaking. He
also very ill treated, Eusebius. cont. Marcel. l. 1. c. 4.
in the same Book, several Arian Bishops, as the two Eusebius's, Paulinus and
Narcissus. He charged likewise Origin, for expounding the Holy Scripture
according to the Notions of Heathen Philosophers, and especially according to
those of Plato; from whom Marcellus affirmed, he had taken his Doctrine of
Principles, which is to say, of the Holy Trinity, of which he had treated after
the Platonic fashion.

The Arian Bishops, offended with this Book, had begun to examine it, when they
were as yet at Jerusalem; but having been obliged to pass over to
Constantinople, they had only enjoined Marcellus to alter his Opinion,
according to the Style of that time. He promised to burn his Book; but having
not done it, and even refusing to do it, his Affair was reassumed at
Constantinople, and he was deposed.

Eusebius of Caesarea wrote two Books expressly against him, wherein he
criticizes his Work; and three others, which he entitled, Of Ecclesiastic
Theology, wherein he established the Opinions which he thought Orthodox
touching the Divinity, and refuted those of Marcellus, and diverse other
Heretics.

Marcellus was afterward Socrat. l. 2.20. and Sozom. l. 2. c. 29.
reestablished in the Synod of Sardica, because he affirmed his Expressions
had been mis-understood; and being an Enemy to the Arians, he insinuated
himself into the Friendship of Athanasius, who perhaps was surpised by the
equivocal Expressions used by Marcellus. It Is certain, that if we may judge of
him by the Fragments which Eusebius cites, he scarcely knew what he would say
himself; or else he concealed his Opinions under obscure terms, lest he should
fall into trouble.

After that Athanasius had been sent into Exile, Id. l. 1. c. 27, and sec.
Arius had returned to Alexandria; but his Presence being likely to cause a
Disorder, by reason of the great number of those who followed the Sentiments of
Athanasius, the Emperor recalled this Priest to Constantinople; and to assure
himself entirely of his Belief, of which the Orthodox still doubted, he offered
him the Nicene Creed to sign; which he did without ballancing, and moreover
swore he was of that Opinion. A report ran, that he had hid under his Arm a
Writing which contained his Opinion, and that he barely swore he believed what
he had wrote; but there is no great certainty to be expected in what his
Enemies say of him. Perhaps he thought, like Eusebius of Caesarea, that one
might give to the words of the Creed, a sense which amounted to his Sentiment,
although he wished they had made use of other terms. What the Fathers of Nice
said more than he, consisting in something absolutely incomprehensible; perhaps
moreover he counted that for nothing. However, Alexander Bishop of
Constantinople refused to receive him into Communion, although the Emperor had
ordered him to do it, and a great number of Bishops and of the People urged him
to it.

Besides this, the Arian Bishops were preparing to hold a Council, to examine
afresh the Question agitated at Nice, and had marked a day in which they were
to meet to discourse about it, and to conduct Arius into the Church, maugre
Alexander.

In this Extremity knowing not how to maintain his Refusal, History tells us,
that he shut himself up in a Church called Peace, and set himself very
devoutfully to pray to God, not that he would convert Arius, or that he would
discover to himself the Truth; but, That if the Opinion of Arius was true, he
himself might not see the day set apart to discourse of it: -- Or, That if his
own Belief were true, Arius, who was the cause of so great Mischiefs, might be
punished for his Infidelity. -- A Prayer so little charitable, and whence might
be seen that this Bishop was more concerned for his Reputation than the Truth,
failed not of being heard, seeing that the next Morning, which was Sunday, or
the same Day at Night, as Arius went to the Church, accompanied by those of his
Party, or in some other Place, (for the Historians vary,) in passing by the
Market of Constantine, he had so great occasion to go and ease himself, that he
was forced to betake himself to the common Privies, where, instead of finding
ease, he evacuated his Bowels, and thus died suddenly. Since that time,
Passengers were commonly showed these Places of Easement, and no body dared sit
down on the same place where Arius sat. It Is said, that a rich Arian, to
abolish the memory of it, bought afterward this Place of the Public, and
there built an House.

It Is thus that Rufinus, Socrates and Sozomen relate the last Events of the
Life of Arius. But St. Athanasius says, that having In Epist. ad Seraptonem.
having been recalled by the Solicitations of those of his Party, he offered
his Confession of Faith to the Emperor, and swore that he did not believe any
thing. After which, those that protected him, would introduce him into the
Church, at his going out of the Emperor's Palace, but that he died (as has
been said) without having been received into Communion. A Valesius.
learned Man is of Opinion in this matter, That the Arius who was received into
Communion at Jerusalem, was a Priest of the Party of the famous Arius; and not
he himself, who had already died out of the Communion of the Church: -- Because
without this, it must be said that Athanasius has been mistaken. But were it
granted him that this Bishop was mistaken, in speaking of a Man whom he every
moment overwhelmed with Injuries, it cannot be found strange, especially not
having been at Constantinople then, when what he relates must have happened.

One may further say, that Athanasius has related, by way of abridgment, and
little exactly, what he had heard say of Arius; and that he regarded him as an
excommunicated Person, having been only received by a Council whose Authority
Athanasius would not acknowledge, it consisting principally of Persons whose
Opinions had been anathematized at Nice. It is far more natural thus to
interpret this Passage of Athanasius, than to reject wholly, as false, an
History so circumstanc'd as that of the later years of the Life of Arius, in
respect of certain Facts which the Historians we have already cited had no
interest to alter.

Arius being dead, apparently of a sudden Death, which may have given occasion
to the tragical manner in which the Historians mention it, the Disputes started
on his occasion died not with him: Sozom. l. 2. c. 31.
Those who were of Athanasius's Party at Alexandria, besought of God his
return, in the Public Prayers, and ceased not to importune the Emperor to make
him be recalled. Constantine was obliged to write to the People of that Town a
Letter, wherein he upbraided them for their Lightness and Folly, and enjoins
the Ecclesiastics to remain quiet; and wherein he declares he would not recall
Athanasius, whom he treats as a Seditious Person, and one who had been
condemned by a Council. He answers likewise to Anthony the Hermit; That he
could not slight the Judgment of the Council of Tire; because that supposing
some among the Bishops were Passionate, yet it is not probable that so great a
number of Wise and Learned Bishops should all of them act by Passion; and that
Athanasius was an Insolent, Proud Troublesome Follow.

Constantine wrote these Letters but a little time before his Death, which
happened in the Year 337, the Circumstances of which may be seen in his Life,
writ by Eusebius. Yet we must remember, that this is rather a Panegyric, than
an uninterest History; whence it is that he says nothing of the Death of his
two Wives, and the Eldest Son of this Emperor, whom he had put to Death,
through Jealousy or Revenge.

Eusebius lived not long after him; he died toward the Year 340, and left in
his Place Acacius his Disciple, Socrat. l. 2. c. 4.
who wrote his Master's Life, which we have not.

I shall not relate what happened afterward with respect to the Arian
Disputes; because I only designed to mention the Events which happened during
the Life of Eusebius, or in which he was somewhat concerned. He was always of
the Arians side, and St. Athanasius and St. Jerome have accused him of being of
their Opinion. In effect, it is scarce credible, that if he had been Orthodox,
he would have so much favored Arianism, and given his Consent to the Deposal
of St. Athanasius. Yet Ib. c. 21.
Socrates has undertaken to justify him, by citing some Passages wherein he
speaks as the Orthodox did; and several modern Authors have done the same, as
Dr. Cave in the Life of Eusebius, which he has writ in Latin and English. This
latter seems to have thought himself obliged to it through Christian Charity;
but others are of opinion, that Christian Charity, that is, the Love we ought
to have for all Christians, should oblige all Historians to mention such
Truths, as make no Alteration in the state of those that are Dead; and are very
useful to the Living, who learn thereby to judge soundly of things. That
pretended Charity, which extends it self only to the Fathers who are looked
upon as Orthodox, has been the cause why we have in a manner only Panegyricks
of the Ancients, wherein their Defects are always suppressed, when they cannot be
covered with the Mask of some Virtues.

Eusebius, as it appears by his Conduct at the Council of Nice, was a dextrous
Person, which made no scruple to subscribe to Terms which he did not like,
provided he could expound them in a sense agreeable to his mind, though little
agreeable to that of those who set them up. Indeed, a Man must shut his Eyes,
who does not see, by what he says in his Letter to the Church of Caesarea, that
he understood otherwise the Terms of the Creed, than Athanasius (for example)
did. So that we ought not to mind the Terms which he uses to accommodate
himself to such ways of speaking as were authorized, and which he looked upon
as equivocal; but only such places wherein he speaks after a manner altogether
opposite to the received Opinions. In his Books De Theologia Ecclesiastica, he
explains himself with so great clearness in several places, that if some
equivocal Passages may be opposed to them, there is scarce any Citation but
what may be eluded. You are afraid (says he to Marcellus, Book. 3. chap. 7.)
lest by owning Two Hypostases, you should introduce Two Principles, and destroy
the Unity of God. Learn therefore, that there being but One God, without
Generation and Beginning, who begot the Son; there is but One Principle, One
only Monarchy, and One Reign, since the Son acknowledges the Reign of his
Father. For God is the Head of Jesus Christ, as the Apostle says. But you very
much fear (say you) lest those who confess that the Father and Son have Two
Hypostases, are obliged to acknowledge Two Principles. Learn therefore, that
those who maintain that there are Two Hypostases in God, are not obliged to
acknowledge Two Fathers, nor Two Sons; but they will only grant, that one of
them is Father, and the other Son. So those who admit of Two Hypostases, ought
not necessarily to own that there are Two Gods. For we do not say that they are
Equal in Honor ((...)) nor that Both have no Beginning, or are not Begotten;
but that the one is without Generation and Beginning, and the other is
Begotten, and has the Father for his Principle. Hence it is that the Son calls
his Father his God, when he says, I go to my God, and to your God, etc.
wherefore the Church teaches only One, who is the God of the Son, etc. He goes
on in the same strain, and declares, that that passage and the like cannot be
understood of the Flesh or Humane Nature of Christ. These Principles are very
different from those of St. Athanasius, who says that there is but One God,
though there is Three Persons; In 1. Dial. de Trin. Tom. 2. p. 160. Vid. and
Curcellaei Quaternion. Diss. 1.
because those Three Persons are altogether Equal, and there is but One Deity
in Kind.

This is one of the chief things which ought to be observed in reading the
Writings of Eusebius: To which must be added, that he was a Disciple of Origin,
of whom one may see several Opinions in the Life of Clemens Alexandrinus. It
remains only to give a Catalogue of his Works, as I have done in the Life of
Clemens. I shall make use of Dr. Cave's Chartophylax, adding to it what I shall
think fit.

1. A Chronicle, or an Universal History: The First Part whereof, which is now
very imperfect, contains the Antiquities of almost all Nations, of the
Chaldaeans, Assyrians, Medes, Persians, Lydians, Hebrews, Egyptians, etc.
Eusebius took it from Africanus. The Second, entitled A Chronological Canon, is
an Abridgment of the First, and reduces all the Chronology into Decades, from
Abraham, to the 25th. year of Constantine: Which makes one believe that that
Work was finished a little before the Council of Nice. St. Jerome translated it
into Latin, adding several things to it, especially with respect to the Roman
History, in which Eusebius was not very well skilled. The Greek Original is
lost; and Joseph Scaliger endeavored to recover it as much as he could, by
collecting all the Fragments he found in Syncellus, Cedrenus, and the Chronicle
of Alexandria. He caused them to be printed at Leyden, in 1606, with his Notes;
but they have been reprinted since at Amsterdam, in 1658, with more Notes.

2. The Evangelical Preparation, in Fifteen Books, which he published after the
Council of Nice, since he cites his Chronological Canons in them. The Design of
Eusebius in that Work, is, to confute the Religion of the Pagans, and to prove
some Principles of ours by their Philosophers, to dispose 'em to embrace it
more easily. He shows therefore, 1st. That the Christians had very good Reasons
to renounce the Heathenish Religion, and gives some Abridgments of the Theology
of the Phoenicians and Egyptians, and of the Opinions of the Graecians
concerning the Beginning of the World, whereby it appears that all of them
acknowledged that the World is not Eternal. 2dly. That the Graecians borrowed
their Divinity from the Eastern Nations, and that their Gods were only Dead
men, whose Graves were turned into Temples, and whose Fabulous History was so
ridiculous, that Plato laughed at it. 3dly. That to defend their Fables, they
have in vain explained them after an Allegorical manner, a Method whereof he
shows the Vanity. 4thly. That the Pagan Oracles contain only the Answers and
Cheats of Bad Demons. 5thly. That nothing was so false, as what the Stoics
said concerning Fate. 6thly. That the Opinions and Customs of the ancient
Hebrews were very agreeable to the Sentiments of the most rational Pagan
Philosophers, especially to those of Plato. 7. That the History of the Hebrews
is confirmed by the Testimony of several Heathen Historians. 8thly. That the
Graecians took their Philosophy from the Barbarians, especially from the Jews,
to whom Plato and the Platonicks owe what they said concerning their Three
Principles, and several other Doctrines which the Greeks admired. 9thly. That
the Philosophers had an infinite number of different Opinions, which may easily
be confuted the one by the other, as it appears by Eusebius his Essay toward
it. One may see by this whole Work, that he was very well versed in Heathen
Authors, and had taken care, in his Study, to collect whatever might be of use
to prove or confirm the Christian Religion by the Testimony of Philosophers. It
affords several Fragments of Authors who are lost, as Sanchoniathon, and
several Platonicks, out of whom he cites some long Passages.

3. The Evangelical Demonstration, which contained Twenty Books, is now reduced
to Ten. The Author explains in it the Old Jewish Religion, and undertakes to
prove by the Prophets the Truth of the Christian Religion. But he grounds all
his Arguments upon some Mystical or Allegorical Explications of some Places of
the Old Testament, without being able to prove against those who would have
denied it, that they ought to be understood so. He lends, if I may so say, his
Principles to the Prophets, and then fixes to their Terms the Idea's he had of
them, by virtue of those Principles. Thus Book 5. chap. 1. where he explains at
large the famous Passage of Solomon concerning Wisdom, God has begotten me
before the Mountains; he finds in the word to Beget, all the Subtilties which
the Arians used after the Council of Nice, to explain it according to their
Mind, without openly shocking the Orthodox.

4. The Ten Books of the Ecclesiastical History came out after the preceding,
which are cited in them. It begins with Christ, and ends in the Year 324,
before the Council of Nice met. One may complain of Eusebius, because he has
incerted several Fables in it, as that of Agbarus, etc. and committed several
Faults in Chronology (of which I have already said something.) But one ought to
forgive him those Faults, because he is the first who has composed any Work
concerning the Christian History; for he has preserved a great number of
Fragments of ancient Authors whom we have lost, and related their Opinions
faithfully enough. Besides, it is he chiefly who can give us some light
concerning the Canon of the Books of the New Testament. He dedicated that Book
to Paulinus Bishop of Tire, who has been rank't among the Prelates, who
favored Arius. The neatest Greek Edition we have of this Work, is that of
Robert Stephen, in 1544; and the best Translation is that of Valesius, which
was printed together with the Greek in Columns, at Paris and Francfort. Yet the
Translation of that learned Man is not without Faults. I am persuaded, that the
greatest part of them come from mere Inadvertency; but it cannot be doubted
that some arise from his understanding the Terms of the Ancients according to
the Modern Notions; as when he renders the words of Alexander Bishop of
Alexandria, which I before mentioned, Duas Personam Vnam esse, etc. (...). One
cannot allege any place wherein the word (...) what we call nowadays Persona
in Divinis, but by supposing that the Ancients ought to think as we do; and
(...) can signify only Two Natures in Existence; that is, which do not differ
in Kind, as a Man and a Horse, but only in Existence, or Number, as Two Men.
This Lucas Holstenius observed in a Discourse which Valesius himself caused to
be printed at the end of Page 199,
Theodoret, Evagrius, etc. wherein he says that this Place must needs be
corrupted either by some Heretics or Transcribers, because he knew not how to
reconcile it with the Orthodox Opinions.

5. Of the Martyrs of Palestine. This Book is to be found next to the Eighth of
the Ecclesiastical History.

6. The Book against Hierocles was writ against a Judge of Nicomedia, who, Vid.
Lactant. Instit. l. 5. c. 2, 3, 4.
in the time of Dioclesian's Persecution, had composed two Books entitled
Philalethes, wherein he compared Jesus Christ to Apollonius Thyaneus. Eusebius
has showed the absurdity of that Comparison, by a short Critic of the Eight
Books of the Life of that Philosopher, written by Philostratus. This Hierocles
must be distinguished from a Philosopher of the same Name who lived almost a
hundred years after, and wrote a fine Commentary upon the Golden Verses of
Pythagoras.

7. I have already spoken of Eusebius his Books against Marcellus, and of the
Ecclesiastical Theology. I shall only add here two things: The first is, that
R. M. which are seen in the Title, signify Richard Montagu Bishop of
Chichester, who first published them. The second is of greater moment, viz.
that Eusebius wrote 'em in anger, and not only gives his Adversary no quarter,
but besides Disputes with him about things that are clear, and which himself
had proved elsewhere. L. 1. c. 4.
Marcellus said, That if we ought to tell the truth about Origin, it must be
acknowledged, that he was but just come from the study of Philosophy, when he
applied himself to the reading of the Scripture; and that before he understood
it well, he betook himself to write sooner than he ought to do, because of his
great Learning in the Pagan Sciences; from whence it is that Philosophy made
him wander, and that he had writ some things which are not true. For Example
(says Marcellus) having his mind full of Plato's Doctrines, and the Difference
he teaches between the Principles, he wrote his Book Of Principles, and
entitled it so. That Title only was sufficient to make one clearly perceive,
that he took from Plato the first Words of his Work, as as well as the Title;
for he begins thus, Those who have believed, and those who have been believed,
etc. words taken out of Plato's Gorgias. -- There is nothing truer than what
Marcellus says here; and all who have read something of Origin will grant it.
Yet Eusebius answers him in these extremely morose terms; Supposing this were
true, there was no need of calumniating Origin for it; since he immediately
after adds, that Grace and Truth are by Jesus Christ, and that Jesus Christ is
that Truth. What is there in it that is common to Plato? I never heard that
Plato wrote a Book of Principles; and Origin has not taught the same thing as
Plato, concerning those Principles. Origin acknowledged only One Principle,
without Generation and Beginning, and above all things, who is the Father of an
Only Son by whom all things were made. -- One may plainly see, that Eusebius
made as if he understood not Marcellus, or that Anger hindered him from
understanding him, The Bishop of Ancyra meant only this, viz. that Origin had
spoken of the Three Persons of the Holy Trinity, after the same manner as Plato
spoke of the Three Principles of all things, and that he borrowed the word
Principle of him, and the first words of his Book wherein he treated of them.
Eusebius might have easily apprehended his meaning; and he was so far from
believing that Plato was of another Opinion in this matter than the Sacred
Writers and Origin, that he he undertakes to prove the contrary at large in his
Evangelical Preparation, lib. 11. chap. 13, etc. which are worth the reading.
In effect, what he adds concerning the Father and the Son, is equally agreeable
to Origen's and Plato's Opinion. Eusebius seems to have followed at this time
St. Jerome's Maxim, who ascribes it to him too; as he himself made no scruple to
follow it: In Apol. prolib. cont. Jov. p. 106, etc. Edit. Gryph.
It Is one thing to write in order to Dispute, and another to write in order to
Teach. In the first Method, the Dispute is very much extended, and one minds
only to answer one's Adversary. Sometimes one thing is proposed, and sometimes
another: Men argue as they please; speak after one manner, and act after
another, etc. In the second, an open and ingenuous Face is necessary, etc.
Origin, Methodus, Eusebius, Apollinarius, have writ a great deal against Celsus
and Porphyry. Consider what doubtful Arguments and Problems they use to confute
some Writings composed by the Spirit of the Devil. And because they are forced
to say, not what they think, but what the Dispute requires, (non quod sentiunt,
sed quod necesse est,) they contradict the Heathens. -- We may see thereby
whether we ought always to believe what the Holy Fathers say; and that Eusebius
was no Arian, only because he denied it, and used all the terms of the
Orthodox. In the Writers of this kind, a word spoken against the common
Opinion, proves often more than a hundred places wherein they speak as the
Vulgar.

8. The Letter to those of Caesarea concerning the Nicene Creed, which I have
already mentioned.

9. Of the Places named in the Old Testament, which is a little Geographical
Dictionary of the Places mentioned in the Hebrew Books of the Scripture. St.
Jerome translated it, and added to it what he thought fit, Jacobus Bonfrerius
printed the Original, with St. Jerome's Translation and his own, at Paris, Anno
1659, in Fol.

10. The Life of Constantine is (as has been said) rather a Panegyric than a
History; and the Style of it also (as Photius has observed) more florid than
that of the other Works of Eusebius, which is somewhat careless. However, there
is afterward a Panegyric of that Emperor in due form, which Eusebius recited
Anno 335, at his Tricennales.

11. An Exposition of the Song of Solomon, printed at Leyden by Meursius, in
the Year 1617, in Quarto, with Polychronius and Psellus.

12. The Lives of the Prophets are ascribed to Eusebius in an ancient
Manuscript, and are joined with Procopius his Commentaries upon Isaiah, in
Greek and Latin. John Courtier published them at Paris, in 1580, in Fol. Those
who have published a new Edition of the Evangelical Demonstration at Cologne,
in 1688, would not have done amiss to join those Pieces with it, or to
endeavor to get some of those which are not yet printed.

13. Of that number are Four Books entitled Eclogae Propheticae de Christo,
which (as Lambecius says) are in the Library of Vienna, and in that of the
Escurial. But it is with those two Libraries as with that of Buda: The Keepers
of them are so faithful and jealous, that they let nothing come out of them.
Labbaeus says, that besides there is some Libraries some Commentaries of
Eusebius upon Isaiah, a Discourse upon the Three Days that our Lord remained in
the Grave; and two more concerning the Women who went to it, and the Angels
they found in it.

14. We have lost of Eusebius, 1. Some Books concerning the Ecclesiastical
Preparations. 2. Concerning the Ecclesiastical Demonstration. 3. Thirty Books
against Porphyry, which, in all probability, are the greatest loss we have
sustained with respect to the Writings of Eusebius; for we might have learned
by them the Objections of the most learned Philosopher of his time, and the
Answers of the most learned Bishop of his Age. 4. Some Varieties of the
Evangelists. 5. Five Books concerning the Coming of Jesus Christ. 6. Some
Commentaries upon the Psalms, of which we have some Fragments in the Catena of
the Greek Fathers upon that Book. 7. Of Topical Names. 8. An Apology for
Origin, whereof the Sixth Book only (as has been said) was Eusebius's. 9.
Three Books of the Life of Pamphilus, which he mentions in the 11th. Chap. of
the Book of the Martyrs of Palestine. 10. An Apology for himself, perhaps a
Vindication of himself against those who accused him of following the Opinions
of Arius. 11. A Collection of Ancient Martyrdoms, which is reported to be in
the Library of the Escurial. 12. A Description of a Church of Jerusalem. 13. Of
the Feast of Easter. 14. Three Epistles, the First, to Constantia,
Constantine's Sister; the Second, to Alexander Bishop of Alexandria, for the
Re-establishment of Arius; the Third, to a Bishop named Euphration. Some
Fragments of those Letters may be found in the Acts of the Second Council of
Nice, Act. 5. and 6. 15. An Ancient History, which perhaps is the same with his
Chronicle, and is cited by Anastasius Sinaita, as well as a Book dedicated to
Marinus.

15. Father Sirmond, a Jesuit, printed at Paris, in 1643, several Latin
Homilies, which two Manuscripts ascribe to Eusebius of Caesarea, and which
Valesius thought to be his; but Dr. Cave rather believes they were written by
Eusebius of Emesus, a Semi- Arian, who lived toward the middle of the Fourth
Century.

After all, the same may be said of the Cologne Edition (1688) of Eusebius his
Evangelical Preparation, and Evangelical Demonstration, etc. as of Clemens
Alexandrinus his Works of the same Edition. They have added nothing to the
Paris Edition but new Faults. Although Eusebius does not observe in those
Discourses a very exact Order, yet because he divides them into Chapters, one
may more easily follow him than Clemens; and in this Edition the Citations are
better distinguished from the Words of the Author, than in the Works of the
Catechist of Alexandria; for there is some Comma's in the Margin of the
Passages that are quoted, or they are in Italick Characters. However, there is
still some Distinctions of Paragraphs wanting in it, as well as in that of
Clemens.

The Life OF Gregory Nazianzen.
GREGORY was Vid. Pagi Crit. Baron. ad An. 354, and 368.
born, according to the most exact Chronology, in the Year 300, in a Village of
the Second Cappadocia, named Arianzum, near the City of Nazianzum, from whence
comes the Surname that is commonly given him. His Father and Mother Greg.
Presb. in ejus Vita.
were Persons of Quality, and their Virtue was esteemed by those who knew them,
if we may believe their Son, who always speaks of them with great
Commendations. He says, that his Father, whose Name was Gregory too, was born
of Parents who had I know not what Religion, which did partake of the
Heathenish and the Jewish. Orat. 19. p. 289.
They had neither Idols nor Sacrifices, but they worshipped Fire and Torches.
They kept the Sabbath, abstained from eating the Flesh of certain Beasts, and
yet despised Circumcision. They went by the Name of (...), because they boasted
of worshipping none but the Supreme God,(...). They seem to have taken the
Worship of Fire from the Magi of Cappadocia, who went by the Name of Strab. l.
15.
Pyrethes, because of the respect they had for Fire, which they looked upon as
the Symbol of the Supreme Deity. But they were not like them in other things.
It Is a surprising thing, that Gregory, who (as has been said) denies that they
worshipped Idols, and says that his Father was born with those Sentiments,
Carm. 1. de rebus suis. v. 125.(...).
should positively say elsewhere, that he was subject to the Images of Animals.
It seems that either his Memory was somewhat weak on this occasion, or his
great Zeal made him fall into that Contradiction; unless one had rather excuse
him, by looking on what he says of the Idols of Animals, which his Father
worshipped, as a Rhetorical Exaggeration, a Figure common enough in Gregory's
Style. As for his Mother Nonna, she was born of Christian Parents, who had been
careful of her Education, and found her extremely inclined to Piety. Her Son
does also infinitely praise her Parts and Conduct.

A Woman with such Dispositions could hardly allow that her Husband should
profess the Errors of the Hypsistarians. Besides, Gregory was a good-natured
and temperate Man; so that though he had some erroneous Opinions, yet his Life
was unblameable. Nonna was continually urging him to get himself instructed in
the Christian Religion; but he could not be persuaded to it, till he had a
Dream, which made him resolve upon it. He dreamed that he was singing those
words of the Cxxii. Psalm, I was glad when they said unto me, We will go into
the House of the Lord. That way of Singing, though new, pleased him; and his
Wife failed not to take hold of this Opportunity, to persuade him to embrace
Christianity.

It happened at the very same time, that Leontius Bishop of Caesarea in
Cappadocia, went that way with some other Bishops, in his Journey to Nice,
where Constanstine had called a Council. Gregory went to see him, and told him
that he had a mind to turn Christian. Leontius caused him to be instructed; and
whilst they were instructing him, to admit him amongst the Cathecumeni, he was
upon his Knees, without being bid to rise, whereas the Cathecumeni commonly
stood whilst they were instructed. Those who were there, observed that Posture,
because 'twas the Posture of the Priests, when they were consecrated. And his
Son Orat. 19.
says, that every Body looked upon it as an Omen of his being some time or
other honored with the Orders of a Priest. Afterward, as the Bishop of
Nazianzum was baptising him, those who stood by, saw him come out of the Water
surrounded with Light, and the Bishop could not forbear saying that Gregory
should succeed him in his Bishopric; as it happened, when the Sea of Nazianzum
had been vacant for some time. His Son, who relates these two Circumstances,
styles them Miracles: And because then, as nowadays, every body believed not
whatever Churchmen said, he declares that he relates these Wonders only to the
Faithful, because none of those great things appear true to profane Men. But a
Man that is not profane, cannot forbear suspecting, not of want of Sincerity,
but of Credulity and Exaggeration, those Rhetorical Souls who take Advantage of
every thing. By relating Facts of that nature, when Men think that they say
what they have seen, they often say what they have thought, concerning things
at which they were surprised; and instead of the undeniable of their Eyes, they
give out the doubtful Consequences of a prejudiced Mind. They believe, without
any Examination, whatever is advantageous to the Party they have embraced; and
whatever is contrary to it, is false, or at least suspected. Those who will
read Gregory Nazianzen, without making these Reflections, will run the hazard
either of looking upon him as a Man of little Sincerity, or of believing many
unlikely Miracles.

Nonna had but one Daughter in the beginning of her Marriage, if Gorgonia, whom
Gregory her Brother mentions in several places, was the first Child she had;
Greg. de Vita sua, p. 2.
and she did heartily desire to have a Son. She made a Vow to God to consecrate
him to him, if he gave her one; and soon after she had a Dream, in which she
saw the Face of the Son she was to have, and learned what should be his Name.
Instead of one, she had two; and as soon as they were born, she took great care
of their Education, having observed in them some Dispositions which deserved to
be cultivated.

As soon as Gregory came to years, he was sent to Caesarea, Greg. Presb. in
Vit. Gr. p. 4, etc.
the Metropolis of Cappadocia, where he was put under the best Masters, to
learn Humane Learning; that is to say, to understand the Greek Poets and
Orators, and to write well in that Tongue. 'Twas the only thing that was minded
in Asia; and the reading of the Pagan Authors who had writ well in that Tongue,
was the Study which they applied themselves to. It Is thought that about that
time Gregory became acquainted with Basil, whose Friendship was so dear to him
afterward. From Caesarea in Cappadocia he went afterward Orat-10. p. 163.
to Caesarea in Palestine, whereof Eusebius was Bishop. He applied himself
there Hieron. de Script. Eccles. in Euzoio.
to Declaming, according to the Custom of that time, under a famous Rhetor
named Thespesius. Having stayed some time at Caesarea, he went to Alexandria,
which for some Centuries was much celebrated, by reason of the learned Men who
were there. His stay there was not useless to him; but he did not think he
could be accounted a learned Man, without going to Athens the Mother of
Learning.

Wherefore De Vita sua, p. 3, 4. Orat. 19. p. 306, 307.
he embarked on a Ship of the Island of Aegina, which is not far from the City
of Athens. Forasmuch as 'twas in the middle of November, he had not a very
prosperous Passage. Being near the Isle of Cyprus, his Ship was tossed with a
violent Storm for several Days; and Provisions failing, the trouble they were
in was attended with Hunger; so that the Seamen would not have been able to do
their Duty, had not a Phoenician Ship, which the Wind carried toward them,
afforded them some Provisions. Gregory says, that his greatest grief at that
time, was, that he was not Baptized. That Thought affected him so much, that he
moved the Seamen with Pity, though they were already afflicted enough with the
Peril they themselves were in. He made a Vow to God, that he would get himself
Baptized, and consecrate himself to God, and the Storm ceased some time after.
It seems he was afraid of being damned, if he should die without Baptism; and
it being the Opinion of that time, it is a wonder that his Father and Mother,
whose Piety he does so much extol, should not take care that he should be
Baptized, from his very Childhood. It Is true, Baptism might be put off, lest
they should fall off from Grace, which they thought God gave to those who
received it; or for fear they should be Excommunicated, if they should live
after a manner unworthy of those who were Baptized. But those Fears don't take
away the Difficulty; since Men are no less in danger of being damned if they
live ill, without having received Baptism, than if they dishonor it after they
have received it. However, Gregory says that his Parents were warned of the
Danger he was in, by a Dream which made 'em pray for him. One of those who were
in the same Ship saw also Nonna, Gregory's Mother, walking upon the Sea, and
drawing afterward the Ship to the shore, and then the Storm ceased. They
sailed toward Greece, and having passed by Rhodus, at last they arrived at the
Isle of Egina, from whence Gregory went to Athens.

He had not been there long, before Orat. 20. p. 326. Vid. and Olympiad. ap.
Photium. Ced. lxxx.
Basil came to it. Then the Friendship which they had begun to contract at
Caesarea, did very much increase. Forasmuch as they applied themselves to the
same Study, and had the same Inclinations, they grew so intimate Friends, that
Gregory says they were but One Soul in Two Bodies. We shall see afterward what
altered that Friendship. The Sophists, or Masters of Rhetoric, who lived at
Athens, had every one of them their Faction, and endeavored by all imaginable
means to get Disciples. In order to it, they kept some of their Party in all
the Avenues of the City of Athens, and as soon as they saw some Young Men who
came to study there, those who happened to be the strongest, seized them, and
then lodged them at their Friends. Those who who were able to bring many
Disciples to their Master, paid nothing to him; which made the poor Scholars
watchful to observe the Strangers who came to Athens. A Young Man being thus
got into their hands, some among the Scholars put some Questions to him, and
delighted to contradict him, to know whether he had any Wit. Afterward, they
conducted him in a solemn manner to the Public Baths; and those who had taken
him, went before him two and two. When he came to the Door, they made as if
they were not willing that he should go in, and made a great noise to fright
him: yet they soon after let him go in; and when he had washed himself, they
they put the Philosophical Cloak upon his Shoulders, which before he was not
allowed to wear. Basil was exempted from that Ceremony, because he had made
much greater progresses than those who commonly came to Athens to study there;
but it does not appear that Gregory, who relates that, had a like Privilege. I
have observed that Custom, though not very considerable in it self; because one
may thereby apprehend how much in love they were then with the Sophistical Art,
or Rhetoric, and how greedy the Masters were of getting Disciples. One may
also perceive thereby, that the Academies of those times were not better
regulated than those of our time; and that in all likelihood when the Students
left 'em, they were not more improved than they are now.

The two greatests Sophists that were then at Athens, were Himerius and
Proeresius, who both were very much esteemed by the Emperor Julian. The latter
being Eunap. Sard. in Vita Proaeres.
an Armenian by Birth, had for that reason in his School all the Youth of
Pontus, Cappadocia, Bithynia. and the other Provinces in the neighborhood of
this Country. Which makes one believe that Gregory studied at Athens under him.
The same Sophist was so much esteemed, that the Emperor Constans treated him at
his own Table, and sent him to Rome with a magnificent Train, where they
erected a Statue to him, with this Inscription upon the Pedestal, ROME THE
QUEEN OF CITIES, TO THE KING OF ELOQUENCE.

Basil having received an Honor at Athens, Nazianz. Orat. xx. p. 328.
which was seldom bestowed upon those who went thither, contracted Envy
thereby. Some Young Men of Armenia, who had put on the Philosophical Cloak, and
were admitted into those Schools. ( (...).
where they only learned to Prattle) before him, thought themselves bound in
Honor to humble that Fresh-Man. They undertook to Dispute with him; but
finding him too strong for them, they would have been forced to leave him the
Field of Battle, had not Gregory, who seriously believed that the Glory of
Athens was concerned in it, come to their help, and made the Combat even on
both sides. But he soon after perceived that the Armenians acted out of Envy,
which made him side with Basil, who afterward put his Adversaries to flight.
From that time their Friendship took deeper root, and they lived very amicably
together. Had it not been for the lucky meeting of such a Friend as Gregory,
Basil would have been weary of Athens, where he found not the Learning he hoped
to find in it; but Gregory comforted him with his Conversation, and gave him to
understand, that it required some time to know thoroughly all the learned Men of
a City, and to be able to judge of them without rashness. Both of them applied
themselves to the wisest and most rational of those who studied at Athens, not
to those who made the greatest figure, and disputed best. Basil left that City
first, from whence he undertook some Travels, and at last retired to Caesarea.
Gregory, some time after, returned to Cappadocia, to assist and comfort his
Father and Mother in their Old Age. He describes, De Vita sua, p. 4. and alibi.
in more than one place, in a very tender manner, a Separation which cost him
many Tears; whereby one may know that Gregory was very tender of, and heartily
loved his Friends.

Gregory had then spent thirty years either in learning or teaching Rhetoric,
as he himself says; that is to say, he left Athens toward the Year 354, or
355. It were almost incredible, that having a Father and a Mother very old, he
should not have sooner thought to retire and live near them; nor have
undertaken to do the Christian Church greater service, than to Study or Teach
Rhetoric, Vid. Pagi Crit. Baron. ad An. 354, and 388.
were it not that the whole Series of his Life shows it, (as the Reader will
easily perceive by the remaining part of this History.) Julian, who was
afterward Emperor, was also there, rather (as Gregory says) to consult the
Diviners concerning his Fortune, than to study Philosophy. From that time
Gregory began to hope no good thing from him, (as I shall observe, when I come
to the Orations he made against him.) After Basil's departure, he applied
himself especially to Eloquence, and Declamed with so much Applause, that every
body looked upon him as one of the chief Orators of that time. He was not
naturally inclined, as he himself says, to that sort of life; and he soon after
made his escape from Athens, where he had been detained, as it were, against
his will, without taking his leave of any Body. De Vita sua, p. 5, 6. and Orat.
x. p. 165.
He loved naturally a quiet life, which made him averse to any manner of life
that would have made him too busy. Those who live after that manner, and
perform well their Employments, seemed to him to be only useful to others; and
those who live altogether in a retreat, seemed to him to be only good for
themselves. He wished he might keep a Medium between those two Extremes, and
lead a kind of a Monastical life in the midst of the World, without taking upon
him any Employment but such as he would have chosen, and without being
obnoxious to some troublesome Irregularities, which render the best Employments
unpleasant.

He departed from Athens full of those thoughts, and went to Constantinople by
Land. He found there his Brother Caesarius, who came thither by Sea, at his
return from Alexandria, where he had studied Physic. Orat. x. p. 164.
He had got so great a Reputation, during the little time that he stayed at
Constantinople, that the Emperor would keep him for his Physician, make him a
Citizen of Constantinople, and confer upon him the Dignity of a Senator. Though
Caesarius was very willing to yield to those Solicitations, yet his Parents
Wishes, and his Brother's Exhortations prevailed, and he set out with him to go
to Nazianzum. But having stayed there some time, he returned to Constantinople,
where it was much more pleasant to live than in a desert Town of Cappadocia. As
for Gregory, he was Baptized at Nazianzum, and his Father persuaded him soon
after to renounce that quiet life, which he designed to lead, and to take the
Orders of a Priest. Gregory, a great while after, could not De Vita sua, p. 6.
forbear naming that Action Ep. xi.
of his Father a Tyranny. But the Respect he had for him, and the Troubles that
good Men were put to, during the Arian Controversies, wherein his Father
himself was concerned, obliged him patient-to bear the yoke that was laid on
him.

Basil had made him Ep. v. Greg.
promise, that when he should leave Athens, he would come and live with him:
But Gregory could not be as good as his Word, being obliged to live with his
Parents. He invited Basil to come and see him sometimes, but it does not appear
that they were ever long together. Several Persons Orat. xi.
wished that he would take Priests Orders, but afterward did not oftener
frequent the Church of Nazianzum for all that, as he upbraids them with it in
one of his Orations, in which, notwithstanding, he praises the Concord and
Orthodoxy of that Church. He does also bestow upon them a considerable
Commendation, viz. that they made Piety to consist, not in speaking much of
God, but in being silent, and obeying him. If Ancient and Modern Divines had
endeavored to deserve that Praise, Christianity would not have been torn by so
many Disputes, nor would it be so now.

Constantius, in order to allay the Arian Quarrels, if it were possible, called
an Oecumenick Council, in the Year 359, which was divided into two Assemblies.
The Eastern Bishops were to hold theirs at Seleucia in Isauria; and the
Western, at Ariminum, a Town of Romania. The Arians who were at Seleucia
Socrat. l. 11. c. 40.
made a Confession of Faith, in which supposing that no unscriptural Term was
to be used, and consequently that the word Consubstantial ought not to be used,
they only said, that the Son was like the Father, according to the Apostle, who
says, That the Son is the Image of the Invisible God. Those who said that the
Son was not like the Father, were also condemned in it. Acacius Bishop of
Caesarea in Palestine, drew up that Confession of Faith. The same Acacius, and
those of his Party, approved the Confession of Ariminum, which was worded after
the same manner. Socrat. l. 11. c. 41. and Sozom. l. 4. c. 29.
They only added to it, that in this matter, the words Substance and Hypostasis
ought not to be used; because those words which had caused so many Disputes,
were not to be found in the Holy Scripture. In the mean time, the Arians being
urged by the Orthodox to say in what that Resemblance of the Father did
consist, made it to consist only in the Will: Whereas the others maintained,
That the Substance of the Son, though distinct, was altogether like the
Substance of the Father. But forasmuch as equivocal Terms were used by both
Parties, it gave occasion to those who were not skilled in those Subtilties, to
equivocate, and confound two very different Opinions. Gregory's Father was one
of those who fell into that Snare; Orat. xix. p. 297. and Vit. Greg. p. 11.
he subscribed to the Confessions of Faith of Seleucia and Ariminum: The
miraculous Light which appeared at his Baptism, and his Study since that time,
had not enlightened his Mind to such a degree, as to make him understand the
Arian Controversies. That Action of the Bishop of of Nazianzum alarmed the
Monks of Cappadocia, who being full of Zeal for the Consubstantiality, refused
to Communicate with the good Man, and got part of the People on their side.
It Is likely that his Son Gregory was not then at Nazianzum; for he would have
hindered his Father from committing a Fault, which he obliged him to acknowledge
by a public Recantation.

Having thus appeased the Monks, Gregory the Son got into the Pulpit, and made
the Discourse concerning Peace, which is his XII. Oration, in the presence of
his Father, who was not to be compared to him for Eloquence and Learning. 1. He
says, That the pleasure he had to see Peace restored to the Church of
Nazianzum, had induced him to make that Discourse, whereas before nothing could
persuade him to speak. 2. That he had been extremely moved at the Division
which had before happened; especially considering the austere and holy Life of
the Monks, which he describes by the bye, with great Rhetorical Exaggerations.
3. That Divisions are the cause of all sorts of Mischiefs; and that they had
reason to thank God, because that which arose in the Church of Nazianzum was
over. 4. That the Church of Nazianzum, which before that last Division, knew
not what Schism was, ought to endeavor for the future to enjoy a perpetual
Peace. 5. That in the last Discord. Men were so fully persuaded that the Bishop
of Nazianzum acted sincerely, and kept the Truth of the Faith, that they
upbraided him only with his being imposed upon by equivocal Words. 6. That
every thing invites us to Peace; God, Angels, and all Creatures which are
maintained by Concord. 7. That the Jews had been happy whilst they were at
Peace one with another, but became unfortunate as soon as they were divided. 8.
Notwithstanding, that all manner of Peace ought not to be sought after, but
that a medium ought to be kept; and that it is one's Duty to oppose Heresy with
all one's might, when any body prefesses it openly; but that one ought to
forbear making a Schism upon mere Suspicions. Page 203.
When (says he) that which troubles us, is only a Suspicion, and a Fear
grounded upon no Certainty; Patience is more useful than Precipitation, and
Condescension more than Passion. It Is much better to remain united together, to
correct mutually one another, as the Members of the same Body; than to condemn
one another by a Schism, before they understand reciprocally one another; or to
lose the Trust which they put one in another by a Division, and than to
undertake to correct others, not after a brotherly, but tyrannical manner, with
Edicts and Laws. -- Lastly, Gregory exhorts the Church of Nazianzum to keep the
good depositum concerning the Doctrine of the Trinity, which he expresses in
these terms: Page 204.
We worship a Father, a Son, and a Holy Spirit; in the Son we acknowledge the
Father, and in the Holy Spirit the Son, etc. Before we join them, we
distinguish 'em; and before we distinguish 'em, we join 'em. We don't look upon
those Three Things as One (GOD,) for they are not things (...). See the Life of
Eusebius.
destitute of a distinct Existence, or that have but One Existence, so that our
Riches be only in Names, not in Things, and that Three Things be really but
One. It Is One Thing not in Existence, but in Divinity. We worship an Unity in a
Trinity; and that Trinity reunited in the Unity, is all adorable and Royal; it
has but One Throne and Glory; it is all above the World, above Time,
Uncreated, etc.

That Speech, as almost all the Speeches of Gregory, is, 1st. Without any great
Order: Thoughts are heaped one upon another, as they came into the Author's
Mind; a Defect which almost all the ancient Orators were guilty of, as well as
he, and which makes him repeat the same things to no purpose. 2dly. His
Reasonings seem too farfetch'd, and are not very convincing; as when he says,
That the World is preserved by Peace: That Is a far-fetched Thought; and the
contrary might be said, as indeed some Philosophers have asserted, That the
Opposition which is between the several Parts of the Universe, keeps them in
the state they are in, because they hinder one another from leaving it. 3dly.
The Style of that Oration is too full of Figures, little correct, and even
sometimes harsh; all which things often breed Obscurity. However, it must be
confessed, that he abounds in noble Comparisons, and happy and Energick
Expressions, such as those (...).
which he uses in that place wherein he condemns the Schism which I have
mentioned. He is also full of Ornaments taken out of History, or Heathenish
Fables; nay, he speaks sometimes of the later, as the Pagan Philosophers did,
without openly rejecting them. Thus, speaking of the Flames of Mount Aetna, he
uses this Expression, Orat. iii. p. 86.
whether it be something else, or the blowing of a Giant in torment. Elsewhere,
having spoken of the Torments of Tantalus, Ixion, Orat. iv. p. 132.
and Tityus, he adds; whether it be True, or a Eable, which teaches us the
Truth under a Fiction. Yet there is no doubt but Gregory looked upon all those
things as mere Fables; but the Greek Philosophers, whom he had carefully read,
spoke after the same manner. It seems, that the custom of speaking as others
did, made Gregory say many things, which he had read in Pagan Authors, without
being willing to examine 'em. But he is far from equalling the Neatness,
Exactness and Elegancy of Isocrates, whom, they say, he proposed to himself as
his Model. I thought my self obliged to set down here, in a few words, what may
be said of Gregory's Style, that I may forbear repeating it, when I come to
speak of his other Orations. I shall only present the Reader with some Examples
of what I have said, when occasion offers.

I must also observe here, once for all, that Gregory, with respect to
Philosophy, followed the Platonic, from which he borrows several terms, which
cannot be understood without the knowledge of it. Thus, he says, Page 1^8.
That God is the most Excellent and Highest of all Beings, if one had not
rather place him above the Essence, and put in him the Whole Being, since he
gives it to other things. -- To understand the meaning of those words, to be
above the Essence, we must know, that the Platonicks established some Chains of
Beings, as they worded it; that is, a Series of Beings placed one above
another: so that going up by degrees, in that Chain, more excellent Beings did
still offer themselves; and at last the Supreme Trinity, which is above all the
Essences of those Beings, that is to say, which cannot be referred to any
particular Species, but contains in it self all their Essences, and therefore
can produce 'em. Vid. Proclum. Theol Platon. l. 3. c. 20. and alibi.
Whence it is that those Philosophers say, that the Gods have some
Super-essential Qualities. Without the knowledge of that Platonic Doctrine,
one cannot know Gregory's meaning in the words which I have just now quoted.

He says in the same Page, That Angels partake first of the Light; That they
are enlightened by the True Reason, and that they are some Beams of that Perfect
Light. -- All those terms are taken from the bottom of Platonism, as I could
easily show by explaining them, were it not that I should too much enlarge.

To return to the Historical part: The Arians being informed of the Division
which happened at Nazianzum, took advantage of it, and laughed at the Orthodox.
Which gave occasion to Gregory to make the Homily, which is the XIII. amongst
his Orations; wherein he shows the Arians, that the Division of Nazianzum
having been only by a Mistake, and having not lasted long, they did unjustly
insult over that Church. Besides, he shows the advantage which the Orthodox had
over the Arians and Sabellians, by comparing the Opinions of those three
Societies one with another. Though that Passage is somewhat long, yet I shall
set it down here; because those who have not very well studied those Matters,
will better understand what was the Opinion of the Orthodox at that time, than
they have done from the Passage of the XII. Oration, which I have cited.

Page 208.
Why (says he) do you love Vanity, and look after Lies, by giving ( he speaks to
the Arians) to the Deity a Nature which is neither One, nor Simple, but Three
Natures which are divided and separated, and even contrary, by reason of the
Proprieties which the one has, and the others want; or by establishing One
only Nature ( he speaks to the Sabellians) but a narrow and streightened one,
and which has not the Propriety of being the Principle of great things, either
for want of Power or Will. It should be either out of Envy or Fear, to
establish nothing which should equal it in Honor, or oppose it. But by how
much God is more Excellent than the Creatures, by so much is it a thing more
worthy of the First Cause to be the Principle of a DEITY, than of Creatures,
and not to come to the latter but by a DEITY which is between both; than if a
Deity (...), from whence comes the word (...).
existed ( according to the Arians) because of the Creatures, as it seems to
those who are too subtle. If when we confess the Dignity of the Son and Spirit,
we acknowledged no Principle of them, or if we referred them to a Principle of
another nature, one might have some reason to fear that we dishonor the Deity,
or introduce some Gods contrary one to another. -- A little lower, he says,
That the Unity moved it self, because of its Riches; and that the Number of Two
was increased, because the Deity is above Matter and Form, which are the Two
Principles which Bodies are made of; That the Trinity is bounded, because of
its Perfecton, and surpasses the Conjunction of Two; so that the Deity is
neither too much streight'ned, nor enlarged to Infinity. -- The former (as he
goes on) has somewhat that is mean; and the latter would breed a Confusion. The
former is altogether Jewish, and the latter Heathenish. -- The word, to move
one's self, here is a Platonic term. Vid. Plotin. Ennead. v. l. 1. c. 6, 7.
which those Philosophers use, when they speak of the Productions of the Deity:
And Gregory means, that the Divine Nature was multiplied to Three Hypostases,
or Three Idividuum's; which is opposite to Judaism, which acknowledges but One
Supreme Nature; and to Paganism, which admits of too many Gods. The Platonicks
disputed about this among themselves; some maintained, That the Supreme Deity
had multiplied it self only to Three Gods, Vid. Cyryl viii. cont. Julian. and
Plotin. Ennead. v. l. 8. c. 12.
and that whatever is beyond it is not of a like Nature; and others extended it
to a greater number of Deities. Plato and Porphyry were of the former Opinion,
and Plotinus of the latter.

Julian being come to the Throne, in the Year 361, sought for all manner of
ways to ruin the Christians; and perceiving that they made a great use of the
Pagan Authors, either to fit themselves for Eloquence, or to take from them
some Reasons fit to defend the Christian Religion, and attack Paganism, he
undertook to hinder the Christians from applying themselves to the study of
Humane Learning. Some Ancients say that he forbad 'em Vid. Pagi ad An. 362.
not only to keep Schools to teach it, but also to go to those of the Pagan
Grammarians and Orators; others seem only to say that the Christians were
forbidden to keep Schools. Julian himself says in express Ep. xlii.
words, in one of his Letters, that the Children of Christians should not be
forbidden to go to the Schools of Pagans, however without forcing them to it;
because those who sin only for want of Understanding, ought to be taught, not
punished. Gregory Nazianzen mentions that Prohibition of Julian in his Third
Oration: But, as a Pagi ad Ann. 362.
Modern Author judiciously observes, forasmuch as he speaks there more like an
Orator than an Historian, it is a difficult thing to find out what he means. It Is
an ill effect of the continual Rhetoric of most of the Ancients: They are so
Eloquent, that they cannot be understood. It Is likely that Julian did not forbid
the Children of Christians to go to the Schools of Pagan Teachers, either
because he himself says so, or because it was a good way to seduce 'em. Hence
it is, that some learned Men amongst the Christians, as both Apollinaris's and
Gregory, put the Scripture and Doctrines of Religion in Greek Verses, or fine
Prose. Those Writings might supply the room of those of the Ancient Pagans, and
the Youth needed no Grammarians to understand 'em. Parents might easily be
instead of Tutors to their Children, to explain those Christian Verses to them,
after they had read the Holy Scripture. However, that Prohibition made the
Christians very angry, who could not abide that their Grammarians, Rhetors and
Philosophers should have been sent back to the Churches of the Galileans (these
are Julian's words) to explain there Matthew and Luke. Had they never done any
thing else, they would not have introduced so many new words, nor handled the
Doctrines then in question with so many Subtilties, nor would the Platonic
Philosophy have had so great a share in their Decisions.

About that time, Caesarius, Gregory's Brother, who was returned (as has been
said) to Constantinople, was made Julian's Chief Physician; and because of his
Learning, he was admitted into the number of the Friends of that Emperor, who
loved learned Men. Whereupon Gregory wrote to him a very sharp Ep. xvii.
Letter, wherein he tells him, That he had made all his Family ashamed, by
reason of his Conduct; That every body wondered that a Bishop's Son should
follow the Court, and endeavor to get Honors and Riches among the Pagans;
That he made his Father's Life unpleasant to him, who could not blame in others
what his Son did; That they were obliged to conceal his Conduct from his
Mother, lest she should die with Grief; That he had enough to live handsomely,
without exposing himself to so great danger. Lastly, That if he went on in the
same manner of life, he must be rank't among those Christians who least deserve
that Name. If Caesarius was not persuaded by that Letter to return to his
Parents, it is likely however that it strengthened him against Julian's
Endeavors to induce him to renounce Christianity, which his Brother mentions
in Orat. x. p. 167, 168.
one of his Orations. He says, that Caesarius having answered all his Reasons,
protested to him that he was a Christian, and would be so all his lifetime;
and that Julian, in the presence of many Persons of his Court, cried out,
thinking of the Bishop of Nazianzum and his two Sons, O Happy Father! O Unhappy
Children! Caesarius being either weary of Julian's Solicitations, or moved with
his Brother's Advice, returned to Nazianzum, when Julian set out to go against
the Persians.

It seems that about the same time, Julian sent a Captain with some Archers
Orat. xix. p. 308.
to Nazianzum, to take possession of the Church of the Christians. But he was
so far from being able to perform what he desired, that if he had not speedily
made his escape, by the Bishop's or some other's Advice, he must have retired
with broken Legs; (...) pedibus lace^^tis.
so great was the Ardour of that Priest's ( Gregory the Father) Anger and Zeal
for that Church! Those are the very words of his Son: Which shows, that those
good Men did not always preach up Passive Obedience.

In the Year 363, Julian was killed in his Retreat before the Persian Army:
Ibid.
An effect, if we believe charitable Gregory, of the Prayers of the same Bishop
and People, who designed to break the Legs of the Captain of the Archers, whom
I mentioned just now.

At that time Gregory composed his two Invectives against Julian, wherein he
omits nothing that can make him odious to all Posterity. Those two Orations are
as full of Resentment and Passion, as can be imagined, against a Man, who,
abating of his Paganism, had been one of the Greatest Emperors that ever were
in the Roman Empire. A learned Man believed that those two Orations were made
public whilst Julian was alive; but it is a Mistake: Gregory mentions his Death
in both of them. The same P. Cunaeus Praef. in Caesares Juliani.
Author observes, not without reason, That we are extremely deceived by the
Authority of some of those who have been formerly illustrious in the Church,
when we come to judge after them of some Princes of their time. Prejudices are
so strong (as he goes on) that most Men examine nothing, but are drawn by the
Holiness of those great Men. The Vulgar fancies that it is a great Sin to
believe that the Piety of those Men was not always attended with a great
Candor. For my part, as I am persuaded that they had great Virtue, so I do
believe that they have committed some Faults out of Passion, and I remember
that they are very sharp. To say nothing of others, those who had some
Reputation in Greece, were apt, according to the ill Custom of their Nation, to
fall into Extremes, etc. They cast into Hell those with whom they were angry,
although their Virtue had raised them to Heaven: And on the contrary, they have
so much extolled those whom they undertook to Praise, that Posterity admires
nowadays their Virtue, which was scarce of the second Order. -- Those who
will judge soundly of the Panegyricks and Invectives of the Christian
Antiquity, ought necessarily to remember that Genius of the Greeks.

1. Gregory begins his Orat. iii. p. 49.
First Invective with opprobious Words against Julian; to the hearing of which
he invites Heaven and Earth. He addresses himself particularly to the Soul of
Constans, who made Julian Caesar: speaking to him he adds these words, Page 50.
If the Dead perceive any thing: From whence it appears, that he doubted
whether the Dead know any thing of what passes below. Yet he says elsewere,
Page 63.
That he censures him, as if Constans was present and heard him, although he
was with God, and enjoyed his Glory: Which shows that this was only a mere
Rhetorical Apostrophe, from which nothing can be concluded.

2. He very much wonders that Constans raised Julian to the Dignity of Caesar,
knowing what he was; and at the same time makes the Encomium of the former,
whose Piety he praises every where: Page 65.
He defends him against those who accused him of Imprudence, for having raised
Julian so high, after he had put to death his Brother Gallus; and says, that he
hoped to allay the Mind of Julian by his Favors, and that trusting altogether
to his own strength, he did not fear him in the least, as one might have seen,
if Constans had not died. In the following Speech against Julian, speaking of
the same Emperor, he excuses him Orat. iv. p. 119.
for the Protection he granted to the Arians. He says that he was imposed upon,
out of Simplicity, and want of Firmness, and that he was deceived by the
seeming Zeal he perceived in the Arian Officers of the Court. It would be a
difficult thing to reconcile that with the Principles of Gregory, who looked
upon the Arian Disputes as material ones, were it not that it is well known that
the words of an Orator are not to be urged as those of a Mathematician. But it
would be a hard matter to reconcile him with St. Hilary Bishop of Poitiers, who
treated Constans much worse than Gregory did Julian. Those Great Men acted as
others do; they spoke according to the present Passion they were led by,
without very much weighing the Figures and Expressions which they used.

3. Gregory Page 51.
does justly laugh at Julian, who forbad the Christians to teach Profane
Learning; for the Reasons of the Christians would not have been less strong,
though they were not propounded with so great Eloquence. But he feigneth to
despise Eloquence and Politeness, which certainly he did not despise, and which
he displays, as much as he can, in all his Writings, which would be very often
clearer, if there was not so much Rhetoric in them. He does also upbraid
Julian, who trusted much his Eloquence, with the great desire he showed of
taking from the Christians the Means of acquiring it; which (says he) is the
same thing as if a Champion should Hector, and play the Courageous Man, after
he has forbidden all other Champions to fight with him.

4. He assures Page 58.
that Constans had taken a particular Care of the Education of Gallus and
Julian, Sons of one of his Uncles, Brother of Canstantine, and whose Name was
also Constans, to show that he had no hand in the Murder of the latter, which
was committed when Constans, Constantine's Son, came to the Throne. Nay, he
designed to impart the Empire to his two Sons, who were of a very different
Temper, if we believe Gregory. Though they had been instructed after the same
manner, and would both be Anagnostes, or read the Holy Scripture in the Church,
it appeared afterward that one of them was no Christian. Besides, there was a
report, and Gregory believed it was true, that Gallus and Julian building a
Temple, at common Costs, to the Honor of some Martyrs, that which Gallus
caused to be built, did sensibly increase; but the Earth quaked in the place
wherein Julian was building, and whatever was raised, sunk down. There happened
many other Miracles besides, all different from those of the Gospel, which were
not wrought so much in the behalf of Unbelievers, as of those whose Disposition
made 'em not altogether unworthy of them. It Is true, that Page 70.
Gregory says, that some Lies had been mixed with the Truth, and relates only,
in a doubtful way, what was reported, that Julian, as he was sacrificing, saw a
a Crowned Cross in the Bowels of a Victim. But he assures as certain some
things that are much more incredible, in the following Oration; Page 71.
and in this he says, that Julian having called out the Demons, with certain
Sacrifices, could not forbear being frighted, as soon as he heard the Noise,
and that he saw certain Fires which commonly precede their Apparition, and that
forasmuch as he had been bred up in the Christian Religion, he made the Sign of
the Cross, which presently drove away all those Spectrum's. The Priest, who
performed the Ceremonies, and perceived the trouble Julian was in, told him
that the Gods abhorred him upon that account, not that they were afraid of the
Sign of the Cross, which he had made.

5. Gregory Page 72.
derides the Artifices which Julian made use of to persecute the Christians,
without procuring them the Honor of Martyrdom, and without seeming to treat
them ill; because whatever Pretense he used, one might easily see that their
greatest Crime was Christianity. Persecution upon the account of Religion, is
so odious of it self, even to all those who have still some sense of Humanity
left, that even those who practice it, are ashamed of it, when Superstition and
Cruelty allow them some time to think somewhat more calmly on what they are
doing. This is so true, that most of those who have suffered themselves to be
led by the blind Zeal of Persecution, have used the same Artifices. We have
seen an egregious Example of it in our Age; and if what Gregory says here of
the pitiful Arts and Cunnings of Julian, be compared with what was lately done
in a great Kingdom, one will find a great Resemblance between both. I shall
omit it here, lest any body should think that I design to insist upon so odious
a Parallel.

6. Amongst other Reasons, which Gregory uses, to show that Julian could not
succeed in his Design, he describes thus the Power of the Saints which the
Christians honored; Page 76, 77.
Did you not fear those on whom so great an Honor is bestowed, and for whom
solemn Feasts have been instituted; by whom the Demons are driven away, and
Diseases cured, whose Apparitions and Predictions are known; the very Bodies
whereof have as much Virtue as their holy Souls, whether they be touched or
honored; some drops of whose Blood only have the same Virtue with their
Bodies? -- It appears from those words, and several other places out of
Gregory, and other Fathers in his time, that they had already a great respect
for the Relics of Saints, and vented a great many Miracles wrought at their
Graves. It Is to be wondered how Gregory, who loved Exaggerations, said not that
the Bodies of the Saints had a greater Virtue after their Death, than during
their Life; for there is no comparison between the multitude of Miracles which
are said to have been wrought at the Graves of Martyrs, and those which they
wrought whilst they were alive. Several People believe that the want of
Sincerity of some Christians, and the Credulity of some others, did very much
contribute to the keeping up of Paganism.

7. Our Author Page 77.
makes afterward an Encomium of the Monks, and despises Socrates, Plato, and
all the Heathen Philosophers. Gregory upbraids Julian with his not esteeming
Virtue in his Enemies; but certainly his Zeal made him on this occasion commit
somewhat like it; and it is very certain that he had learned more by the reading
of Plato and Socrates's Discourses, than by his Conversation with all the Monks
he had seen. As for Manners, the continual Seditions of those Pious Hermits,
and their implacable Temper, do plainly enough show that they were infinitely
below those great Patterns of the Pagan Antiquity.

8. He Page 80.
rightly observes, that to design the ruin of the Christian Religion, in a
time when the Roman Empire was full of Christians, was to undertake to ruin
the Empire it self. When they were but a small number, they might have been ill
treated without any danger to the State; but it could not then be done, without
causing great Commotions, and too great Disorders in it. It were to be wished
that the Imitators of Julian had well considered that Advertisement of Gregory,
who despises, with great reason, whatever might be good in Julian's Government,
if compared with the mischief which so detestable a Design would have been the
cause of, if he had been able to execute it. Besides, one could have wished
that our Age Page 83, 84.
had been well acquainted with the horror the Christians had for the Snares
which Julian laid for his Officers and Soldiers. Gregory says that some
Christian Soldiers having, on one day wherein Julian was distributing some
Liberalities to his Army, thrown Incence into the Fire in his presence,
according to an ancient Custom; it had been interpreted, as if they had
incensed the Idols; and having been told of their fault, as they were praying
to Christ by making the Sign of the Cross after a Meal, by some who told 'em
that they had renounced him, they presently went into the public Place, and
cried even in the Emperor's hearing, that they had been surprised, and were
Christians. Julian being angry because they had found out that Surprise, sent
'em into Banishment.

9. Gregory describes Page 87, 88.
some horrible Cruelties against the Christians, which Julian had either
commanded or suffered in Egypt and Syria. He says, that the Inhabitants of
Arethusa, a Town of Syria, after they had exposed some Virgins consecrated to
God to a thousand Infamies, killed them, ate their Liver raw, and threw their
Bodies to be eaten by Dogs, having covered them with Barley. The same People
treated with an abominable Barbarity, the Bishop of that Town, who
notwithstanding seemed to be insensible in the midst of Torments. There might
be some Exaggerations in this, and Page 88.
Gregory says, that that Bishop had, in Constans's time, demolished an
Habitation of Demons; that is, a Pagan Temple, according to the Power he had
received from the Emperor. That Action of Mark of Arethusa drew on him the
Hatred of the People, as a Heathen would have been detested by the Christians,
if he had pulled down one of their Churches. Notwithstanding, Gregory says Page
97.
a little lower, not only that the Christians had not treated the Pagans, as
they were treated by them; but he asks them what Liberty the Christians took
from them? As if it was nothing to pull down their Temples, as they did Sozom.
l. 2. c. 5.
since the Empire of Constantine! They went on with the same Rigor, under the
following Emperors; and to leave nothing that the Pagans might be upbraided
with, they forbad; on pain of Death, to sacrifice to Idols, with the Applauses
of all Christians, if we believe Ep. 48. ad Vincentium.
St. Augustine. I must not forget here to observe another effect of Gregory's
Rhetoric, viz. speaking of the Christian Virgins of Arethusa, who had been so
ill treated, he does not only inveigh against the Pagans, but also addresses
himself to our Savior, by way of Apostrophe, in these words; O Jesus Christ!
how shall I suffer the Patience you showed then?

10. Julian added Page 94.
Insults to ill Treatments; and when he deprived the Christians of their
Estates, he said that he only helped them to observe the Gospel, which commands
to despise them. That Railery may be seen in Julian's Forty third Letter, where
he says, that the Church of the Arians of Edessus having used them violently,
he had confiscated all the Money of that Church, to distribute it to the
Soldiers; and kept their other Goods for himself, lest the Arians being too
rich, should not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. To which Gregory answers,
amongst other things, that Julian, by acting so, must needs have fancied that
the Gods of Pagans are well pleased that Men should be deprived of what they
have, without having deserved it, and so that they approve Injustice. He might
have been content with that Answer; but he adds, That Christ has commanded
some things as necessary, and propounded some others only for those who would
observe them, without absolutely obliging any body to do it. Such is (according
to Gregory) the Command of forsaking what one has.

11. One of the things which offended most the Christians of that time, and
about which they did not always defend themselves so well as they might have
done, is, their being upbraided by the Pagans with keeping up Ignorance, Page
99.
since they preached nothing but Faith: You don't reason (said Julian to them,)
you are mere Clowns, and all your Wisdom consists in saying, Believe. Gregory
answers to that, That if Julian derided the Christians, by reason of that
Method, he should also have derided Pythagoras, whose Disciples were wont to
say, when they were asked the Reason of something, That Pythagoras had said so,
which is all one. -- He adds, That the Christians mean only by it, That it is
not lawful to refuse to believe what has been said by Men Inspired of God; but
that they so much deserve to be believed, that that only is a Demonstration of
what they say, stronger than the whole Faculty of Reasoning and Contradicting.
-- Celsus had raised the same Objection, Origin. in Celsum. p. 8. etc.
and laughed at those who said, Examine nothing, but believe. Origin answered,
That it was indeed impossible for the Common People to examine things
thoroughly; and that there was nothing more convenient for them, than to
Believe, without knowing why. Such Answers could not very much recommend
Christianity, nor put the Christians in a Condition of Triumphing over the
Pagans, who might have stopped their mouths with like Answers. For, if one must
Believe, without knowing why, one may as well believe any thing, though never
so absurd.

12. Julian having observed that the Church Discipline and good Order among the
Christians, did very much contribute to unite them one with another; and to
increase their number, was resolved to introduce them into Paganism. He
designed to Page 102.
set up Schools in every Town, wherein the Pagan Religion and good Manners
should be taught; to order public Prayers and Censures against those who
should commit some Faults; and to erect Monasteries, and Hospitals where the
Poor, Sick, etc. should be taken care of. The Christians had maintained
themselves, and increased, in the midst of Persecutions, by such means which
were much more proper to work upon the Common People, than Reasoning. Those who
have writ concerning the manner how Christianity was propagated, have most of
them omitted, I know not why, the good Order and constant Charity practiced
among them.

13. To make an end of the Extract of that Oration, I shall only say, that
Gregory does afterward Page 103, etc.
fall upon the Theology of the Pagans. He is much stronger on this occasion,
than when he defends himself; and it seems that he knew much better the
weak-side of the Pagan Religion, than the strong one of his own.

I shall further give an Extract of the chief places of his Second Oration
against Julian, and then I shall only in general show the Subject of the other
Writings of Gregory, which will be sufficient to know his Genius. That Oration
contains in general the ill Designs of Julian against the Christians, some of
his Actions, and his Death.

1 He Orat. iv. p. 111.
would favor the Jews, to oppose them to the Christians, and rebuild the
Temple of Jerusalem. When the Jews began that Work, there happened, as when
Julian himself was building with his Brother Gallus, so great an Earthquake,
that they all ran away. As they were going into a neighboring Temple to secure
themselves, the Gates shut themselves of their own motion, as some reported it.
But every body, if we believe Gregory, affirmed, that, as they intended to
force their entrance into that Temple, some Flames came out of it, which
consumed part of them, and lamed the rest. If any miraculous thing happened on
this occasion, it must be confessed, that they took little care to write it
faithfully; since History varies so much about it, as one may see by comparing
only Socrates and Sozomen with Gregory. However, the latter speaks very
positively of that Fire, which came out of the Foundations, or out of the
Temple; and to convince altogether Unbelievers, he adds, Let no body refuse to
believe those Miracles, unless he rejects the other Miracles of God too. That
which is most admirable and glorious, is, that a Light was seen in Heaven,
which represented the Cross, etc. -- The Miracle did not stop there; Let those
who have seen that Miracle (says Gregory) show their Clothes marked with the
Cross. As soon as any one, either of ours, or a Stranger, related this, or
heard some body who related it, he perceived that Wonder either in himself, or
those who were by him. He saw it shine in his Clothes, or in those of others,
after a more artificial manner than the finest Weaving, or the most exact
Picture can represent it. -- That Miracle, together with the foregoing,
converted an infinite number of People, if we believe Gregory.

2. Afterward he Page 114, etc.
describes Julian's March, and Behavior against the Persians, and his Death,
about which they did not agree, some relating it one way, and some another; a
variety to be observed not only amongst those who were not at the Fight, where
he died, but also amongst those who were in it. Gregory says what he heard
concerning it, but he has not related that was reported about it, as it
appears from what Sozomen relates, lib. 4. c. 1, 2. But he forbears especially
saying that Libanius the Sophist accused the Christians of having killed that
Emperor. From whence one may learn, that when the Question is about Facts, one
ought not to rely too much upon Circumstances. Our Author, who takes advantage
of every thing, prefers Constans before Julian, Fag. 118.
because Constans his Funeral was better ordered than his Cousin's, and because
he was Praised after his Death; whereas the Memory of Julian was abhorred by
the Christians. Among the Ceremonies wherewith they honored that of Constans,
Gregory reckons Ibid.
the Nocturnal Hymns and Torches, as if Constans had been the happier for it
after his Death.

3. After having upbraided Julian with his Inconstancy, Covetousness, angry
Temper, and several other Vices, Page 121, etc.
he says, that he had foreseen a great while before, when he was at Athens,
what others knew by experience of that Emperor. It seemed to him, that no good
thing could be expected from a Man who shook his Head at ever minute, who moved
and raised up his Shoulders, who had wandering Eyes, a furious Look, staggering
Feet, an insolent Countenance, together with something that was ridiculous, an
excessive breaking in laughter, and a broken Voice; who asked impertinent
Questions, and returned no better Answers.

When Gregory saw this, he said, in the presence of many Persons, that he
wished to prove a false Diviner, but, that the Roman Empire was breeding a
great Evil. A Cunaeus Praes. in Caesares.
learned Man, whom I have already quoted, could not abide that Gregory should
find fault with Julian for some things, which of themselves have no relation
with Virtue.

4. Gregory, Page 124, 127.
who had begged of God that Julian should be punished; as soon as he died,
looked upon the Pagans with Pity, and exhorted the Christians to treat 'em with
Mildness; though he rejoices because the Christian Churches would be no more
polluted, the Altars profaned, Things consecrated to God ravished, Churchmen
ill treated, the Relics of Martyrs burnt, etc. Afterward he insults over the
False Gods, and admonishes the Christians not to make an ill use of Prosperity,
and to forbeat doing what they reproached to the Pagans. In the beginning of
his Page 128.
Exhortation, he speaks of himself thus, to excite the Attention of the
Hearers: Hear the Discourse of a Man who has not acquired a mean knowledge of
those things, either by the experience of what happens every day, or by the
reading of ancient Books, and ancient Histories.

5. However, the greatest Page 131.
Satisfaction of the Christians, after Julian's Death, was, according to
Gregory, that those who had persecuted the Christians, were ridiculed upon the
Stage, and in Public Places and Assemblies. That which is surprising (says he)
is, that those who persecuted us together with others, do now overthrow, with
great Acclamations, the Statues of the Gods, by whom they were so long
deceived: These who worshipped them yesterday, do now use them opprobriously.
-- But those who continued in the Heathenish Religion, were undoubtedly very
much offended to see the Statues of their Gods so dealt with, and could not
look upon the Christians as moderate Men. For certainly those Statues were as
dear to them, as the most Sacred Things were to the Christians. Besides, those
who changed their Religion, as often as they had a new Emperor, and became so
suddenly Enemies to the Gods whom they had worshipped all their life, could not
but be very much suspected.

6. Lastly, Gregory having Page 183.
derided Julian's Speeches and Writings, which notwithstanding are not so
contemptible, tells him that he boasts in vain of having never contracted any
Crudity by eating too much; since the Harm he had done the Christians, was
infinitely greater than the Good which might accrue to the Empire from his
Sobriety. When one only Man (says he) is troubled with Crudities, and feels the
Inconveniences of it, Is the Commonwealth the worse for it? But the whole
Empire must needs suffer upon the account of so violent a Persecution, and so
many Troubles. -- In effect, the want of Royal Virtues in a Prince, is a
greater defect, than to be destitute of those which Private Men ought to have.

To return to our History, Gregory having been ordained a Priest against his
Will, as has been already said, resolved to retire into the solitary places of
Pontus, without his Father's leave. His Brother Caesarius being then returned
from Court, to live with his Parents, helped him to it. In the mean time, his
Father being a very Old Man, and no longer able to bear the burden of a
Bishopric, obliged him to return, to help him. Basil himself endeavored to
persuade him not to deny his Father. He was made a Bishop, to be his Coadjutor,
and performed the Episcopal Functions, which his Father was not able to
perform. At that time he made the Oration, which is the Fifth in order, wherein
he addresses himself to his Father and to Basil, Page 136.
and says, that he took the Long Habit and Miter at their Solicitation. It Is a
hard matter to know whether he pronounced that Complement, or was contented to
write it down; but he recited before the People the Forty first Oration, which
runs upon the same Subject. Not long after, he made the long Apology for his
Flight, which is in the beginning of his Works. He sets down at large the
Difficulties which attend the Exercise of Episcopacy; and says, that
notwithstanding, he was resolved to come, to comply with the Church of
Nazianzum and his Parents Desires, who equally wished for his return.

Among the Reasons which had deterred him from Episcopacy and Priesthood, he
reckons the shameful manner after which many endeavored to come to it, though
they were never so unworthy of it, and and the multitude of Pretenders. Orat.
i. p. 5.
They look upon that Dignity (says he) not as an Employment wherein they ought
to be Examples of Virtue, but as the means of Maintaining themselves; not as a
Ministry, of which they must give an Account; but as a Magistracy, which is
liable to no Examination. They are almost more numerous than those whom they
govern, etc. And I believe, that the Evil growing worse in time, they will have
no body to govern, but all will be Teachers, and Saul himself shall be seen
among the Prophets. -- He says, Page 21.
That ignorant Men and Children were brought into the Pulpits; Page 30.
That Churchmen were not better than the Scribes and Pharisees; Page 33.
That no Charity was observed in them, but only Anger and Passion; That their
Piety did only consist in condemning the Impiety of other Men, whose Conduct
they observed, not to reclaim them, but to defame them; That they blamed or
praised Men, not because of their good or bad Life, but according to the Party
which they had embraced; That they admired among themselves, what they sharply
censured in another Party; That there was nothing to be seen amongst 'em but
Disputes like Night-Fights, wherein Friends are not distinguished from Enemies;
That they wrangled about Trifles, on the specious Pretense of defending the
Faith: Lastly, That they were abhorred by the Heathens, and despised by good
Men among the Christians. This is a true Picture of the Lives of the
Ecclesiastics in his time, as it does but too plainly appear by the History of
that time. It Is an unlucky thing, that those of our time are so much like them,
that were it not known from whence those Complaints come, one would be apt to
look upon them as a Picture of our Modern Divines.

Another Difficulty which attended the Exercise of Episcopacy, consisted in
discoursing well of the Mysteries of Christianity, and especially of the Page
16.
Holy Trinity; concerning which, according to Gregory, a medium ought to be
kept between the Jews, who acknowledge but One God; and the Pagans, who worship
Many: A Medium which Sabellius did not keep, by making the same God, considered
under several Relations, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit; nor Arius, by
maintaining that they are of different Natures. As for him, he believed (as we
have already seen, and as he repeats it here and in many other places) that he
kept that wished for Medium, by establishing Three Principles Equal in
Perfection, though the Father be the Principle of the Son and Holy Spirit.

It seems that Gregory had not been long his Father's Coadjutor, when his
Brother Caesarius died. 'Twas not long after the Earthquake which happened in
Bithynia, in October, in the Year 368. He was then at Orat. x. p. 169.
Nice, where he exercised the Office of Questor, or the Emperor's Treasurer.
That City was almost altogether ruined, and he was the only Officer of Valens
who saved himself from that Danger. Gregory made a Funeral Oration in his
Praise, which is the Tenth of those that are extant. He makes a short
Description of his Life, the chief Circumstances of which I have related;
describes the Vanity of whatever we enjoy here; and makes several Observations
upon Death, and the manner of comforting one's self upon the Death of one's
Relations. He wishes that his Brother may be in Page 168.
Abraham's Bosom, whatever it may be: And toward the Page 173.
end, describing the Happiness of Good Men after Death, he says, that according
to Wise Men, their Souls are full of Joy, in the Contemplation of their future
Happiness, until they are received into the Heavenly Glory after the
Resurrection. Caesarius had given his Estate to the Poor at his Death, yet
notwithstanding they had much ado to save it; those who were at his death
having feized the greatest part of it, as Gregory complains in his Eighteenth
Letter, whereby he desires Sophronius Governor of Bithynia to use his Authority
in it.

Basil, Gregory's Friend, having been made Bishop of Caesarea, Vid. Pagi Crit.
ad hunc ann.
in the Year 370, had some difference with Valens, which I shall not mention
here, because it does not at all relate to the Life of his Friend. This was
perhaps the reason that moved that Emperor to divide Cappadocia into Two
Provinces, and to make Tyane the Metropolis of the Second Cappadocia. Forasmuch
as the Jurisdiction of the Metropolitans reached as far as the extent of the
Province, several Bishops who were before Suffragan of Caesarea, became
Suffragan of Tyane; so that Basil saw himself at the head of a lesser number of
Bishops than before. Orat. xx. p. 456.
The new Metropolitan drew to himself the Provincial Assemblies, ceased the
Revenues of his Diocese, and omitted nothing to lessen the Authority and
Revenues of Basil. Anthimus (such was the Bishop of Tyane's Name) who was an
Arian, sheltered himself under the pretense of Piety, and said that he could
not give up the Flocks to Basil's Instruction, whose Opinions concerning the
Son of God were not right, nor suffer that any Tribute should be paid to
Heretics. Gregory assures us, that he got some Soldiers to stop Basil's Mules,
to hinder him from receiving his Rents. Basil found no other remedy to it, but
to make new Bishops, who should have a greater care of the Flocks than he could
have; and by whose means, every Town should carefully receive what was due to
them. Sasime being one of those Towns in which he was resolved to put some
Bishops, he cast his Eyes upon his Friend Gregory, to send him to it, without
considering that that Place was altogether unworthy of a Person of such Merit:
'Twas a Greg. de Vita sua, p. 7.
little Town, without Water and Grass, and full of Dust; a Passage for
Soldiers, and inhabited only by some few poor Men. The Income of that
Bishopric was very small; and besides, he must either resolve to defend it by
Force against Anthymus, or submit to that new Metropolitan. Gregory refused
that Employment; but at length the Importunity and Dexterity of Basil, who
wrought upon Gregory's Father, obliged him to accept of it.

It seems, that about that time he made his Seventh Oration, wherein he
addresses himself to his Father and Basil, and desires their Help and
Instruction to govern his new Church at Sasime. Notwithstanding* he says freely
enough to Basil, that the Episcopal Throne had made a great Alteration in him,
and that he was much milder when he was among the Sheep, than since he was a
Pastor.

The next day, he made Orat. vi.
another Oration on the Arrival of Gregory Nyssen, Basil's Brother, to whom he
further complains of the violence his Brother had done him* and because 'twas a
Day of some Martyr's Feast, he adds several things on that occasion, concerning
the Manner of Celebrating Holy Days, not with Profane Rejoicing, but Pious
Exercises. He says, amongst other things, That it is then time to raise one's
self, and become God ((...)) if one may so say, and that the Martyrs perform
therein the Office of Mediators ((...).) -- That Expression, to become God,
instead of, to become a Good Man, and despise Earthly things, does often occur
in Gregory's Writings. He says elsewhere, That the Priests Orat. i. p. 31. and
Orat. xxiii. p. 410.
are Gods, and Deifie other Men; Orat. ii. p. 46.
That Solitude Deify's. Introducing Orat. xx. p. 349.
Basil, who refused to embrace Arianism, he makes him say, That he could not
worship a Creature, he who was a Creature of God too, and had received a
Commandment of being God. -- It ought to be observed, that that Expression was
used among the Pythagoreans; as may be seen by the last Golden Verse of
Pythagoras, upon which Hierocles may be consulted.

When Gregory came to Sasime, the misery of that Place made him believe that
Basil despised him, and abused altogether his Friendship. Though he took upon
him the Government of it for a little time, yet he exercised no Episcopal
Function in it. He did not Pray publicly with the People, nor lay his Hands on
any body. Forasmuch as he went thither against his Will, and without engaging
himself to stay there, he thought he might leave that Church, and return into
the Solitary Place out of which they took him, when he came to Nazianzum. He
Ep. 31, 32. and de Vita sua, p. 7. and alibi.
complained sharply of Basil's Pride, whom the Episcopal Throne of Caesarea had
so blinded, that he had no more any regard to his Friends. Those Complaints,
though never so just, were looked upon as a Rebellion, by the Metropolitan; who
seemed to have forgot the Esteem he formerly had for Gregory, and the Services
the latter had done him, in his Promotion to the Sea of Caesarea. Yet Gregory
continued to complain that he had been shamefully dealt with by his Friend.

Gregory having left Sasime, Greg. Presb. in ejus Vita, p, 14.
retired into an Hospital of Sick Men, whom he took care to consolate; and his
Father desired him, in vain, to return to Sasime; he could never resolve
himself to do it, nor brook the Unkindness of Basil, who out of fifty
Bishoprics, which were in his Diocese, had given him the least. All that
Gregory the Father could obtain from his Son, was, that he should reassume the
care of the Bishopric of Nazianzum during his Life, Ep. xlii. and Orat. viii.
without engaging himself to succeed him.

It seems that at that time, a Commissary of the Emperor, who had been a very
good Friend of Gregory, came to Tax the Inhabitants of Nazianzum: They fearing
he would not Tax them according to Equity, obliged Gregory to make the
Discourse which is his Ninth Oration, wherein he exhorts Men of all Conditions
to Piety, and addresses himself to Julian, who was the Emperor's Commissary, to
induce him to lay that Tax like an Honest Man. Yet there happened a Tumult at
Nazianzum, which exasperated the Imperial Commissary, and gave Gregory occasion
to pronounce his Seventeenth Oration, which is upon the same Subject, and
wherein he exhorts the People to Patience, and the Commissary to Moderation.

It Is also believed that his Sister Gorgonia, who married a Man of Quality,
whose Name was Vitalian, died about this time. Gregory made her Funeral
Oration, which is the Eleventh in order. I shall not mention the Praises he
bestows upon her, upon the account of her Piety, and wise Conduct. I shall only
observe these Two things: 1st. That Gorgonia Orat. xi. p. 188.
was Baptized with her Husband but a little while before she died, according to
the Custom of that time. Her Brother did so much esteem her Piety, that he does
not stick to say, that there is scarce any body else to whom Baptism was rather
a Seal than a Grace; that is to say, rather a Confirmation of the Virtue she
had before, than the Infusion of new Holiness. 2. At the end of his Oration,
having said, in his Address to her by a Rhetorical Figure, very frequent in our
Author, that she enjoys the Contemplation of the Heavenly Glory, he goes on
thus; If you have any regard to us, and if God has given to Holy Souls the
Privilege of perceiving such things, receive our Oration rather than Funeral
Gifts. It appears from thence, that he doubted whether the Souls of Dead Men
know what is done here. One may also observe, that the word which I have rendered
Privilege, (...) Hes. Opera and Dies verse. 125.
is the same which Hesiod uses, when he says that Jupiter has given to Kings
the Advantage of being after their death the Guardians of Men.

In the Year 371, Athanasius Bishop of Alexandria being dead, Gregory Orat. xxi.
made his Funeral Oration, some Years after, V. p. 376.
being at Constantinople. I shall say something of it, when I come to that part
of Gregory's Life.

In the Year 374, Gregory made another Funeral Oration, in Praise of his
Father, which is the Nineteenth in order. He says that he died, being almost a
Hundred Years old, having been a Bishop Five and forty Years. His Son makes his
Panegyric at large, by giving an Abridgment of his Life; and endeavors to
consolate his Mother Nonna, whom he also praises very much. He addresses
himself to his Father, Orat. xix. p. 314.
whom he desires to let him know what Glory he was in, and to govern both the
Flocks and Pastors, of which he was named the Father, and especially his Son.
-- Here he uses no word which may excuse so violent a Figure as that Prosopoeia
is; and had he not used elsewhere some softening words in the like occasions,
it would perhaps be a difficult thing to distinguish that Apostrophe from a
true Invocation.

His Mother Nonna, who was almost as Page 315.
old as her Husband, died soon after; and it was not necessary that Gregory
should make any Discourse to her Praise, because he had already made her
Panegyric, in the Funeral Oration of his Father. After the death of the
latter, they would oblige him to take upon him the Bishopric of Nazianzum; and
'twas pretended that he had engaged himself to keep it, when he began to take
care of it. But Ep. xlii.
he excused himself, because of his Old Age; and the Bishops of the Province
named Eulalius to succeed his Father; and because 'twas reported that that
Election was made against Gregory's Will, he wrote to Gregory Nyssen, to let
him know that there was nothing done in it but at his desire.

Forasmuch as things were not presently brought to that issue, and Gregory
Carmen de Vit. p. 9.
was afraid that he should be forced to stay at Nazianzum, he retired to
Seleucia in a Monastery, where he staid long enough, till the Church of
Nazianzum should be provided. However, he returned to that Town before the
Election was made; and he was again urged to take his old station, but he would
never do it. The Author of his Life assures, that Basil built at this time an
Hospital for those that were sick of the Leprosy, and that Gregory made on
that occasion his It Is the Sixteenth Oration.
Discourse concerning Charity toward the Poor, especially toward those that
are sick of the Leprosy. That Oration contains several Reflections concerning
Piety in general, and the use of the Good things and Evils of this Life.
Gregory does seldom confine himself to one Subject only, and observe an Order
clear and free from Digressions.

During the Empire of Valens, who favored the Arians, that Sect, and those
that sprung out of it, did very much increase. Carmen de Vita sua, p. 10.
Constantinople especially was full of Arians and Apollinarists, who believed
that the Divinity of Christ was instead of a Soul to his Body. Whereupon
several Bishops, and many amongst the People, who followed the Council of Nice,
obliged Gregory to go to Constantinople, to confirm the Orthodox, and oppose
the Heretics. He says that he undertook that Journey against his will,
especially because 'twas reported that there was to be a Synod made up of
Apollinarists, to establish their Opinion.

Being arrived at Constantinople, Orat. 28. p. 484.
toward the end of the Year 378, he lodged at a Kinsman's of his, whom some
Authors conjecture to have been Nicobulus, who had married Alypiane Daughter of
Gorgonia, Gregory's Sister. Valens had given to the Arians all the Churches of
Constantinople, so that Gregory was obliged to Preach at his Kinsman's House.
There was soon after so great a concourse of People, that that House having no
Chamber that might hold them, the Owner of it pulled it down to make a Church
of it. Orat. 32. p. 527.
It was named Anastasis, that is, the Church of the Resurrection; because the
Orthodox Faith had been, as it were, raised in that Place. Then the Arians
stirred up almost the whole City against him, by accusing him of believing
Three Gods. He ascribes the Zeal of the People against him, to their ignorance
of the manner how to reconcile the Trinity with the Unity of God. It was not
altogether the People's fault; because Gregory himself speaks of it so as to
make one believe that he introduced what we should call Three Gods, according
to the common way of speaking; though, according to his manner of defining the
Unity, it must be said he believed but One. He complains, that they threw Carm.
de Vita, p. 10, 11.
Stones at him, upon that account, and that he was summoned before the Judges
as a Seditious Person.

All that helped to make him more Famous, and encrese the number of his
Admirers. 'Twas then that St. Jerome heard him, as he said in Ep. ad Nepot.
Catal. Script. Eccles. cont. Jovinian. lib. 1.
several places. I have quoted elsewhere a Passage out of that Father, wherein
he gives but an ill Character of Gregory's Eloquence, whom he describes as a
Declamator, and whom the People applauded, without understanding what he said.

The number of the Orthodox increasing every day, they desired to have a Bishop
of their Opinion, and generally cast their Eyes upon Gregory. The Eastern
Orthodox Bishops, especially Meletius of Antioch, Basil of Caesarea, and Peter
of Alexandria, did openly favor him. Yet they succeeded not in their Design.

There was at Alexandria Carm. de Vita sua, p. 12.
one Maximus, a Professed Cynick, and yet a Christian. He pretended to be
desoended from a Noble Family, and in which there had been some Martyrs. After
the Death of Athanasius; the Orthodox having been persecuted in Egypt, he had
been banished into a Village of the Wilderness of Thebais, named Oasis. He went
dressed like the Philosophers, that is, with a ragged Cloak on his Back; he never
cut his Hair, nor shaved his Beard, and went with a Stick, as Diogenes. Thus
living a very austere life, he took upon himself to censure every body's Vices,
without any regard to any one's Quality, as the Ancient Cynicks did. Yet under
that severe Outside, and mortified Countenance, there lay a Soul Deceitful,
Ambitious, Malicious, Covetous, and full of the most shameful Passions. But
because those things appeared not to the Eyes of Men, he got a great
Reputation, not only among the People, but also among the most learned Men. He
kept Correspondence with the Bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia, Gregory's
Friend, Basil. Ep. 41. and 42.
as it appears from two Letters of Basil, which are directed to him.

Gregory received him so well, at his arrival at Constantinople, that he made
an Oration in his Praise, Orat. 23.
wherein he omits nothing that might contribute to make that Impostor be looked
upon as a Great and Good Man. But having since found out his Cheat, Hieron. in
Cat. in Greg.
instead of the Name Maximus, which was prefixed to that Oration, he put that
of Heron, and entitled it thus; An Oration in the Praise of Heron a Philosopher
of Alexandria, sent into Exile because of the Faith, and returned three Years
after. Gregory shows, in that Discourse, what use might be made of the Cynick
Philosophy, in the Christian Religion; and mentions the Persecutions which the
Princes who favored Arianism had exercised against the Orthodox, especially in
Egypt, and against the Philosopher Maximus. He concludes with explaining the
Mystery of the Holy Trinity, and exhorting his Philosopher constantly to
persevere in the Sound Doctrine, which kept a medium between Judaism and *
Arianism. Page 425, etc.
He often makes that Observation, when he mentions the Holy Trinity; and one
may observe in general, by reading his Works, that the same Thoughts do
frequently occur. He advises his Philosopher to despise the Objections that are
raised against that Doctrine, and bids him not be ashamed of the Charge of
Tritheism, whilst others (the Arians and Macedonians) run the hazard of
establishing Two Gods; for (says he) either you will resolve the Difficulty as
they do, or you will not be able to resolve it no more than they, etc.

Gregory having thus made the Panegyric of Maximus, received him at his House,
Instructed, Baptized and Ordained him, and imparted to him his most secret
Thoughts. Carm. de Vita sua, p. 12, etc.
But as soon as Maximus thought himself Learned enough, he saw with grief that
they designed to make Gregory Bishop of Constantinople. He thought he deserved
that Station better than his Master and Benefactor; and perceiving that one of
the Chief Priests of that Church envied also Gregory that Dignity, he joined
with him to cross him. In order to it, Maximus got on his side Peter of
Alexandria, who before favored Gregory. Some time after, the Corn Fleet, which
came every year from Alexandria to Constantinople, arrived there; and the
Masters of the Ships Hammon, Aphammon, Harpocras, Steppas, Rhodon, Anubis and
Hermanubis, joined presently with Gregory's Assembly, though they had Orders to
favor the Design of Maximus, whom two or three Egyptian Bishops designed to
uphold more vigorously afterward. In the mean time, the arrival of the
Egyptians, and the care they took to join with Gregory, rejoiced him so much,
that he made Orat. 24.
an Oration thereupon, wherein he does very much extol the Piety and Constancy
of those of Alexandria, and explains to them his Opinion concerning the
Equality of the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. He does especially enlarge to
prove the Divinity of the Holy Spirit; and among other Reasons, he uses this
Argument, the Terms whereof would seem strange, had I not already observed the
like before: Page 429.
If the Holy Spirit is not God, let him be made God first, and then let him
make me God equal to him in Honor. The meaning of that harsh Expression seems
only to be this, viz. that if the Holy Spirit is not God, he cannot sanctify
Men, which Gregory styles elsewhere, to make Men Gods.

Some learned Men conjecture that about the same time Gregory made the
Panegyric of St. Athanasius, which is his One and twentieth Oration. He
displays in it not only the Virtues of the Bishop of Alexandria, but also
relates at large the Persecutions he suffered, and the Troubles that happened
during his life. He praises him especially for his Orthodoxy and Constancy in
the defense of the Truth: All those (says Page 394.
he) who professed our Doctrine, were divided into Three Parties-Some did not
think well of the Son, and worse yet of the Holy Spirit: Those who had a sound
Belief in those two Points, were very few: He was the first and only Man who
durst openly publish the Truth, or at least he was seconded by very few People.
-- Gregory gives also St. Athanasius Page 395.
the Glory of having brought to an Agreement the Eastern and Western Churches,
which disputing only about Words, yet looked upon one another as Heretics: We
said, agreeably to the Doctrine of Godliness, that there is One Essence, and
Three Existences (Hypostases,) the Former relating to the Nature of the Deity;
and the Second, to the Properties of the Three. The Bishops of Italy
apprehended it so; but because of the scantiness of their Tongue, they could
not distinguish the Hypostasis from the Essence, (because the Latin Churches
Hieron. in Ep. ad Damas. T. 2. p. 13. Ed. Gryph.
rendered the word Hypostasis Substance;) and they introduced the word Person,
lest it should seem they acknowledge Three Essences. What followed from it?
Something ridiculous, or rather, that deserves Pity. A mere Dispute about
Words, was looked upon as a Dispute concerning the Faith. Those who said that
there are Three Persons, were suspected (in the East) of Sabellianism; and
those who mentioned Three Hypostases, were suspected (in the West) of Arianism.
Such was the effect of those Disputes, etc.) St. Athanasius remedied it, by
mildly conversing with every Party, and carefully examining the senses of the
words which they used; and as soon as he perceived that the Eastern and Western
Bishops were of the same Opinion as to the thing, and differed only in
Expressions; he allowed the use of different Terms, and reunited them as to
the Substance of the Doctrine.

To return Carm. de Vit. p. 14, etc.
to Maximus, his Party grew stronger, by the arrival of his Countrymen, in the
Year 379; and the better to engage the Bishops of that Country to serve him, he
sent to them considerable Presents. Wherefore, he borrowed some Money of a
Priest who was lately come from Thassus, an Island of the Archipelago, with
Orders to buy at Constantinnple some Marble, and other Materials for a Church,
which they designed to build in that Island. Not long after that, Gregory being
indisposed, went out of Constantinople, to take the Air, and so gave occasion
to the Bishops to go very early to his Church, and to place Maximus upon the
Episcopal See. They could not make an end of the Ceremony of that Cynicks
Ordination, before it was noised about in the City. Whereupon the Magistrates
of Constantinople, the Clergy, and the People, without excepting the Arians
themselves, went in a Crowd to the Anastasis, and turned those Bishops out of
the Church. They retired into a Playhouse that was hard by, where they cut his
Hair, and Consecrated him. Which did but exasperate the People, who gave
Maximus all sort of ill Language, and blamed Gregory for having too kindly
received that wicked Man into his House.

Gregory having notice of what past, returned presently to Constantinople, and
made that Oration, which is the Twenty-eighth in order; wherein he says, that
he was gone out of Town with some repugnancy, and that the little time he had
been absent, had but increased his Love for his Flock. He does again show the
Perfidiousness of Maximus, and those of his Party; to which he adds a
Description of a true Christian Philosopher. He excuses himself for his having
been deceived by Maximus; because Good Men being not Suspicious, he could not
suspect that that Philosopher would deceive him. Lastly, He says, that he is
ready to leave the Episcopal See, and that he never desired it. He mixes
several general Reflections in that Discourse, and seems to prepare himself to
Patience, by the Consideration of the Miseries of this Life. It appears that he
was an Old Man, because he says that Maximus Page 483.
would perhaps upbraid him with his Old Age, and want of Health; which is
contrary to the Opinon of those who believe that Gregory was born about the
time of the Council of Nice.

Indeed, Gregory's Return got him the People on his side, and obliged Maximus
to leave the City, but not to give over his Design. It seems that he wrote to
the Ep. Ambros. and Epp. Italiae ad Theod. Imp. Conc. T. 2. col. 1007.
Bishops of the Italick Diocese, met in a Synod at Aquileia, to whom he
imparted the News of his Election, which had been approved by the Communicatory
Letters of Peter of Alexandria, which he sent to them, to be read in their
Council. He confessed he had been Ordained in a Private House; but he said it was
because the Arians had seized all the Churches, and that he was forced to give
way to their Violence. The Council, who knew not the Circumstances, approved
his Ordination, thinking that Gregory's Promotion was not according to the
Canons; because a Bishop was not allowed to leave one Church, and settle
himself in another. Their Approbation of Maximus's Ordination was also the
reason why they refused since to Communicate with Nectarius his Successor, and
wrote to the Emperor to desire him to have an eye to it, and to restore
Maximus; or to call a General Council at Rome, to examine that Business.
Damasus Bishop of Rome disappaoved also Gregory's Election, who, according to
the Canons, should have stayed at Sasime, since it was not lawful for a Bishop
In Collect. Romans Holsten. p. 37.
to leave the People committed to his Charge, to remove to another out of
Ambition, which breeds Quarrels and Schisms. Thus he speaks of it in a Letter
written to some Bishops of Egypt, wherein he also blames Mavimus's Election, as
being contrary to the Canons. He wrote Ibid. p. 43.
further to Acholius Bishop of Thessalonica against the same, and exhorted him
to endeavor to get a Catholic Bishop established at Constantinople. It
appears from thence, that Gregory's leaving Sasime, had offended several
People; and perhaps he was somewhat too Nice, for one who was so little
addicted to the World, as he himself says he was. Besides, his resolving to go
to Constantinople, after he had despised Sasime, was a thing that might raise
Suspicions in the Mind of ill-affected Persons. It Is not to be doubted but
Maximus did maliciously make use of all that, to ruin Gregory's Reputation;
and this perhaps emboldened him to go to Thessalonica, to desire Theodosius to
restore him by an Edict. But he was so far from obtaining what he desired, that
the Emperor ordered him with Threatenings to give over his Pursuits. Being
enraged at his having missed his aim, he went to Alexandria; where having drawn
some People to his Party, he threatened Peter Bishop of that City to deprive him
of his Place, if he he did not help him to invade the Bishopric of
Constantinople. The Governor of Alexandria having had notice of this Insolence,
and being afraid that the Cynick would cause some Disturbance, banished him out
of the City; and History does not tell us what became of him afterward.

Gregory being thus got rid of Maximus, was now exposed to the Arian Faction,
which endeavored to cry him down, by ridiculing his Country and Relations.
Besides, they accused him of ill Humor, Carelessness, and other like Defects.
But because those Reproaches were either ill grounded, or inconsiderable, he
easily justified himself, as may be seen in his Twenty-fifth Oration. That
which did him the greatest Prejudice, is, that though he was great Orator,
according to the manner of the Age he lived in, yet he was not really fit to do
a thousand other things necessary to maintain himself against the Arians. He
should have made his Interest at Court, and got the Favor of the Grandee's, to
promote the Interest of his Church: But this he was not capable of, having
spent the greatest part of his Life in Study and Quiet. Hence it is that that
Priest, who had favored Maximus (as I have said) drew several Catholics to
himself, who began to say that Gregory was not capable of well performing the
Episcopal Duties; which required no less Experience and Skill in Affairs, than
Eloquence and Learning.

Gregory was so weary of the Complaints and Crosses of those Men, that one day
De Vita sua, p. 17, 18.
he undertook to take his leave of his People. But he had no sooner said that
he would go, than that the whole Assembly did so earnestly desire him not to
leave them, and not to suffer the Orthodox Doctrine to perish by the Arians
Endeavors, after his departure; that at last he was persuaded to stay till the
Eastern Bishops, who were to meet shortly, as 'twas reported, would choose
another to fill up the Episcopal See of Constantinople.

Such was the state of Affairs, until the arrival of Theodosius at
Constantinple, the 22d. of Vid. Pagt ad hunc Ann. n. 7.
November. 380. That Emperor had been lately Baptized at Thessalonica, by
Acholius an Orthodox Bishop, who had inspired him with the Design of restoring
the Nicene Faith. He had already ordered, being at Thessalonica, C. Th. l. 16.
T. 1. c. 2.
by an Edict bearing date the 27th. of February, That all his Subjects should
have such a Belief concerning the Holy Trinity, as they had at Rome and
Alexandria; That those who would profess it, should be called Catholics, and
the others Heretics; That the Assemblies of the latter should not be called
Churches: and, That they should be liable to Civil Punishments, as well as to
the Divine Vengeance. Being at Constantinople, and having observed the great
multitude of Heterodox, of which that City was full, he published yet a more
severe Edict Ibid. T. 5. l. 6.
the 10th. of January, in the Year 381, whereby he annuls all those which might
have allowed the Heretics some liberty, and takes from them all the Churches
they had in the Towns, ordering them to restore 'em to those who followed the
Nicene Faith. Afterwads he sent word So^ at l. ^. c. ^. So^^^ 7. c. ^.
to Demophilus, an Arian Bishop, to subscribe to the Council of Nice, or to
resolve to leave the Churches of Constantinople. Demophilus did the latter
without any Hesitation, and told the People that the next day they should meet
out of the City. Thus the Arians were deprived of the Public Churches, which
they had kept Forty Years. De Vita sua, p. 20, etc.
Notwithstanding, Theodosius was accused of want of Zeal, and they would would
have him use Violence, to reduce the Arians, (as Gregory says;) though he does
not approve the Heat of those who found fault with Theodosius's Conduct upon
that account, and declares himself against those who pretend to force the
Conscience.

The Emperor having sent for Gregory, received him very kindly, and told him he
was going to put him in possession of the Cathedral of Constantinople. Lest the
People, the greatest part whereof followed the Opinions of Arius, should rise
up, Theodosius sent some Soldiers to seize the Church of the Apostles; and sent
Gregory to it, attended with some others, through the midst of the People, who
cried on every side, and were as much afflicted as if Constantinople had been
taken; which could not be a pleasant Spectacle to a wise and moderate Bishop.
Though the Sun was up, it was so clouded, that one would have thought it was
Night; but the Sun shone all of a sudden, when Gregory came to Church. That
Circumstance should not deserve to be taken notice of, were it not that our
Bishop relates it as an extraordinary thing; having said, Carm. de Vita sua, p.
22.
That though he is one of those who are most opposite to such Thoughts; yet he
believes it is better to believe all things, than to refuse to believe what is
said. -- As soon as they came to Church, all the People that were in it, cried
out, they would have Gregory to be their Bishop. He silenced them, getting a
Priest to tell them, that they ought not to cry, but to give Thanks to God. As
for the rest, he was threatened with no danger, except that one Man only drew
his Sword, which he presently put up into its Scabboard.

But though the Arians had yielded their Churches, yet they murmured about it
among themselves, and were angry because they had been turned out. Gregory
believed, with great reason, that the Heterodox might be wrought upon by
Mildness, which he more willingly used than the Emperor's Authority. He
complains, That a Company of wretched Young men called Mildness Cowardice, gave
to Fury the name of Courage, and would have the Arians to be exasperated and
inflamed with Anger.

The Moderation of Gregory was not unpleasant to Theodosius, who sometimes sent
for him, Carm. 10. T. 2. p. 80.
and made him eat at his Table. Notwithstanding, our Bishop went seldom to
Court, Carm. de Vita sua, p. 23.
though the others were constantly there, to be in the Emperor's or his
Officers Favor; and made use of Piety, as a pretense to raise themselves, and
ruin their Enemies. Forasmuch as he was Old, and of a Weak Constitution, he
was often indisposed; which his Enemies ascribed to too great a Delicacy. As he
was once in his Bed, they sent a Man to kill him; who moved with repentance,
confessed to him, at the feet of his Bed, that they had incited him to commit
that Crime; the Pardon of which he presently obtained.

As for the Revenues of the Church, Gregory says, that having not been able to
find any Account of them, neither among the Papers of those who had been
Bishops of Constantinople before him, nor among those to whom the care of
gathering them was committed; he would not meddle with them, and took nothing
out of them, to avoid giving an account of them.

Theodosius called at that time a Council at Constantinople, either to condemn
several Heresies, or to settle Gregory Canonically in the Episcopal See of that
City. But before I relate what past with respect to Gregory, it will not be
amiss to say something of the Orations he made whilst he was at Constantinople,
and which are extant.

Basil Bishop of Caesarea Vid. Pagi ad An. 378. n. 1.
being dead on the First Day of the Year 380, Gregory made an Orat. 20.
Oration in his Praise some time after; having not been able to pay that last
Duty to his Friend as soon as he could have wished. He praises Basil's
Ancestors, who were Persons of Quality, and besides, Christians for a long
time. He says, that Page 319.
during Maximin's Persecution, some of Basil's Ancestors having retired into a
Forest of Pontus, without any Provision, and without Arms to go a Hunting, they
prayed to God that he would send them some of the Fowls, or a little of the
Venison, which they saw in that Wood; and God presently sent 'em a great number
of the fattest Stags, who seemed to be grieved because they had not called them
sooner. Gregory delights in that Subject, according to the Custom of the Pagan
Orators, who did the same with respect to the Fables of Paganism: The worst of
all, is, that it makes one suspect the other Relations of Gregory.

2. Afterward, he gives a short Account of Basil's Life, and insists upon
every Particular, according to his custom, with a great deal of Exaggeration,
many Figures, and Moral Observations. Speaking of the manner after which he
himself had spent his Life, he says, that he wishes Page 333.
his Affairs may better prosper hereafter, by the Intercessions of Basil.

3. The manner of getting Page ib.
Church-Preferments in his time, was not more Canonical than the Means which
are now-adays made use of for the same end, if we believe Gregory.

Having said, that in other Professions Men raised themselves only by degrees,
and according to their Capacity, he assures, That the Chief Dignity was got as
much by Crimes as by Virtue; and that Episcopal Sees were not for those who
deserved them best, but for the most Powerful, etc. No body takes the Name of a
Physician, or a Painter, before he has studied the Nature of Diseases, well
mixed his Colors, and made several Pictures; but a Bishop may be easily found,
not after he has been carefully formed, but upon the spot, as the Fable
feigneth, That the Giants were no sooner sowed, but they sprung out of the
Earth. We make The Bishops were then called Saints, as now-adays Lords.
SAINTS in one day, and we exhort to Wisdom those who have not learned to be
Wise, and who have brought nothing to perform well the Episcopal Duties, but
the Desire of being Bishops.

4. Gregory ascribes to Basil Page 340, and 358.
some Monastical Laws, and written Prayers. We have the former still, without
any great alteration; but the Liturgy which bears his Name has been very much
altered since.

5. He not only praises his Friend, but also makes his Apology against those
who accused him of Pride, (of which notwithstanding he himself accuses him in
several places,) Page 364.
and suspected he did not believe the Divinity of the Holy Spirit, because he
had not styled him God, in his Book. Gregory says that Basil did so, for fear
of exasperating the Heretics, who could not abide that that Title should be
bestowed upon the Holy Spirit, because the Scripture does not ascribe it to
him; but that he had said something equivalent to it, which was the same thing;
since Words do not save us, but Things.

6. Lastly, Having described Basil's Funeral, he goes on thus; Page 372.
He is now in Heaven, where he offers, as I think, Sacrifices for us, and
prays for the People; for when he left us, he did not altogether forsake us,
etc. He advises me still, and chides me in Night-Visions, when I depart in
something from my Duty. -- At the end of his Oration, he addresses himself to
him, and asks his Help in energick terms, as if he heard him; though he seemed
to doubt whether he was in Heaven, that is, in the Place of greatest Bliss;
into which the Ancients believed no body went, except Martyrs, but after the
Resurrection, (as we have already seen by another Passage of Gregory.)

There is some likelihood that he composed at Constantinople most of the other
Orations which are extant, which I have not mentioned yet, especially those
which he made against the Arians; wherein he has been thought to have so well
defended the Doctrine of the Council of Nice, as well as in his other Writings,
that for that reason they have given him the Title of Theologue. One may read
especially his Thirty third Oration, and the Four following, upon that Subject.
In order to give an Idaea of those Five Orations, I shall observe, that the
Design of the First, is to show, that it does not belong to All to dispute
about Religion, and that it ought not to be done before every body, neither at
all times, nor with too great a heat. He censures the Heretics, as if they had
no regard to any of those things, and preaches some common places which all
Parties have always equally made use of. He complains, Orat. 33. p 535.
That they make Saints the very same day they go about it; That they choose
Divines, as if they had inspired them with Learning, and, That they make a
great many Assemblies of Ignoramus's and Babblers. Forasmuch as he knew that
some Men cannot forbear Disputing, he tells 'em, to satisfy their Desire, that
he will give them a large Field, in which they may exercise themselves without
danger: Ib. p. 536.
Philosophize (says he) about the World or Worlds, the Soul, Rational Creatures
less or more Excellent, about the Resurrection, the Judgments, the Rewards, the
Sufferings of Christ. It Is not an useless thing to succeed in those Matters, as
there is no great danger in being mistaken about them. -- Christians have been
since of a very different Opinion; and it is certain, that one may fall into
dangerous Errors, and that there has been real Mistakes about those Articles.

In the Orat. 34.
Second Oration, he comes to the Matter in hand, and does chiefly enlarge to
prove against the Eunomians the Incomprehensibility of God, which he does
often. He shows, that there is an infinite number of things in Nature, which we
do not comprehend, to conclude from thence, that it is no good Reasoning, to
deny that something is in God, only because we do not comprehend it.

Having thus prepared the Mind of his Reader, or Hearer, he proposes his
Opinion concerning the Divinity of the Son, Orat. 35. p. 562.
and the Holy Trinity in general, which he does in these remarkable terms: That
which we worship is a Monarchy. I don't call Monarchy, what is possessed by one
Person only, (for it may happen, that a Person not agreeing with himself,
produces the same effect as if there were many,) but what is grounded upon the
Equality of Nature, the Consent of the Will, the same Motion, and the same
Design, with respect to the things which that Monarchy produces, (which is not
possible in Created Natures;) so that although those that compose that Monarchy
differ in Number, yet they differ not in Power. -- Had Gregory believed the
Numerical Unity of the Divine Essence, he would have spoken very weakly and
obscurely; since instead of the Equality of the Nature, he should should have
said the Identity, and not mentioned the Consent of Will, but One only Will in
Number. In that Oration, Gregory answers the Objections which the Arians raised
against the Eternal Generation of the Son, which are often very weak, either
because they are not well propounded, or because the Arians argued not better.
However, as one might Personate an Arian better; so so one might perhaps
maintain with greater advantage the Sentiments of the Council of Nice.

Among the Arian Objections which Gregory proposes to himself, this is one of
them, which is the Eighth; viz. Page 569.
That if the Son is, as to the Essence, altogether as the Father is; it will
follow, that the Son is not Begotten, as the Father is not. -- Gregory answers
not, as the Schoolmen do, That the Son is not Begotten, as to the Essence,
which is the same in Number with the Fathers, as he should have said according
to the Principles of the Modern Schools; but that not to be Begotten, is not a
thing Essential to the Deity. To which he adds; Are you the Father of your
Father, that you may not be inferior to him in any thing; because you are the
same thing as to the Essence? -- If any one should doubt still, whether the
Unity which our Orator speaks of, is a Specific or a Numerical one, he needs
only read these words, which are at the bottom of the following Page; Page 570.
This is our Doctrine, As we judge alike of things which are under the same
Species, as a Horse, an Ox, and a Man, and every thing is properly called by
the Name which suits the Nature of which it partakes, whereas that which does
not partake of it, does not go by that Name, or has it but improperly: so
there is but One Essence and Nature in God, which has the same Name; though
the Persons and Names are distinguished by the Thoughts.

In the Orat. 36.
Fourth Oration, Gregory resolves, according to his way, the Objections of the
Arians, by which they pretend to show the Unequality of the Father and the Son.

In the Orat. 37.
Fifth, he disputes about the Consubstantiality of the Holy Spirit, against the
Macedonians.

Some of those who believed the Divinity of the Son, denied that of the Holy
Spirit, and were even so bold, as to call the Holy Spirit a Strange God;
because he is styled God no where in the Holy Scripture. Gregory made his Fifth
and last Theological Oration against them.

In that Discourse, speaking of the several Opinions that have been about that,
he says, amongst other things, Orat. ib. p. 595.
That the greatest Theologers among the Pagans, and those who came nearest to
us, have an Idea of Him; though they gave him another Name, having called him,
The Soul of the World, and, The Soul which comes from without; and used some
other such Names. As for the Wise Men of our times, some believe that the Holy
Spirit is a Faculty; some, that he is a Creature; some, that he is a God; and
some know not in what Order of Things they should place him; by reason of the
respect they have for the Scripture, which is not clear upon that Point. --
Gregory maintains, That it is a Person Consubstantial with the Two other: And
when he answers his Adversaries, who asked him wherein the Generation and
Procession differed, he has recourse to the Incomprehensibility.

But one of the chief Objections against the Orthodox, was, Page 600.
That they acknowledged Three Gods. If there is (said their Adversaries) a God,
and a God, and a God; how comes it that there are not Three Gods? etc. This is
(replies Gregory) what is said by those whose Impiety is come to its height,
and even by those who are in the Second rank, that is, who have a right Belief
concerning the Son. I have a common Answer to both, and another which concerns
only the latter: I ask therefore the latter, why they call us Tritheists, since
they honor the Son; and whether, though they leave out the Holy Spirit, they
are not Ditheists? How do you explain your Ditheism, when they offer you this
Objection? Teach us how we ought to answer; for the Answer by which you will
clear your selves from Ditheism, will serve us to vindicate our selves from
Tritheism, etc. Thus we shall get the Victory, and our Accusers will be our
Defenders, etc. But we have a Dispute with those two sorts of Adversaries, and
a common Answer to both. We have but One God, because there is but One Godhead;
and that those who emaned from it, refer to One only thing, though we believe
Three of them. The one is not more God than the other; the one is not Anterior,
and the other Posterior. They are not divided in Will, nor separate in Power,
and there is nothing in them that is found in things divided; but to say all in
a word, the Godhead is without Division in Three Divided Persons; as in Three
Suns fastened one to another, there would be but One Mixture of Light. When we
consider the Deity, and the First Cause of the Monarchy, we conceive but One
Thing; but when we consider those in whom the Deity, and those who emaned from
the First Cause before Time was, and enjoy the same Glory, we worship Three.

But it will be said, Is there not One only Deity among the Pagans, as their
most learned Philosophers say? All Mankind has but One Humanity, and yet there
are Many Gods among the Pagans, not One only, as there are Many Men. I answer,
That in those things the Unity lies only in the Thought. Every Man is divided
from others, by Time, Passions, and Power, which is not in God. Therein does
the UNITY of God consist, as far as I can conceive it. If that Reason be Good,
let God be thanked for it; if not, we must look for a Better.

Afterward Gregory proposes to himself an Arian Objection, which shows more
clearly still, that the Orthodox placed not the Unity of God in the Numerical
Unity of the Divine Essence, but in a Specific Unity of Distinct and Equal
Essences, and in a perfect Agreement of Wills. Page 602.
Things which are of the same Essence (say ye) are ranked in the same Order of
Things; -- and those which are not Consubstantial, are not so ranked. From
whence it follows, that you cannot but confess, that there are Three Gods,
according to your reckoning: For as for us, we are not in the same danger,
because we do not say that the Persons are Consubstantial. -- The Arians meant,
That forasmuch as they admitted but of One Supreme God, and who has created
all other things, they might say, in that respect, that there is but One God;
because that God could not be ranked in the same Order, and under the same Name
with his Creatures: but that the Orthodox acknowledging Three Beings of a
perfectly like Nature, they could not deny that they acknowledged Three Gods,
properly speaking. Gregory answers only, That Things which are not of the same
Species, are often reckoned in the same Rank ((...),) of which he gives several
Instances out of the Scripture. That shows, that the Arians might be accused of
admitting of Many Gods, as well as the Orthodox; not that the Orthodox
acknowledged not Three Eternal Minds, though perfectly Equal, and having the
same Will.

A little lower, in the same Oration, Page 611.
Gregory says, That having sought among Created Things something like the Holy
Trinity, he could find no satisfactory Comparison: He thought of an Eye, a
Fountain, and a River, but he found not those things proper enough to express
his Thoughts. I was afraid (says he) First, that I should seem to introduce a
cetain Fluxus of Divinity, which should have no Consistency: Secondly,
establish a Numerical Unity by those Comparisons. For an Eye, a Fountain, and a
Sun, are One in Number, though differently Modified. I was thinking of the Sun,
the Beams, and the Light; but it was to be feared still on this occasion,
First, That we should suppose a Composition in a Nature wherein there is none;
such as the Composition of the Sun, and what is in the Sun. Secondly, That
indeed, we should give an Essence to the Father, but should not ascribe a
Distinct Existence to the other Persons, by making them to be some Faculties
which exist in God, and have no distinct Existence. The Rays, or the Light, are
not other Suns, (as the Son and the Holy Spirit are other Minds distinct from
the Father,) but some Emanations and Essential Properties of the Sun. Lastly,
Gregory Page 612:
found nothing better, than to lay aside those Images and Shadows, as being
Deceitful, and very Remote from the Originals.

After all Gregory believes Page 608*
that the Holy Trinity was only revealed by degrees; so that the Revelation
manifested to Men, first God the Father, without speaking of God the Son but
obscurely; afterward the Son, without requiring from Men the Belief of the
Holy Spirit; and lastly, the Holy Spirit, after the Ascension of the Son.

One may judge from those places, of the Doctrine of Gregory, and the Orthodox
of his time; with whom the Orthodox of ours agree as well in Terms, as they
differ from them in Sense. One may also observe in the Expressions of our
Bishop a remarkable Effect of Disputing; viz. when Men are afraid that their
Adversaries will take advantage of certain Expressions, they carefully forbear
using them, for fear of lying open to 'em; though those Expressions are very
proper to express the Doctrine they maintain. It Is manifest, that Gregory, to
be well understood, should have answered the Arians; Yes, it is true, we worship
Three Gods, since we acknowledge Three Eternal Minds, who have Distinct
Essences: But those Gods are perfectly Equal, and as perfectly United as
Distinct Beings can be, having the same Thoughts, and the same Will; hence it
is that we commonly say, that we acknowledge but One God. -- But had he spoken
thus, the Arians, who boasted of their studying, and following the Scripture,
would have presently replied, that the Scripture represents the Unity of the
Supreme God, as a Numerical Unity, not as a Unity of Species and Agreement.
They would have said (as they already did) but with greater show of Reason,
that the Homoousians introduced a New Paganism, by acknowledging Three
Collateral Gods. So that they were obliged, to avoid those Reproaches, stoutly
to maintain that there is but One God, according to the Nicene Opinion. The
Platonicks, who had the same Thought, but were not confined to Expressions,
spoke it out, and said, that the Principles of All Things are Three Gods. I
cannot forbear quoting, on this occasion, some remarkable Words of St.
Augustine, which do admirably confirm what I have just now said; De Civit. Dei,
l. 10. c. 23.
Liberis Verbis loquuntur Philosophi, nec in rebus ad intelligendum
difficillimis, offensionem Religiosarum aurium pertimescunt. Nobis autem ad
certam Regulam loqui fas est, ne verborum licentia, ETIAM in rebus quae in his
SIGNIFICANTVR, impiam gignat opinionem. Nos autem non dicimus Duo vel Tria
Principia, cum de Deo loquimur; sicuti nec Duos Deos vel Tres nobis licitum est
dicere, quamvis de unoquoque loquentes vel de Filio, vel de Spiritu Sancto,
etiam singulum quemque Deum esse fateamur. The Philosophers do freely use any
Words, and are not afraid of offending Pious Ears, in Matters very difficult to
understand. As for us, we are not allowed to speak, but according to a certain
Rule; lest some Words used with too great a license, should produce an impious
Opinion, if understood according to their Signification. When we speak of God,
we neither mention Two nor Three Principles; as we are not allowed neither to
say that there are Two or Three Gods, though speaking of every one of them,
either of the Son or Holy Spirit, we say that each of 'em is God.

Such a Conduct, was the Cause of departing by degrees from the ancient
Notions; because the word Unity was taken in its ordinary Signification,
without minding that the Ancients understood it in a particular Sense. The same
has happened in several other Doctrines.

Having thus alleged so many Proofs of our Bishops Opinion concerning the
Doctrines which then divided Christians, it is now time to return to his
History. The Council, which I have already mentioned, Socrat. l. 5. c. 8. and
Sozom. l. 7. c. 7.
met at Constantinople in May, in the Year 381. It was made up of a CL.
Orthodox Bishops; and XXXVI. Macedonians, whom they hoped to bring to the
Orthodox Faith. Besides, some Canons made in it concerning the Discipline,
which I shall not mention, the Business of Gregory and Maximus was debated in
it, and they made a Creed. Maximus's Conc. C.P. c. 4.
Ordination, and all those which he might have conferred, were judged Null; and
then Carm. de Vit. p. 14.
they declared Gregory Bishop of Constantinople, though he endeavored to be
excused from it. They made him promise he would stay in it; because he
persuaded himself, that being in that Station, he could more easily reconcile
the different Parties which divided Christianity. Indeed, it was said against
Gregory's Promotion, that having been Bishop of Sasime and Nazianzum, he could
not be transferred to Constantinople, without breaking the Fifteenth Canon of
the Council of Nice, which is Formal thereupon. But Meletius Bishop of Theodor.
l. 5. c. 8.
Antioch replied to that, That the Design of that Canon was to bridle Pride and
Ambition, which had no share in that Business. Besides, it seems, that that
Canon was not observed in the East; since Carm. de Vit. sua, p. 29.
Gregory calls what they opposed to him, Laws dead long since. Furthermore, he
had exercised no Episcopal Function at Sasime; and as to Nazianzum, he had been
only his Father's Coadjutor.

That Business being over, they came to treat of the chief Subject for which
they were met; viz. Macedonius's Opinion, who had been Bishop of
Gonstantinople, and believed that the Holy Spirit is but a Creature; though all
the Disciples of that Bishop agreed not about the Nature of that Divine Person,
(as may be seen from a Passage of Gregory, which I have quoted.)

The Nicene Creed was presently confirmed in the Council, and 'twas thought fit
Vid. Conc. Chalced. Act. 2.
to make some Additions to it, especially to what concerns the Holy Spirit.
That Addition is expressed in these words, I believe in the Holy Ghost, the Lord
and Giver of Life, who proceeds from the Father, who with the Father and the
Son together, is worshipped and glorified, and who spoke by the Prophets.

The Council did also Anathematize the Opinions of Sabellius, Marcellus,
Photinus, Eunomius, Apollinaris, and Macedonius; but I shall not enlarge upon
those Errors because they have no essential relation with the Life of Gregory.
For the same reason, I shall omit what concerns the Discipline.

All things went quietly enough with respect to Gregory, till there arose a
Storm, which deprived him of the Episcopal See of Constantinople, when he least
expected it. The Spirit of Vengeance, of a Party which he opposed, was the
cause of that Disturbance; which Gregory, who was not courageous enough to
sustain the shock of his Adversaries, could not get himself rid of, but by
running away.

There happened, some time before, a mischievous Schism in the Church of
Antioch, where there were Two Orthodox Bishops at the same time. Meletius being
dead at Constantinople, before the Council was ended, 'twas proposed to give
him a Successor. Thereupon Gregory proposed an Expedient to put an end to that
Schism; viz. That Paulinus, who was the other Orthodox Bishop, Carm. de Vit. p.
25.
and had been Ordained by Lucifer of Cagliari, should govern alone the Church
of Antioch during the rest of his life; and afterward, those of Melelius's
Party being reunited with those of Paulinus's, should choose a Bishop by common
Votes.

Lest it should be thought he had some Interest in favoring Paulinus, and that
he designed to make a Party; he offered the Counsel to leave the Episcopal
Throne of Constantinople, on which he was just settled. But the Ambitious Men,
and Incendiaries, (as Gregory calls 'em) who began to move to give a Successor
to Meletius, would not hearken to that Proposal. Ib. p. 27.
A company of Young Men fell a crying like Mag-pies, and made so great a Noise,
that they drew in even the Old Bishops, who should have resisted them, and
brought to a second Examination the Business of Gregory, which was just before
ended. Gregory describes admirably well their Ambition, Ignorance, and their
other Defects, in the Poem he made concerning his Life: One had better read it
in the Author himself, than here. In the mean time, the People having heard
that Gregory began to be weary of the Council, and was talking of retiring,
fell a crying that they would not take their Pastor from them, and desired him
that he would not leave his Flock.

Thereupon, Timothy Bishop of Alexandria, who had succeeded Peter, and was of a
violent and quarrelsom Temper, arrived with several Egyptian Bishops. The old
Grudge they bore Gregory, on the account of Maximus the Cynick, had inflamed
them to such a degree against our Bishop, that the first thing they did, was to
complain that they had broke the Canons, by transferring Gregory from one
Bishopric to another. This caused a great stir in the Council, and on that
occasion Gregory made his Oration concerning Peace, which is the Fourteenth,
wherein he describes at large the Advantages of Concord, and the Mischiefs
which arise from Divisions. He severely censures the Inconstancy of the
Bishops, who had other Thoughts of him, without any reason, and suffered
themselves to be imposed upon by the Calumnies of his Adversaries. He says,
that the ill Reports which are commonly spread against Moderate Men, ought to
be despised.

Lastly, One may easily perceive, by all that he says, that it is not only in
our time that Men have covered their most shameful Passions, with the specious
Name of Zeal for the Purity of the Faith. Wherefore Gregory says Ib. p 29.
that he told 'em, That they should not trouble themselves so much with what
concerned him, but that they should endeavor to be reunited; That 'twas time
for 'em to expose themselves no longer to be laughed at as Wild Men, and such as
have learned nothing but Quarrelling; That provided they would agree, he would
willingly be the Jonas who should make the Storm to cease; That he had accepted
of the Episcopal See against his will, and willingly parted with it; and that
his Body, weakened with Old Age, obliged him to it.

But because notwithstanding they charged him with Ambition still, he made a
Discourse which is his Twenty seventh Oration; whereby he protests that he had
accepted the Bishopric of Constantinople against his will, and appeals to all
the People for it. He says, Ortt. 27. p. 465.
he does not know whether he ought to call the Sea of Constantinople the Throne
of a Tyrant, or a Bishop: He complains of his Enemies Evil-speaking, and the
Envy they bore him, Page 466.
because of his Eloquence and Learning in the Sciences of the Pagans. That
perhaps raised the Envy of some; but the Station he was in, raised without
doubt the Envy of many more. He might have made use of all his Rhetoric at
Sasime, without being put to any trouble upon that account.

Having declared, a Full Council, that he desired to leave the Place, which was
so much envied; he went to the Emperor's Palace, to desire him to give him
leave to retire. He obtained it with some difficulty; and having obtained it,
his only Thoughts were to take his leave publicly; which he did in the
Cathedral, in the presence of a Hundred and Fifty Bishops, and all the People.
The Discourse he made is extant still, and is the Thirty second in order. He
describes the bad Condition he found the Orthodox Church of Constantinople in,
and the Alteration he made in it: He makes a Confession of his Belief
concerning the Holy Trinity, and shows that he had done nothing that deserved
to be censured: He exhorts the Fathers of the Council to choose a Person worthy
of the Sea of Constantinople, to succeed him; and lastly, takes his leave of
all those who heard him. In that Page 523.
Oration he complains of his Old Age. And in the Poem concerning his Life, Page
30.
he says he was then but a Dead Man Animated: Which he could not say, had he
been but Fifty six, or Fifty seven years old, according to the ordinary
Supputation.

As soon as he had taken his leave, the People, and generally all those who
heard him at Constantinople, showed a great grief for it. The Conduct of the
Council must needs have appeared to them very inconstant and violent, since
after they had confirmed Gregory in the Sea of Constantinople, they obliged him
to leave it, when he was above Fourscore Years old. Without doubt, so imprudent
and Unchristian a Behavior gave matter of Sport to the Enemies of the Council,
and lessened in a great measure the Authority of their Decisions. For how can
it be imagined that Bishops, as Factious, Unjust and Ignorant as Gregory
describes them in several Places, were able to examine with Deliberation the
Doctrines then in question? If their Interest made 'em not incline to
Orthodoxy, 'twas a mere Chance which led them into the right way. The love of
Truth is seldom to be found with so much Vanity and Ignorance.

Thus Gregory left the Bishopric of Constantinople, some Weeks after he had
been settled in it by the Council that turned him out of it: He retired into
Cappadocia, (according to Gregory the Priest, the Author of his Life,) and went
to live at Arianzum, where he was born.

Among those who were presented to the Emperor, some Bishops Sozom. l. 7. c. 8.
put in Nectarius a Senator of Constantinople, a Man of an Exemplary Life, and
good Mien, but was not Baptized yet, and had scarce any Learning. It Is not
known whether Gregory set out for Cappadocia before that Election was made, or
whether he stayed at Constantinople till they had named him a Successor.
However, Gregory wrote Orat. 46.
an Instruction for Nectarius, wherein he begins with saying, That it seems,
God's Providence, which heretofore took care of the Churches, had altogether
given over the Conduct of the Things of this Life. -- He says, that his Private
Afflictions, though so great, that they would seem intolerable to any body
else, induced him not to speak so: He assures, that the Condition only the
Church was in, extorted those words from him. Afterward, he describes to
Nectarius the Boldness of the Arians and Macedonians, who were at least as
numerous as the Orthodox, and dared to meet publicly. A horrible Undertaking,
after the Decisions of a Council so well regulated as that which was held a
little before! Gregory could not apprehend how his Holiness and his Gravity (so
the Bishops were called) suffered the Apollinarists to meet. He lets him know,
that Apollinaris asserted. That the Body of the Son of God existed before the
World; That the Divinity supplied the Place of the Soul; and, That the Body,
which descended from Heaven, and is Essential to the Son, did notwithstanding
die.

Gregory fancied, I know not why, that to suffer those Men to Meet, was to
allow 'em that their Doctrine was Truer than that of the Council, since there
cannot be Two Truths: As if to suffer some body, is to denote that one believes
their Opinion to be True!

Lastly, He exhorts Nectarius to tell the Emperor, That what he had done in the
behalf of the Church, would signify nothing, if Heretics were suffered to
Meet.

Thus good Gregory, who, whilst the Arians were strongest, having the Emperor
on their side, would not have that practiced, which was blamed in them,
exhorted his Successor to forget that good Lecture. So difficult a thing it is
not to contradict one's self, when one does not take great care to be free from
Passion!

The next Year Theod. l. 5. c. 8.
there was an Assembly of Bishops held at Constantinople, to which Gregory was
invited: But he refused to go; and he answered those who invited him to it,
thus; Ep. 55.
If I must write the Truth to ye, I am so affected, that I will always avoid any
Assembly of Bishops; because I never saw any Synod that had good Success, or
which did not rather increase the Evil, than lessen it. Without any
Exaggeration, the Spirit of Dispute and Ambition is so great in them, that it
cannot be expressed. -- One ought not to think that our Bishop said so, without
thinking well on it, and in a Fit of Passion. He repeats it in his Sixtyfifth,
Seventy first, Seventy second, and Seventy fourth Letters; and besides, he
diverted himself, by putting in Verses the same Thought in his Poetical Pieces:
Carm. 10. p. 80.
I Will never go (says he) to any Synod, because (...) Gregory drew, for Example,
Baronius, Pagi ad an. 389. a. 5.
or some of his Transcribers, into an Error; since they believed, that when
Gregory, a short time after the Death of his Brother Caesarius, and Sister
Gorgonia, said that he was an Old Man, it was to be understood of a Premature
Old Age; because the Translator made use of that term, in translating the 363
Verse of the Poem entitled, Carmen I. de Rebus suis, though there is no such
thing in the Original. As for the Translation of the Works writ in Prose, it is
incomparably better; and it may be said, that the Abbot de Billy was as fit for
Prose, as he was unfit for Verses. It Is a surprising thing, that a Man of his
Learning took so much pains to translate into bad Verses, what he might have
better translated in Prose. However, one may observe a thing, in the
Translation both of Gregory's Orations and Letters; which shows, that one ought
always to have recourse to the Original; viz. That the Punctuation of the
Translation is often altogether different from that which is in the Greek,
which makes it appear neater. This may arise partly from the fault of those who
put the Greek over against his Translation, (for he published it by it self,
and were not careful enough to correct it; and partly from the liberty the
Translator took, who cut several Periods that were too long, and lengthened
those which seemed to him too short. However, it may be said in general, that
it is one of the best Translations of the Greek Fathers that we have, and at the
same time one of the most difficult, by reason of Gregory's Style being too
Florid, and even Harsh and Obscure in several places wherein he handles some
controverted Doctrines.

I should end here the Life of Gregory, because there is nothing else to be
said of him that is certain, were it not that I perceived, a little too late,
that what I have said concerning the putting off of Baptism, may be cleared by
Gregory himself. He disputes at large, in his Fortieth Oration, wherein he
treats of Baptism, against those who put it off, for the abovementioned
Reasons. After all, it appears, to say so in a word, from that Oration, that
Gregory believed, 1. That all past Sins are forgiven and blotted out by
Baptism. 2. That it is a very difficult thing to be restored into a state of
Salvation, if one commits a mortal Sin after Baptism. 3. That those who neglect
Baptism, and die without it, are Damned. 4. That those who die without being
Baptized, but have not neglected or put off their Baptism by their fault, are
neither Glorified nor Punished; whether they die in Childhood, or in a more
advanced Age, wherein they wished in vain to be Baptized.

It appears from that Doctrine, and several others, that Christian Societies
nowadays, without excepting one, cannot boast to follow the Doctrine of the
Fathers in every thing. Theology is subject to Revolutions, as well as Empires;
but though it has undergone considerable Changes, yet the Humor of Divines is
not very much altered; as will easily appear, by comparing what we see in those
of our time, with the Complaints Gregory Nazianzen makes against those who
lived in his.

The Life OF PRUDENTIUS.
A Vrelius Prudentius Clemens was born in Spain, in the Year 348, ( Praefat.
Cathem.
as he himself says, in some places of his Works.) His Ancestors and Quality
are not known, but it appears that he had afterward some considerable
Employments. Ibid.
After his Childhood, he applied himself, according to the Custom of those
Times and the foregoing Ages, to the Study of Eloquence, under the Direction of
a Rhetor. Youth learned, in those Ages, to Declame upon all sorts of Subjects,
before they applied themselves to the Sciences necessary to dive into the
Nature of those Subjects, and handle them well.

That way of Instructing Young Men was not New; and the Abuses that crept into
it, were not introduced all of a sudden. L. 2. c. 4.
Quintilian assures us, that 'twas only in Demetrius Phalerianus's time about
300 Years before Christ, that the Athenian Masters of Rhetoric began to
exercise Young Men, who desired to advance themselves, and get some Preferments
in the State, by proposing some feigned Subjects to them, like those that were
treated before the People, or at the Bar, and obliging them to discourse upon
those Matters in their Schools. But in Socrates's time, who lived a hundred
years before, there were already some Masters whose Profession was to teach to
defend all sorts of Causes, and who boasted to argue them so, as to make what
is Unjust, appear Just; such were Cicero in Bruto. 8.
Gorgias Leontinus, Thrasimachus of Calcedonia, Protagoras Abderinus, Prodicos
of Ceos, Hippias Eloeus, and many others, who promised, with great insolence,
to teach how a Bad Cause might become Good, by pleading it as one ought to do:
Quemadmodum causa inferior dicendo fieri superior posset. One may see a bloody
Satyr against those Men in Aristophanes his Nubes, who indeed very unjustly
ascribes that Doctrine to Socrates, but grounds that Calumny only upon this,
viz. That there was at that time some Men who maintained it, and upon some
outward resemblance which might be between Socrates's Discourses and theirs. He
that will form yet a more complete Idea of those Sophists, must read
Aristotle's Books concerning Sophistical Arguments, wherein he assures us, that
the Art of those Men was, a seeming Wisdom, but not really so.

Socrates, and the wise Men of his time, omitted nothing to ridicule those Men,
and hinder that so pernicious an Art should be esteemed, as it may be seen by
Three Dialogues Hippias, Protagoras, and Euthydemus. See Cicero de Orator. l:
3. c. 16.
of Plato, wherein he very ingeniously mocks the Sophists of his time. But they
did not succeed in their Design, since Greece proved afterward full of that
sort of Rhetors; and Isocrates, whom Plato did much esteem, made two Orations
like those of Gorgias, wherein he praises two Persons that are extremely to
blame, viz. Helena and Busiris.

Whatever Socrates, and those that were of his Mind, might have said, a
Discourse artificially composed, and attended with the other Ornaments of
Rhetoric, made so great an Impression upon the People, that by the means of
such Art, they overcame the best Reasons. This could not fail to make a great
many People desirous to learn it, and to corrupt the Minds of most Men:
Therefore they endeavored to know how to speak agreeably and readily upon all
Subjects; and because such a thing depended much more upon Exercise, than the
Knowledge of the Things themselves, they spent a great deal more time in
Declaming, than in Forming their Judgment, and Studying the other Sciences. If
they applied themselves to Philosophy, it was not so much to please themselves
with the Knowledge of the Truths which it might contain, as to appear Learned,
and make use of them at the Bar. They chiefly applied themselves to
Dialectick; which was nothing else but the Art of Wrangling upon every thing,
and Arguing Sophistically, rather than Rationally. They pretended, that they
were not bound to use, upon the Subjects which they treated, Demonstrative
Arguments, or such as come as near them as can be; and they thought that it was
enough to allege Likely Arguments, not in such a degree of Probability which
moves the Mind by it self, but in such a degree as belongs to the Things which
are not opposite to clear Truth. 'Twas almost enough, to say nothing either
altogether absurd, or whereof the Weakness was palpable almost to every body.
Vid. Diog. Laert. in ejus Vita; p. 319. Ed. Hen. Steph.
Aristotle, who proposed Two things to himself in his Writings, what is
Probable ((...),) and what is True, handled the former, in his Dialectick and
Rhetoric; wherein he shows how to make upon every thing Probable Discourses,
that is, of the Falsity whereof every body is not sensible.

One may also convince one's self of all this, by reading of the other Ancient
Rhetors, and especially the Rhetorical Books which Cicero wrote. That Art, as
he himself says, came from Greece to Rome, and besides the Greeks who taught
Rhetoric in it from the time of the Second Punick War, some Masters did also
teach to Declame in Latin. 'Twas one Lucius Plotius who began to exercise the
Youth in that Language, Cicero being but a Child.

They distinguished those Exercises into several kinds; sometimes they took a
Moral Subject, which they handled so as to allege nothing that was particular,
but only some general Notions, which had no relation to any Fact or
Circumstance. This they called Theses, and In Praef. Cont.
Seneca the Rhetor says that those were the Exercises practiced before Cicero;
although it appears from what has been said, that they had some other
Exercises, which consisted in some Discourses which they made upon a true Fact
taken Sucton. in lib. de Claris Rhetoribus.
out of Ancient or Modern History: Whereupon they enquired what ought to be
done on some Occasions; wherein they praised or blamed some Action. Cicero
calls those Subjects Causes; and says in several places, that he Tuscul. 1. c.
4.
had much exercised himself in them: Nay, he says, in one of his Letters, Ep.
Famil. l. 9. Ep. 16.
that Hirtius and Dolabella Declamed at his House, in an Age in which it seems
that those Exercises were unseasonable. Afterward they found, that true
Subjects taken out of ancient History, or such as lately happened, were not fit
for that: They feigned some Facts, and to have more occasion to say some
extraordinary things, Petron. Init.
they clothed them with strange Circumstances. There was nothing to be heard
but Discourses upon what a Man should do, when he is ready to escape from a
Shipwreck, and sees upon the Shore some Pirates who will bind him with
Chains; or concerning a Man whom a Tyrant should command, upon pain of Death,
to kill his own Father; or concerning a Father who should see his Children
carried away to be sacrificed, by the Command of an Oracle. One may see a great
number of such like Subjects in Seneca's and Quintilian's Controversies. They
handled them with such an Eloquence, as came much nearer the Style of a
Tragical Poet, than a Judicious Orator. That manner of Studying, which was
admired in the following Ages, in which Men were much less polite, made most
Writers mere Declamators, full of Exaggerations, strained Figures, Witticisms,
Equivocations, Punns, Arguments which prove nothing, and all the other Defects
of a false Rhetoric. They undertook to maintain all sorts of Subjects, without
having any regard to Truth, thinking that one might more improve, by exercising
one's self to defend bad Causes, than to maintain good one's. Thus Julian,
being yet a Christian, Declamed against the Christian Religion in the School of
Libanius, only said they to form his Mind, and use himself to find out probable
Arguments pro and con on all Subjects.

I was obliged somewhat to enlarge upon the Manner of Studying in those
Centuries; because without having some Notion of it, these words of Prudentius,
in the Abridgment which he himself made of his Life, cannot be understood:
Aetas prima crepantibus
Flevit sub ferulis, mox docuit toga
Infectum vitiis falsa loqui, non fine crimine.


That last Verse denotes well enough the Rhetorical Exercises which I have
mentioned, which Young Men applied themselves to, when they had put on the
thorough White Gown, that is, at Seventeen or Eighteen Years of Age. In effect,
they learned thereby to speak false things (falsa loqui,) which though spoken,
as it were, out of an ingenious Fancy, yet were criminal, (non sine crimine,)
because by that means they used themselves by degrees to Lie, and speak against
their Conscience. Father Chamillard [ who put out Prudentius, in usum Delphini]
has paraphrased those words with some that are more obscure: Plenus criminibus
didici dicere falsa criminose. But I have not mentioned the Studies of
Prudentius's time, only by reason of that place; but because, as we shall see
hereafter, there is a great many others in our Poet, which require that we
should think of the Manner of Studying, and the Eloquence of his Time.

The Christians Studied as others did, and Reasoned almost as they did. One may
find a pleasant Description of the Eloquence of that time, in St. Jerome's
Letter to Nepotianus, Page 12. Ed. Gryph.
concerning the manner how Ecclesiastics ought to behave themselves: Don't you
require of me (says he) Childish Declamations, wherein one may find Sentences
spread as it were Flowers through the whole Discourse; far fetched Expressions,
to flatter the Hearer's Ear; and at the end of every Article, Witticisms shut
up within few Words, to excite the Applauses and Exclamations of those that
hear us: -- Ne a me quaeras pueriles declamationes, sententiarum flosculos,
verborum lenocinia, and per fines capitulorum singulorum acuta quaedam
breviterque conclusa, quae plausus and clamores excitent audientium. For then,
to say so by by the bye, Acclamations and Applauses were used in Churches, as
well as Theaters: Ib. p. 14.
Which appears by St. Jerome's Advertisement in the same Letter: I will not have
you (says he) to be a Declamator, and a Babbler without Reason; but understand
the Mysteries, and be instructed in the Secrets of your God. It Is the part of
Unlearned Men, to seek to be Admired by the ignorant Vulgar, by rolling as it
were some words, and reciting with an extraordinary swiftness. An impudent Man
does often explain what he knows not; and after he has imposed upon others,
fancies himself to be Learned. I desired once Gregory Nazianzen, who was
formerly my Master, to explain to me what is meant by the Second Sabbath after
the First, in St. Luke: And he pleasantly answered, I will teach you that at
Church, where, when all the People shall applaud me, you will be forced to know
what you do not know; or if you only keep silence, you will be looked upon as a
Fool: Docebo te super hac re in Ecclesia, in qua mihi omni populo acclamante,
cogeris invitus scire quod nescis; aut certe si solus tacueris, solus ab
omnibus stultitiae condemnaberis.

To return to Prudentius: He confesses, that when he applied himself to the
Study of Eloquence, he lived after a manner somewhat licentious. Afterward he
began to make use of his Eloquence at the Bar; where his desire of gaining all
the Causes he undertook to defend, either good or bad, exposed him, as he says,
to great Dangers. Next to that, he obtained twice the Government of some
Provinces which he does not name: He was in the Army for some time, and was
raised by Theodosius, or Honorius, to a considerable Employment, which he
describes in these terms: Tandem militae gradu
Evectum Pietas Principis extulit,
Assumptum propius stare jubens ordine proximo.
Perhaps he had been Prefect of the Praetorium, which was the Chief Dignity of
the Empire. It Is not known why, nor upon what occasion, he retired Home; but it
appears, that in the Fifty seventh Year of his Age, he wrote the Preface of his
Hymns for Every Day; wherein he alludes to his several Works ( Verse. 35, etc.)
which he designed, or had already composed, but perhaps were not yet made
public. They all run upon some Subjects of Devotion, and part of them are in
Lyrick, and part in Heroic Verses; yet he was not born for Poetry, and it does
not appear that he had much Learning. He does very often mistake the Quantity
not only of Greek Words, the Orthography of which he does not seem to have well
understood, but also of Latin Words, of which one may find some Lists in his
Interpreters. He also uses many words of the Latinity of his time, and a Style
which could only be liked then. The noble Facility of the ancient Poets, nor so
much of Claudian, who lived at the same time, does not appear in it; and the
bottom of his Style is low, and prosaick enough, though he does whatever he can
to raise it. His Heat fails him at every moment: One may perceive that Age had
lessened the Heat of his Fancy, and that he could not supply it by the Light of
his Mind. But if his Poetry does not please by its Elegancy, yet it may be
useful, because one may learn from it several Opinions and Customs of his time,
besides some Facts concerning the History of Martyrs; as it will appear by the
following Examination of some Places of our Poet.

I. The Book entitled Hymns for Every Day, contains Twelve of them, composed as
if they were to be sung or recited on several Occasions, at Break of Day, at
one's Rising, before and after Meals, when they light the Candle, when one goes
to Bed, on a Fast and after Fasting, at all times, at a Funeral, on
Christmas Day, and on the Epiphany. The Preface which is before those Hymns
seems to be rather a General Preface for all the Poems of Prudentius; since (as
I have already observed) he alludes therein to all his Works; and says, that he
is resolved to leave for ever his worldly Employments, that he might altogether
apply himself to write Verses to the Praise of God, against Heresies, and the
Pagan Religion, to explain that of Christ, and upon the Martyrs and Apostles.
Those are the Subjects upon which all the Poems of Prudentius run.

1. One may observe, that that Poet mentions several popular Opinions of the
Christians in his time, which they took from the Heathens, as that which is to
be found in the First Hymn ( Verse. 38.) wherein he assures us that they said,
That the Demons, whom the Darknesses of the Night rejoices, withdraw when the
Day appears. The Pagans believed that the Demigods retired into some Desert
Places, and wandered in the Night, and at Full-Noon, (as I have observed
elsewhere; to which the 72, 73, and 74 Verses of Callimacus his Hymn, entitled
The Baths of Pallas, may be joined, wherein he says that that Goddess bathed
herself at the same time that Mount Citheron enjoyed the Rest of Noon. What the
Latins said concerning their Lemures and Striges, is well known.

2. There is many Expressions in Prudentius, which are very harsh, and seem to
say much more than he designed. For Example, Ib. v. 58.
speaking of St. Peter, he says: Flevit negator denique
Ex ore prolapsum nefas,
Cum Men's maneret Innocens,
Animusque servaret fidem.


It seems that he meant no more than this, viz. That though St. Peter had sworn
that he knew not our Lord, yet he kept in his mind the same Sentiments for him
which he had before. But his words taken in a rigorous sense, seem to say that
a Man may speak against his Conscience, and yet have his Mind free from Guilt,
as in Euripides's Verse: Juravi Lingua, Mentam Injuratam gero.

Those who delight too much in a Figurative Style, are liable to the like
Expressions. Thus St. Cyprian, in his Book Oxon. Ed. 127.
de Lapsis, speaking of those who were overcome by the violence of Torments,
says, Infirmitas viscerum sensit, nec animus sed corpus dolor defecit: "'It Is
not the "Mind, but the Body that failed.

We shall see in the Sequel of this Discourse another remarkable Example, by
which it will appear that Prudentius says more than he means.

3. In the Evelenth Hymn, to be recited in the Morning, Verse. 29.
there is a slight Imitation of Horace; wherein having said, that in the
Morning every body betakes himself to his Affairs, Prudentius adds: Miles,
Togatus, navita,
Opifex, arator, institor:
Illum forensis gloria
Hunc triste raptat classicum, etc.


One may see the beginning of the First Satyr of Horace, by which it will
appear, that by Togatus, we are to understand a Juris Consult, or a Lawyer. F.
Chamillard understands a Judge by it: But what I have said, and forensis
gloria, which follows, show that the Poet means, a Person who frequented the
Bar, to get Glory by Pleading, not to do Justice in it. This agrees well
enough with the Division of the Day, which we find in Martial, l. 4. Ep. 8.

Prima salutantes atque altera distinet Hora,
Exercet raucos tertia Causidicos.
In the words of Cicero, cited by F. Chamillard, Cedant arma togae, Toga does
not signify the Judgments given in time of Peace, and has no relation with
Junicature; but denotes Eloquence, as it appears by the rest of the Verse,
Concedat Laurea Linguae. This is not the only place wherein Critics will not
agree with our Commentator.

4. For Example; Prudentius, in the Third Hymn Verse. 2.
to be recited Before Meals, calls Christ Verbigena; where F. Chamillard does
well observe, that according to the Analogy of the Latin Tongue, that word
signifies Begotten, or Born of the Word, as Martigena signifies Born of Mars.
Yet he maintains that this is not Prudentius's meaning, because it is contrary
to the Faith, which teaches us, that Christ is the very Word of his Father, not
a Production of the Father's Word; so that he explains Verbigena, Begotten
Word. But as we would not have our Words to be always explained according to
the Notions and Terms of the Ancients; it is not just that we should make 'em
speak as we do, unless it be evident that they have really used the same
Expressions in the same sense. That Rule ought always to be observed, but
especially when the Question is about an Incomprehensible Subject, as on this
occasion; for indeed, whatever Expressions be used, it does not become more
Intelligible. Besides, it appears from another place of Prudentius, that by
Verbigena, he understood, Begotten by Speaking. Here are his words in Verse. 17.
the Eleventh Hymn of the same Book: Ex ore quamlibet Patris
Sis ortus, and Verbo Editus,
Tamen paterno in pectore
Sophia callebas prius.
Although Thou came out of the Father's Mouth, and wast begotten as the Word,
yet Thou wast before his Wisdom, in his Breast.

Prudentius expresses in those words the Opinion of several Ancients who lived
before the Council of Nice, and believed that the Substance of the Son of God
had existed after an Incomprehensible manner, and without Generation in the
Father, from whom it emanated after an unspeakable manner Vid. Bull Def. Fid.
Nican.. 3. p. 5, etc.
before the Creation of the World; and that Emananation they call his
Generation. Notwithstanding, they do sometimes explain that Generation by the
Example of the Production of the Word; which made Tertullian say, Hunc ex Deo
prolatum didicimus, and prolatione generatum: Vid. Iren. l. 2. c. 48.
We have learned that God produced him, and begot him by Production. -- Hence
it is that the Fathers of the Council of Nice anathematized those who should
say that the Son existed not before he was begotten: So that, in their Opinion,
the Nature of the Son of God existed not only before the World, but is
Coeternal with God, properly speaking; whereas his Personality is only
Eternal, inasmuch as it did exist before Time, that is, the Duration of the
World. The same Fathers teach, that after the Generation of the Son, he created
the World, (as one may see in Dr. Bull.) Prudentius says also, agreeably to
that Notion, in the following words, Quae prompta Caelum condidit,
Caelum, Diemque and caetera.
Which being emanated from the Father, created Heaven, the Day, and all Things
else. -- Those who will give themselves the trouble to compare this Remark with
F. Chamillard's Note, will be able to judge whether it be safe to explain the
Ancients according to the Modern Notions. If any one desires to have a clear
Idea of the manner after which the Ancients apprehended that the Essence of the
Son existed without Generation in his Father, and how he was emanated from him,
I refer him to the same Fathers, who will tell him that it is a Mystery they
comprehended not no more than we.

5. In the same Hymn, Verse. 58.
wherein the word Verbigena is to be found, there is also an Opinion singular
enough, and which savours more of a Pythagorean, or Manichean, than an
Orthodox. Having said that the Earth affords all sorts of Fruits to the
Christians, he adds: Absit onim procul illa fames,
Caedibus ut pecudum libeat
Sanguineas lacerares dapes.
The Ebionites are accused, as well as the Manicheans, of having believed that
it is not lawful to eat Meat; and one may see St. Epiphanius upon those two
Heresies. Prudentius might have said in this place more than he thought, as F.
Chamillard believes, who observes, that he only meant, that many abstained from
Meat, the they thought it not unlawful, only to live a more austere Life.

6. Toward the end of the same Poem, Verse. 19.
Prudentius, speaking of Christ's Resurrection, says: Nam modo corporeum memini
De Phlegethonte gradu facili
Ad superos remeasse Deum.
For I remember that a Corporeal God easily came up again from Phlegethon. --
F. Chamillard paraphrases this latter word by that of Limbus; as if Prudentius,
by the Name of one of the Rivers of Hell, understood what they call Limbus
Patrum. It Is certain, that the Pagans, who first used the word Phlegethon,
denoted by it, not a River of the Elysian Fields, or Fortunate Islands, but of
Hell, and the Place of Torments. So that unless Prudentius ex-explains it
elsewhere, or the general Opinion of the Christians of that time leads that
way, the Critics will have much ado to apprehend why the word Phlegethon
should not denote in Prudentius the Place of Torments. Now, having examined all
the Passages in Prudentius, wherein that Name, and those of the other Rivers of
Hell are used, I find that Prudentius denotes by those terms, not a Place of
Rest, but a Place wherein the Souls are Tormented. He describes that Place as
the Heathen Poets do, either with respect to its Situation, or the Torments
which they suffer there. Thus in the Apotheosis, Verse. 743, he speaks to
Lazarus in these terms, Dic cujus vocem tellure sub ima, etc. Tell us whose
Voice you heard under the lowest Places of the Earth, and what Force went
through the hidden Places where the Dead make their abode: Since when Christ
recalled you, and ordered you to come forth from the Black Depth wherein you
was, you heard it as if you had been near. By what so neighboring an Abyss is
the Kingdom of of Darkness almost joined with the Upper Parts of the Earth?
Where is the dismal Tenarus, by which they go down through a vast Extent? and
that Hidden River, which rouls Flames in its Channel, which nothing can fill?

It appears from thence, that Prudentius placed Hell under the Earth, at a very
great distance from the Place wherein the Living dwell: as Homer and Hesiod,
who say that Tartarus is as far from hence, as Heaven is; and that an Iron
Anvil thrown from Heaven upon Earth, or from hence to Tartarus, could get
thither but in Ten Days.

In his Hamartigeny, Ver. 824. he describes Hell in the following words:
Praescius inde Pater liventia Tartara plumbo
Incendit liquido, piccasque bitumine fossas
Infernalis Aquae furvo subfodit Averno,
Et Phlegethonteo sub gurgite sanxit edaces
Perpetuis scelerum poenis inolescere vermes.
One would almost think that it is a Heathen Poet who speaks thus; but he is not
the only one who has done the same; the Jews before and after Christ, and the
ancient Christians, expressed themselves in the same terms.

Now, if it be asked what was the Opinion of the Fathers concerning the Place
into which Christ descended, and those he took out of it; I answer, That there
was some diversity of Opinions amongst 'em upon that Subject, although they
agree in some respects. They See Pearson upon the Fifth Article of the Apostles
Creed, page 256, etc.
all constantly say that Christ descended into the subterranean Places where
the Dead make their abode; but they don't agree about the Persons to whom he
made himself known, and the End for which he went to them, because they had not
the same Notions concerning the State of the Dead. Some who by the words Hades
and Infernus, understood the Places wherein the Souls of all Men, both Good and
Bad, are expecting the Resurrection, believed that the Soul of Christ descended
toward the Souls of those who died in the fear of God, as the Patriarchs and
Prophers. But some others, as St. Augustine, who thought that those words are
never to be found in the Scripture for a Place of Happiness, and consequently
could not apprehend that the Souls of the Patriarchs and Prophets should be
detained in it; those Fathers, I say, could not believe that Christ, in his
Descent into Hell, went to the Prophets and Patriarchs who were not there.

Some of those who followed the former Opinion, as Eusebius, St. Ambrose, and
St. Jerome, believed that Christ took from Hell the Souls of Good Men, and led
them into Heaven. That Is the Opinion of the modern Schoolmen, and which F.
Chamillard seems to follow in his Paraphrase. But others who had the same
Thoughts, with respect to the word Hades, believed that the Souls were still in
a subterranean Place, which they call Abraham's Bosom, where they were to stay
till the Day of the Resurrection. Justin Martyr, St. Irenaeus, Tertullian, St.
Hilary, and St. Gregory Nyssen, were of that Opinion.

Others, who maintained that the Souls of the Patriarchs could not be in a
Place called Hell, which, in their Opinion, denotes only the Place of Torments
in the Scripture, said that Christ really descended into the Place wherein the
Devils and wicked Men are tormented. They believed he went thither to deliver
the Souls which were there to suffer the Punishment which their Sins deserved.
Some pretended that Christ had only delivered a certain number of those Souls;
and others, that he had altogether emptied Hell. St. Augustine Haeres. 79.
calls this latter Opinion a Heresy, and follows the former. However, it was
St. Cyril's Opinion, Hom. Pasch. 7.
who assures us, that when Christ was risen, he left the Devil alone in Hell.
Prudentius seems to have been of the same Mind too; at least, in his Verse. 125.
and 133.
Fifth Hymn, he says that every Year, on the Night in which Christ rose, the
Damned feel no Pain; which supposes that Christ descended into that Place, and
took the Damned out of it on that very Night: Sunt and Spiritibus saepe
nocentibus
Paenarum celebres sub Styge feriae,
Illa Nocte sacer qua rediit Deus
Stagnis ad superos ex Acheronticis.
Marcent suppliciis Tartara mitibus,
Exultatque sui carceris otio
Vmbrarum populus liber ab ignibus
Nec fervent solito flumina sulphur.
The Spirits of the Wicked, the Night in which God came from the Lakes of
Acheron, have some solemn releases from their Torments. Tartarus languishes
with milder Punishments; the People of the Shades, free from Fire, are glad to
have some rest in their Prison, and the Rivers of Brimstone don't boil as they
are wont to do. -- F. Chamillard observes that the Poet was mistaken in that
respect, although St. Augustine* Enchir. c. 12.
believed also that the Damned had sometimes some release. The Schoolmen, and
other Divines, who are so positive upon that Matter, should produce a clear
Revelation, or the Testimony of some that have been in the Places which they
speak of. But it appears, by the variety of Opinions, that no body has any
such Proof; and all that can be said, is, that it were better ingeniously to
confess that they know nothing of it, no more than those who formerly spoke of
it so differently. We shall see again, in the sequel of this Work, a Thought of
Prudentius, extraordinary enough, concerning the State of the Dead.

7. In the Hymn Verse. 95.
to be said before Sleep, speaking of the Divine Justice, which can kill the
Soul, as well as the Body, he says, Idem tamen benignus
Vltor retundit iram
Paucosque non piorum
Patitur perire in aevum.
Notwithstanding, that Revenger, full of Goodness, stops his Wrath, and only
permits that some impious Men perish for ever. -- Had Prudentius read Plato,
one might believe that he should have taken that Opinion from him; for that
Philosopher introduces Socrates, in his Phaedon, dividing Men into Three
Orders; the last whereof, which contains but a small number of them, is of
those who are come to the highest pitch of Wickedness, and who being past
curing, are precipitated into Tartarus, never to come out of it. It may be also
that our Poet, by Perirae in Aevum, meant, not merely to be excluded from
Heaven, or to be in Hell, but to suffer the highest degree of Punishment in it;
for he acknowledged several Degrees of it, as he says in the end of his
Harmartigeny, of which I shall speak hereafter.

The Fathers have very differently spoken of the State of Souls after Death,
and the Punishments of another Life; so that it is no wonder that Prudentius
should have an Opinion of his own upon that Subject. We have seen what they
said concerning the Place into which Christ descended, whilst his Body was in
the Grave: And several of their Opinions concerning the Duration of the
Punishment of the Wicked, may be seen in Huetius his Origeniana, lib. 2. cap.
2. q. 11. by which it will appear, that Justin Martyr and St. Irenaeus believed
that after a certain time they should be annihilated. But, says that learned
Man, the Church had decided nothing then concerning those Questions, so that
what was looked upon as uncertain at that time, became certain, since some
Councils were pleased to tell what was their Opinion concerning it; which
Opinion cannot be grounded upon a constant Tradition, seeing the Ancients spoke
so differently of it.

8. 'Twas the Custom to make the Sign of the Cross when they went to Bed,
thinking that that Sign did drive away the Devil; as it appears by these words
of Verse. 131.
Prudentius in the same Hymn: Frontem locumque cordis
Crucis figura signet.
Crux pellit omne crimen,
Fugiunt crucem tenebrae, etc.
Make the Sign of the Cross upon the Forehead and Heart. The Cross drives away
all manner of Crimes, and Darkness flies from the Cross, etc. -- The Respect
which the Ancients had for that Figure, gave occasion to their being accused of
worshipping the Cross, (as may be seen in Minutius Felix, who vindicates
himself from it;) but at last the time came, when Men were not ashamed to
maintain that it ought to be worshipped. Thus Outward Practices, which strike
the Eyes of the People, and are performed without Trouble, are easily kept up
and increased; whilst the Inward Dispositions of the Mind, which cannot be
acquired without Pains, and without renouncing one's Passions, are neglected.

9. In the Ver. 147.
Seventh Hymn, which is for those who Fast, Prudentius, speaking of the Fast of
the Ninivites, affords us an Example of a manner of Speaking, which may easily
lead one into an Error, if he does not read with great Attention. He speaks
after the manner of his time, of a thing that was done in a very remote time,
and which those who did it, would not have expressed after the same manner:
Placet frementem publicis jejuniis
Placare Christum.
It was resolved to appease Christ with Public Fastings. -- If the Ninivites
well known, and if we knew not the Fast which Prudentius mentions, was
celebrated many Ages before Christ, we might conclude from thence, that the
People knew Christ. But it is very likely that our Poet had no such Thought, but
only spoke as they did in his time; and in all probability, those who spoke of
the Father's of the Old Testament in Christian terms, did the same.

10. Prudentius is not very exact in his Expressions, as one may easily
perceive by the reading of some Pages with a little Application. Here is a
remarkable Instance of it in the two Verses of his Ver. 12.
Tenth Hymn, wherein he describes Death thus: Humus excipit arida Corpus,
Animae rapit Aura Liquorem.
The Earth receives the Body, and the Wind carries away the Soul. -- If we had
nothing of him but those two Verses, and if we knew not that he was a
Christian, we should maintain, that he believed that the Soul dies together
with the Body; for the second of those two Verses does naturally signify so
much, and an Epicurean could not express himself better. But besides that it
cannot be doubted, after the reading of Prudentius, that he believed the
Immortality of the Soul, he explains himself in his second Book against
Symmachus, wherein he introduces God speaking thus; a Ver. ib.
The Inward Man, who lives in you, shall not die; he shall be punished with an
Everlasting Punishment, because he has ill governed the Members that were
subjected to him. It Is no difficult thing for me to surround a Liquid Substance
with Flame, though it flies as the Wind: Nec mihi difficile est liquidam
circumdare flammis
Naturam, quamvis perflabilis illa feratur More Noti.
He would have the Soul to be a very subtle Liquor, which the Wind carries
away; but he pretended, that it could not be dissipated. The question is not,
whether he had a clear Idea of what he said, and whether his Opinion is
rational; it is enough to show that he believed those two things, lest he should
be suspected of Epicureism. F. Chamillard conjectures, that he might believe
that the Soul was of the same Nature with Heaven, or of the Quint-Essence which
Heaven is made of. But Prudentius his Chimera's were not perhaps the same with
those of the Peripateticks of our time.

II. The Work entitled De Coronis, contains a Preface, and Fourteen Hymns, in
Praise of several Martyrs, especially of Spain, which was our Poet's Native
Country.

1. It does clearly appear from several Places in those Hymns, that they Prayed
to Martyrs at that time, and believed that they were appointed Patrons of some
Places by God. Some Protestant Writers, who fancy that the Tradition of the
Four or Five first Centuries of the Church ought to be joined with the
Scripture, have denied that the Saints were Prayed to in the Fourth Century;
but they should not have framed a Notional System, before they were well
instructed in Facts, since they may be convinced of this by several places out
of Prudentius. Thus in the Ver. 10.
First Him, which is in Praise of two Martyrs of Calahorra, a City of Spain, he
says, Exteri nec non and Orbis, etc. Strangers come hither in Crowds, because
Fame has published through the whole World, that the Patrons of the World
(Patroni Mundi) are here, whose Favor may be sought for by Prayers. No Body
did ever offer here pure Oraisons in vain. Whosoever came to Pray to them,
perceiving that his just Requests had been granted him, went away full of Joy,
having wept off his Tears. Those Martyrs are so careful to intercede for us,
that they suffer not that they should be Prayed to in vain: Whether it be done
with a loud or a low Voice, they hear it, and report it to the Ears of the
Eternal King. -- Those who desire more Proofs of it, need only. read the
Passages marked in the Hymn. II. ver. 457. III. 311. IV. 175, and 196. V. 545.
IX. 97. X. 130. XIV. 124.
Margin.

It does also appear from Vigilantius a Priest Vid. Hieron. T. 2.
of Barcelona his upbraiding most of the Christians of his time upon that
account, that there were already great Abuses in the Honor which they paid to
the Saints. St. Jerome, who answered him, confirms the same, by his manner of
vindicating himself: He feigneth so to understand the Objections of
Vigilantius, as if that learned Man had said that the Martyrs were Honored as
Gods, whereas he only complained that they Prayed to them, and Kissed their
Relics. Hereupon his Antagonist denies that they Worshipped the Martyrs, and
believed they were Gods; but he does not deny that they Prayed to them. One may
see his violent Invective against Vigilantius, in the Second Tome of his Works.

2. Although Prudentius relates a great number of Circumstances of the Torments
of the Martyrs, whom he mentions; yet he complains that Time and the Heathens
have destroyed abundance of Acts, from which one might have learned them.

O vetustatis silentis obsoleta oblivio!
Invidentur ista nobis, fama and ipsa extinguitur,
Chartulas blasphemus olim nam Satelles abstulit.
Hymn I. ver. 73.
O Forgetfulness of Antiquity! We are deprived of the knowledge of those Facts;
and the very Fame, which would have mentioned them, is extinguished; for the
Satellites of the Heathens have long since taken from us the Acts. -- The
History of the Martyrs has been the better adorned for it; they are
represented to us not as Men, but as Persons that have no Feeling, and at the
same time are almost out of their Wits, (as it appears by the Hymns upon
Lawrence and Agnes.) Hence it is also that Prudentius made but Two Persons of
several. Hippolytus's and Cyprian, as F. Chamillard has observed upon the
Eleventh and Twelfth Hymns.

3. They believed, in our Poet's time, that Rome was full of the Graves of
Martyrs, whereof the Number was not known, Hymn II. ver. 541.
as may be inferred from the following words: Vix fama nota est, abditis
Quam plena sanctis Roma sit,
Quam dives urbanum solum
Sacris sepulchris floreat.
It Is scarce known how full Rome is of hidden Saints, and how rich and adorned
with holy Sepulchers the Soil of that City is. -- The great Crowds of People
about the Graves of the Martyrs, brought then too great a Gain to the
Ecclesiastics in whose Parish they were found, to believe them altogether upon
their Word. However, they began then to set up the Catacombs, of which here is a
Description taken out of the Ver. 158.
Eleventh Hymn: Haud procul extremo culta ad pomoeria vallo,
Mersa latebrosis crypta patet foveris, etc.
Not far from the Walls of the City is a Vault, that lies open through dark
Pits: They go down into it by winding Stairs, without seeing any thing at all,
for there is but a small Light that gets into it through the Door of the
Stairs; but when they go forward to the darkest Place, after they have walked
through the winding Byeways of that Den, the Light comes in through a Gap that
is above: And although those Paths are very narrow and winding, yet one sees
often the Light through such like Gaps which are in the pierced Vault, etc. The
Body of Hyppolitus (says Prudentius) was laid in that hidden Place.

4. It Is not only the Behavior of the Christians toward the Martyrs, after
their Death, which may be observed in the Works of Prudentius; one ought also
to remark how they behaved themselves toward them whilst they were alive. In
the Ver. 333.
Fifth Hymn, which contains St. Vincent's Passion, Prudentius represents the
Christians going in Crowds to the Prison, wiping and kissing the Wounds which
he received when he was pinched with Tongs (ungularum duplices sulcos) licking
his Blood, or dipping a Cloth in it, to keep it as a kind of Preservative for
them and their Posterity. It appears also from the Ver. 75, etc.
Sixth Hymn, that Fructuosus Bishop of Sarragoza was attended with many Friends
of his as far as the burning Pile, and that they desired him to remember them.
Afterward they gathered carefully his Ashes and Bones, and having sprinkled
them with Wine, they buried them magnificently enough. In the Tenth Hymn, Ver.
665, etc.
which contains the Passion of Romanus, a Christian Woman being at his
Execution with a Child, delivers him to be asked whether it is not better to
worship One God than Many? The Child answers, Yes, and says that his Mother
taught him so: Whereupon the Pagan Judge causes him to be whipped till the Blood
runs before his Mother who exhorts him to suffer, is angry with him because he
calls for some Drink, and afterward carries him to be Beheaded.

If those Circumstances, and many more, are true, it does necessarily follow,
that they spared then, in some measure, the Blood of the Christians, and put
but few of them to death, to terrify others, since they did not put to death
such Persons as made a public Declaration. Yet if we believe those who wrote
since the History of those Times, 'twas enough to show that one was a
Christian, to suffer Martyrdom; and the Rivers were red with the innocent Blood
that was shed, to confess the Name of Christ. Those who have no great love for
Truth, and maintain it with the same Spirit that stirs those who defend a
Faction, have always done the same: They never believed that simple Truth was
sufficient to maintain it self, but that it wanted to be adorned and upholden
with Lies. A fatal Conduct, and which has done Truth so great a wrong, as will
never be repaired. All that can be done by those who love it, is to endeavor
to disintangle it from Fables as much as they can, and ingenuously to confess
that an infinite number of Falsehoods has been mixed with some true Facts. This
we are obliged to do, especially in the History of the Martyrs; and Mr. Dodwell
has happily performed it in his Cyprianick Dissertations, wherein he shows
that there has not been so many Martyrs as the Martyrologies reckon.

5. Although the Heathenish Custom, of filling the Churches with Images, is not
approved, because it has been found by Experience that they do more harm than
good; yet it must be confessed, that that Custom was practiced in Italy in the
beginning of the Fourth Century, and perhaps before. We learn it from
Prudentius, in the Ninth Hymn, wherein he says, Ver. 9.
That as he was going to Rome, he went into a Church at Imola, where St.
Cassianus a Martyr was buried, and that being upon his Knees before his Grave,
he saw there the Representation of his Martyrdom, over against him: Erexi ad
Coelum faciem, stetit obvia contra
Fucis colorum picta imago Martyris, etc.


The same thing may be observed in the Eleventh Hymn, concerning Ver. 123.
St. Hyppolitus, in whose Chapel Prudentius reports that the same thing may
may be seen as in that of Cassianus.

Exemplar sceleris paries habet illitus, in quo
Multicolor fucus digerit omne nefas.
Picta super tumulum species liquidis viget umbris,
Effigians fracti membra cruenta viri.
It ought to be observed, that upon that Grave there was a Table, or an Altar,
on which they celebrated the Ibid. ver. 170.
Eucharist; so that, that Image precisely upon the Altar where they are wont to
place Images now in the Church of Rome.

Thus those who had but a confused Notion of Christian Piety, believed that it
could not maintain it self without the help of Outward Objects, and I know not
what Heathenish Pomp, which has at last extinguished the Spirit of the Gospel,
and substituted Paganism in its room. Whatever has an Outward Appearance of
Piety, and may be observed without having any Virtue in the Soul, was always
easily entertained amongst ignorant Nations; who, on the contrary, did always
neglect whatever requires some Virtue to be practiced. However, we must
acknowledge, that Images were not yet permitted every where at that time;
witness St. Epiphanius's Action, who tore a Vail in a Church of a Village in
Palestine, named Anablatha, because there was a Picture upon it, saying, that
it was against the Authority of the Scripture. He himself relates that Action,
in a Letter to John Bishop of Jerusalem, which St. Jerome translated into Latin,
and speaks of it as of an Action which no body could blame, and which was
grounded upon the Doctrine of the Apostles. However, it apears from Prudentius,
that this was not the Opinion of the whole Christian Church; and one may see
thereby, that the single Testimony of one Father is not sufficient to judge of
the Opinions of all the Christians, as it is but too often practiced.

III. Prudentius his Apotheosis is a Poem in Heroic Verses, wherein he
assaults several Errors either of some Heretics, or of the Jews. He attacks,

1. The Patripassians, or Disciples of Noetus, who lived about the Year 240,
who distinguished no Hypostases in the Deity, and believing that it was united
to Christ, maintained that the Father had suffered as well as the Son. It Is a
difficult thing to know whether the Opinion of that Heretic is faithfully
related, or whether they did not ascribe to him the Consequences which they
drew from it. However, Prudentius endeavors to prove against him, that the
Father never made himself Visible, and that consequently it cannot be said that
he dwelt in Christ; but it must be confessed that this is a very weak Argument,
according to the Notions of our Modern Divines. For if the Essence of the Son
became in some respect Visible by being United to Christ, that of the Father
became Visible at the same time, because it is but One only Essence in Number.

2. The next Heretics against whom Prudentius writes, are the Vnionites, that
is to say, the Sabellians, who began to appear about twenty Years after Noetus.
They used the same Arguments with that Heretic, to prove the Unity of a Divine
Hypostasis; and they were answered as Noetus was, (as may be seen in Haere^s.
57, and 62.
St. Epihanius.) Prudentius upbraids Sabellius with saying nothing that is new;
because the Pagans, especially the Philosopers, acknowledged the Unity of a
Supreme God, as well as he, although they did sometimes mention many: Cum
ventum tamen ad norman rationis and artis,
Turbidulos sensus, and litigiosa fragosis
Argumenta modis concludunt Numen in Vnum.


Afterward he shows, that the Christians surpass those Pagan Vnionites,
because they believe Three Hypostases in that One Deity; and that if there was
but One Hypostasis, the Son would be Son of Himself; which is absurd. That
whole Dispute is a very intricate one, because it runs upon a Subject equally
incomprehensible to the Orthodox and Heretics; and those who will carefully
read the Reasonings of Prudentius and St. Epiphanius upon that Matter, will
perceive that they prove not Three Modifications of One Essence, but Three
equally Glorious Essences.

This the Heretics upbraided the Orthodox with, when they asked 'em, as St.
Epiphanius relates it, Have we One God, or have we Three? Prudentius answers
that Question, in his Ver. 347.
Hamartigeny, thus: -- Deus Pater est and Filius unum,
Quippe unum Natura facit quae constat utrique
Vna voluntatis, juris, virtutis, amoris;
Non tamen idcirco Duo Numina, nec Duo rerum
Artifices; quorum generis Dissentio nulla est.
That is to say, those are not Three, whose Nature is the same Kind,(...) in
Greek, which is the same thing with (...), (as I have showed In the Life of
Eusebius.
elsewhere.)

3. Afterward Prudentius attacks the Jews somewhat weakly, by confusedly
relating some Miracles of Christ, and some Effects of the Gospel, either true
or false, as the History of I know not what Magical Sacrifice of Julian, the
Effects whereof a Christian hindered by his Presence. Yet he speaks well of that
Emperor, which is a sign of his Equity: -- Ductor fortissimus armis,
Conditur and legum celeberrimus ore manuque,
Consultor Patriae, sed non consultor habendae Religionis.


4. The Fourth Error, which Prudentius confutes, is that of Paulus Samosatenus,
Bishop of Antioch, who believed the Unity of God, in the same sense as Noetus
and Sabellius: but said, that Christ was but a mere Man. To show the falsity of
that Doctrine, Prudentius relates the History of the Wise Men, and the Miracles
of Christ. He that set down the Titles to those Places of the Apotheosis,
wherein our Poet begins to confute a new Error, calls the Followers of Paulus,
Homuncionites.

5. Prudentius explains the Nature of the Soul, against I know not what
Heretics, who seem to have made it Equal to the Divine Nature: He shows, that
the Soul has a Beginning, though it be like God; wherein it differs from the
Son, of whom the Essence had no Beginning, having been in his Father from all
Eternity. Afterward he shows how it is subject to several Weaknesses, and may
sin. He says that Souls Ver. 910.
become corrupted, by being united with the Body, which all Men have from Adam;
whence it is that all Men are born Sinners, and that we must beware of
believing that Souls produce other Souls.

6. Our Poet writes against the Phantasmaticks, that is to say, those who
pretended that Christ had not a True Body. He does especially endeavor to to
show that, if this were true, God would have deceived us, and that Christ's
Genealogy would he but a Chimaera; in effect, the Manichaeans, who were of the
number of the Phantasmaticks, rejected that Genealogy.

7. Prudentius, in the last place, describes the Resurrection, in some Venses,
and so ends his Poem.

IV. The following Poem, entitled Hamartigeny, or, The Birth of Sin, is against
the Opinions of the Manicheans and Marcionites, who believed Two Collateral
Gods, whereof the one was the Author of Good, and the other of Evil. Prudentius
does scarce any thing but set down the common Opinion, and repeat several ways,
That there is but One All-Good God; and that he whom the Heretics make Equal
with Him, is an Angel fallen from his Innocence, who induced Men to Sin, and is
really the cause of most Evils which happen in the World, which our Poet
describes at large.

The Manicheans and Marcionites raised an Objection against the Orthodox, which
Prudentius Ver. 640.
alleges, without abating any thing of its strength; viz. That if the God who
governs the World did not delight in Sin, he would hinder it; since he is not
ignorant of Men's Corruption, and can hinder it. They pretended, that to do Ill,
or suffer it, was the same thing, when it can be remedied. Prudentius answer,
First, That it does plainly appear, that God delights not in Sin; since he
applies a Remedy to it, and saves those who abstain from it. But, replied the
Heretics, Men cannot Sin, if God will not; since he masters Men's Hearts, and
turns them as he pleases. Our Poet does not resolve this Difficulty any other
way, than by having recourse to Free Will, without which, there can be neither
Vice nor Virtue. He does much enlarge upon that, and proves it, not only by the
Example of our First Parents, but of Lot and his Wife, Noemi's Daughter-in-Law;
and of two Brothers, one of whom is seen every day to embrace Virtue, and the
other to give up himself to Vice: To which he adds Ver. 508.
this general Maxim: Omnibus una subest Natura: sed exitus omnes
Non unus peragit, placitorum segrege forma.
All Men are not of the same Nature, but all have not the same End, because
they do not all pursue the same thing. --

It appears from what has been said before, the Prudentius believed that Men
are born corrupted; but one may see by what he says here, that he believed not
that that Corruption did irresistibly determine 'em to do Ill. To which he
adds. That because Men may be Good or Bad, as they will, God has appointed
Rewards and Punishments. If the Manicheans had further objected to him, That it
seems 'twere better if there was no Freedom of Will, nor Happiness, bestowed as
a Reward, and if Men necessarily applying themselves to Good, were necessarily
happy, than to make Men so dismal a Present as Free Will, which exposes most of
them to an Eternal Misery: If, I say, the Manicheans had raised such an
Objection against him, he would perhaps have made use of his Principle, which I
have already mentioned, viz. That few Men fall into that Misery. And who knows
but Prudentius came by that Notion because of that Objection, which might
easily come into his Mind?

2. Prudentius, describing the Flying of Lot, uses a word which cannot be
understood without the help of the Old French, which has its Original
immediately from the bad Latin: It Is in the 773 Verse: Alter (Lot) se proripit,
altera mussat. That is, Et l'autre muse; in better Latin, Nectit moros. Father
Chamillard paraphrases it Murmr, in effect Mussare signified that in the
ancient Latinity, but afterward it changed its signification. But that is an
Observation of no great moment: I had rather observe another thing which
Prudentius says in the same History, viz. That Lot's Wife was not only changed
into a Statue of Salt, but also, that that Statue was perfectly like her, and
had the Head turned backwards; That it was still extant; and though the Salt
did melt, and was often licked by the Cattle, yet it did not lessen. It seems
that our Poet had this out of a Poem upon Sodom, ascribed to Tertullian,
wherein it is said moreover, that 'twas known every Month, by a certain Mark,
that 'twas a Woman's Statue. I think I am able The Author has done it since,
in his Comment upon Genesis.
to show, that Moses says not that Lot's Wife was metamorphosed into a Statue
of Salt; but this is not a fit place to enlarge upon that Matter, or show, that
what is related concerning the Statue of Salt, are mere Fables.

3. At the end of this Poem Prudentius offers a Prayer to God, which deserves
to be observed. He prays, That when he is dead, he may not see a Devil, who
carries his Soul into the Black Dens, where he will be forced to pay whatever
he owes, to the last Farthing. He does not beg to be in the Place where the
Blessed, especially the Virgins dwell. He says he will be content, provided he
sees no Devil, and Hell devours not his Soul; that since is is necessary,
because of the Corruption which his Soul had contracted in his Body, he
consents to be swallowed up by the sod Fire of Avernus, provided however that
it shall not be too hot. Let others (says he) be gloriously crowned in an
Immense Light, and I but lightly burnt.

Esto; cavernoso, quia sic pro labe necesse est
Corporea, tristis me sorbeat ignis Averno:
Saltem mirificos incendia lenta vapores
Exhalent, aestuque calor lanquente tepescat.
Lux immensa alios, and tempora vineta coronis
Glorificent, me poena levis clementer adurat.
Prudentius adds not, that he hoped to get out of that Place in the Day of the
Resurrection; so that one cannot affirm, that he understands by it what was
since called Purgatory, as F. Chamillard thinks. The Ancients differed so much
among themselves concerning those Matters, that we cannot tell whether
Prudentius had not a private Opinion of his own concerning this; and believed
not, that a lesser degree of Heat, though it should last for ever, was a hind
of Happiness. In effect, he ranks the Place wherein he wished to be, among the
several Habitations in the House of God, which Christ speaks of, John xix.

Multa in Thesauris Patris est habitatio, Christ,
Disparibus Discreta locis.
V. The Psychomachy is an Allegorical Poem, wherein Prudentius describes a
Fight of Virtues against Vices, and wherein there is nothing that is remarkable.

VI. The two Books against Symmachus were composed a little while after the
Defeat of Alarick by Stilichon, in the Year 402. as it appears from the 695
Verse of the Second Book, wherein Prudentius mentions that Defeat, as having
lately happened. Symmachus, a Pagan and Prefect of the City of Rome, the most
Eloquent Orator of his time, had about eighteen Years before presented a
Request to Valentinianus, Theodosius and Arcadius, to obtain from them the
re-establishment of an Altar and Statue of Victory, which was in the Place
where the Senate met, and which Gratianus took away. We have still the
Discourse of Symmachus, and an Answer to it of St. Ambrose Bishop of Milan,
which he wrote when he had disappointed the Request of Symmachus, by another
which he presented upon the spot. Prudentius did also exercise himself in
writing an Answer in Verses to the Discourse of that famous Heathen. He excuses
himself for daring to write against so learned a Man. Lib. 1. ver. 646.
In effect, the Verses of our Poet are not comparable with Symmachus's Prose,
as to what concerns the Expression; though the Reasons of the latter, being
only the Reasons of a Declamator, are very much beneath those of Prudentius.
Yet Prudentius says scarce any thing against the Pagan Religion, but what other
Christian Authors, who wrote upon the same Matter, said before him. He spends
his First Book in that, and answers Symmachus's Reasons only in the Second.

1. One may learn from two Places of the First Book, that there was then but a
small number of Heathens in Rome, since Ver. 579.
Prudentius says to the Pagans, That to know how few People pay Honor to the
Altars of Jupiter, one needs only observe of what Religion are those who live
in the highest Stories of the Houses, those who walk through the whole City,
those who are nourished with the Bread which the Emperors distributed to the
People, those who lived at the foot of the Vatican, and those who go to the
Church of Lateran, to be Confirmed there. -- It appears from thence, that the
greatest part of the People were Christians. And a little lower, Ver. 609.
Prudentius teaches us, that the greatest number of the Senators were
Christians too; Because they had thrown down the Images of the Gods, by a
Decree of the Senate made by the Majority of Votes. He says, That the Senators
gave freely their Consent to the Proposal of the Emperor for it; which was
evident, because that Prince did equally honor Merit in the Pagans and
Christians.

2. Simmachus had drawn an Argument for the Pagan Religion from its Antiquity,
which he expressed very elegantly; Si longa aet as authoritatem religionibus
faciat, servanda est tot saeculis sides, and sequendi sunt nobis Parents, qui
feliciter sequuti sunt suos: If length of Time is of some weight in Religion,
we ought not to depart from the Belief of so many Centuries; we ought to
imitate our Fathers, who did so well imitate theirs. -- This is so well worded,
that the ablest Missionary cannot preach better against the Innovators. Yet
Prudentius answers chiefly two things against that Argument, which are so
judicious, that the most learned Innovator cannot answer a Missionary better.
The First is, That if the manner of Living of past Ages, is always to be
preferred before that of the time wherein one lives, the Romans of that time
should have renounced all the Conveniences of Life, trodden under foot all
Sciences, recalled the Inconveniences and Barbarity of the Age of Saturn, and
sacrificed Humane Victims to him. The Second thing is, That the Religion of the
Romans was very much altered since Saturnus, and even Romulus's time: Ver. 303.
Roma Antiqua sibi non constat, versa per aevum,
Et mutata sacris, etc.


What was remarkable in the Religion of the Romans, is, that since Romulos, the
number of the Gods was infinitely increased: Ver. 343.
Sanguinis Hectorei populum probo tempore longo
Non multos coluisse Deos, rarisque sacellis
Contentum paucas posuisse in collibus aras, etc.


3. Symmachus said also, That as every Body has a certain Soul; so Cities have
some Tutelar Gods, which Fate gives 'em. Prudentius having laughed at those
pretended Genius's, Ver. 460.
does very much inveigh, as all the Ancient Christians did, against the Opinion
of Fate. He says, that if it be true, there should be no Laws nor Punishments
against Malefactors: -- quos ferrea Fata
Cogunt ad facinus, and inevitabile mergunt:
Quin and velle adigunt pravum insinuantia votum,
Ne liceat miseris vetitum committere nolle.
That Unmovable Fate does unavoidably force to Sin; That it disposes the Will
to do Ill, so that Men cannot forbear being willing to do what is forbidden.

4. The Heathen Orator vaunted much the Institution and Chastity of the
Vestales: But Prudentius, who did not suffer himself to be surprised by fine
words, when the Question was about Paganism, replied, Ver. 1065.
That it must be observed, that the Vestales were chosen in their Childhood,
before they came to despise the lawful Bond of Marriage of their own motion,
and kindled with the love of Virginity and Religion. They Consecrate (says he)
their Chastity before the Altars against their Wills, and those poor Wretches
are deprived of a Pleasure which they take away from them, but they have not
despised it: If they are Chaste as to the Body, they are not so as to the Mind:
They enjoy no Rest in their Beds, where an Invisible Wound makes them sigh
after the Nuptial Torches. -- The same Argument cannot be made use of against
the Christian Nuns of that time, who were permitted to Marry, if they were not
content with Celebacy. But some things have happened since among a part of
Christians, by the means whereof we see nowadays, upon the Theater of
Christianity, its several Parties act the same Scene between themselves, which
was acted formerly by the Pagans and Christians.

VII. Lastly, There are Forty nine Quadrants to be found in the Works of
Prudentius upon several Histories of the Old and New Testament, which make up a
little Book entitled Enchiridion, whereby the Style is still less Poetical than
that of the other Works of our Poet.

THE HISTORY OF PELAGIANISM.
IN the Fourth Century, a vast number of People went to visit the Holy Places
in Pulestine; which made the Books of Origin to be known in the West, where
they were unknown before. Rufinus, amongst others, a Priest of Aquileia, having
lived thirty Years in the East, and studied under Evagrius an Origenist, not
only embraced the Opinions of Origin, but being returned into Italy, spread
them every where, by translating several of his Works. Pelagius and Celestius
learned of him at Rome that Doctrine, of which I shall speak hereafter. They
were both Monks, and of Great Britain; Celestius was a Scotch-man, and Pelagius
an Englishman: The latter's Name was Morgan, in the Language of his Country,
that is, Born of the Sea; or in Greek, (...), a Name which he took out of his
Native Country. If we believe In Proem. Dial. cont. Pelag.
St. Jeram, Pelagius was an ignorant Fellow, who knew not how to express
himself, who deserved more to be pitied than envied; and Celestius a
Solecism-maker. But St. Augustine speaks well of their Parts, in several
Places; and indeed, it appears by their Fragments, which remain in his Works,
that they did not express themselves so ill as St. Jerome says. We have still
two Pieces of Pelagius among the Supposititious Writings of this latter;
whereof one is a Letter to Demetriades; and the other is entitled Symboli
Explanatio ad Damasum, whereas it should be called Professio Fidei ad
Innocentium, for Pelagius sent it to Innocent. This last Piece is also to be
found in Baronius, and in the First Volume of the Councils of Cologne, in 1606.

Pelagius made a long stay at Rome, where he got a great Reputation by his
Works and Conduct: Hence it is, that Augustine Bishop of Hippo praised him, and
wrote a very obliging Letter to him, before he fell a Disputing with him. He
calls him, in his Book De Peccatorum Meritis, Cap. 1, 3.
Vir, ut audio, sanctus, nec parvo profectu Christianus, bonus ac praedicandus
Vir: As I hear (says he) he is a Holy Man, and very much improved in Piety, a
Good Man, and worthy of Praise. -- Petavius, in his Book Dogm. Theol. T. 3. p.
586.
De Pelagianorum and Semi-Pelagianorum Dogmatum Historia, observes, that St.
Augustine wrote the Book in which he speaks so advantageously of Pelagius, after
the Condemnation of Celestius in the Council of Carthage, in 412. From whence
he concludes, that St. Chrysostom does not mention the same Pelagius in his
Fourth Letter, wherein he laments the Fall of a Monk of the same Name. It Is not
more likely that Pelagius the Hermit, to whom St. Isidorus of Damietto wrote
Lib. 1. Ep. 314.
sharp Censures, was the same whose History I write, and whose Life was always
unblameable, as it appears by St. Augustin's Testimony.

Rome having been taken by the Goths, in the Year 410; Vid. Vsser. Brit. Eccl.
Antiq. c. 9. p. 16.
Pelagius, who was there, left it, and sailed into Africa; but he did not stay
there, having presently set out for the East. In the mean time, Celestius his
Disciple stayed at Carthage, and aspired to be Priest of that Church; but
because he made no scruple to maintain the Opinions of his Master, he was
accused by Paulinus a Deacon of the same Church, in a Council wherein Aurelius
Bishop of Carthage presided in the beforementioned Year. Celestius was
Condemned and Excommunicated, as having maintained these Seven Propositions. 1.
That Adam was created a Mortal Man, and would have died, whether he had sinned
or not. 2. That Adam's Sin had prejudiced none but himself, not all Mankind. 3.
That the Law brought Men to the Heavenly Kingdom, as well as the Gospel. 4.
That before the Coming of Jesus Christ, Men were without Sin. 5. That Newborn
Children are in the same Condition in which Adam was before his Fall. 6. That
all Men do not die through the Death and Prevarication of Adam, as all Men do
not rise through the Resurrection of Jesus Christ. 7. That Man is without Sin,
and may easily obey God's Commands if He pleases.

Celestius answered all those Heads; but we have only some Fragments of his
Answers, in St. Augustine's Book; that is to say, we have no other Witnesses of
his Doctrine but his Adversaries, who took no great care to propose their
Accusations clearly, and to apprehend well of the Opinions of those whom they
accused, as it appears by the Obscurity of the before mentioned Heads. Aug. de
Pecc. Orig. c. 3.
Celestius said, among other things, that as for what concerns the Propagation
of Sin, He had heard many Catholic Priests, and especially Rufinus, deny it.
He presented a Request to the Council, wherein he consest, that Children were
Redeemed by Baptism. But he was Condemned notwithstanding; and being obliged to
leave Africa, he went into Sicily, where he wrote some Books in his
Vindication. From thence some short Questions were sent to St. Augustine, which
Celestius had composed to prove that Man is not by his Nature unavoidably
inclined to do Evil. Those Interrogations are contained in Fourteen Articles: I
shall only here set down one or two, by which one may judge of the rest. Quest.
1.
First (says he,) Those who say* that Men cannot be without Sin, must be asked,
what Sin is in general? whether it be a thing that may be avoided or not? If it
cannot be avoided, there is no harm in the committing of it. If Man can avoid
it, he may be without Sin. Now, there is no Reason nor Justice that allows that
what cannot any way be avoided, should be called a Sin. Quest. 2.
Again, It must be asked whether Man ought to be without Sin? It will
undoubtedly be answered, that he ought. If he ought, he can be without it; if
he cannot, he is not obliged to it. Besides, if Man ought not to be without Sin,
he ought not to be a Sinner; and 'twill be no more his fault, if it be supposed
that he is necessarily such.

At the same time, Pelagius, who was at Jerusalem, published several Pieces,
wherein he explained his Opinion more fully, Vsser. Brit. Eccl. Ant. p. 125.
and in particular asserted, that although no Man but Jesus Christ had been
without Sin, yet it did not follow from thence that it was impossible. He
affirmed, that he did not Dispute about the Fact, but about the Possibility;
and besides, that it was possible only by the Grace and Assistance of God. St.
Augustine undertook to confute one of those Writings of Pelagius, in his Book De
Natura and Gratia. He accuses him, on the one hand, of confounding the Graces
which God gives to Men, when he creates them, with those by which he
regenerates; and on the other hand, of saying, that God bestows his Graces
according to Men's Merits, and that those Graces are only External; but we shall
see hereafter how Pelagius explained his meaning.

Three Years after Celestius had been Condemned at Carthage, his Master was
accused at Jerusalem of having the same Opinions. John Bishop of that City
called an Assembly of some Priests, to examine Pelagius, and see whether he
really held the Opinions that were ascribed to him. Three Latin Priests,
Avitus, Vitalis, and Orosius, were sent for to know what had been done in
Africa against Celestius. Orosius was then at Bethlehem, studying ( De Lib.
Arbit. page 621. Edit. Mogunt. in 8 vo.
as he himself says) at the feet of St. Jerome, to whom St. Augustine had
recommended him. Forasmuch as he happened to be in Africa when Celestius was
Condemned there, he told the Assembly of Jerusalem, with what Zeal that of
Carthage had Condemned that Heretic, and that St. Augustine had wrote a Book
against Pelagius; and besides, confuted the Queries of Celestius, in a Letter
sent to Sicily. Having that Letter about him, he offered to rend it, and read
it at the Request of the Assembly. After the reading of it, Bishop John desired
that Pelagius should be introduced. It was permitted, out of Connivance (says
Orosius) either out of respect for the Bishop, or because it was thought
necessary that that Prelate should confute him in his Presence. He was asked
whether he acknowledged to have taught what Augustine Bishop of Hippo had
confuted. He presently answered, Who Is that Augustine? And every one crying
out* That a Man, who blasphemed against a Bishop by whose Mouth the Lord had
preserved Union in all Africa, should not only be banished from that Assembly,
but also from the whole Church; John bad him sit in the middle of the Catholic
Priests, though he was a Layman, and guilty of Heresy. Afterward, he told
him, I am Augustine; to the end, that acting as it were in the Name of that
Offended Bishop, he might more freely forgive Pelagius, and allay the
exasperated Minds. We told him then (says Orosius,) If you represent here the
Person of Augustine, follow his Opinions. He replied, by asking us whether we
believed that what was read concerned any body else, or Pelagius? If it be
against Pelagius, say (added he) what you have to propose against him. I
answered, by the Assembly's leave, That Pelagius had told me, he maintained
that Man might be without Sin, and easily observe all the Commands of God, if
he would. Pelagius confessed that it was his Opinion. Whereupon I said, that this
was the very thing which the Bishops of Africa had condemned in Celestius,
which Augustine declared in his Writings to be a horrible Doctrine, and which
Jerome had rejected in his Epistle to Ctesiphon, and confuted in some Dialogues
which he was then writing. But the Bishop of Jerusalem, without hearkening to
any of those things, would have us to prosecute Pelagius before him. We are not
(answered we) the Accusers of that Man; but we declare to you, what your
Brethren and our Fathers have judged and decreed concerning that Heresy, which
a Layman publishes now, lest he should disturb, without your knowing of it,
your Church, into the Bosom of which we are come. Then, that he might engage us
to be in a manner Accusers, he began to cite what the Lord said to Abraham,
Walk before me, and be without spot: And what was said of Zacharias and
Elizabeth, That they were both righteous before God, and walked in all the
Commandments of the Lord blameless. Many of us knew that this was an
Observation of Origin: And I answered him, We are Children of the Catholic
Church. Father, don't require of us that we should undertake to set up for
Teachers, above the Teachers; nor for Judges, above the Judges. Our Fathers,
whose Conduct the Universal Church approves, and in whose Communion you rejoice
to see us, have declared that those Doctrines are condemnable. It Is just, we
should obey their Decrees. Why do you ask Children what they think, when you know
the Opinions of their Fathers?

The Bishop said afterward, that if Pelagius maintained, that Man may be
without Sin, without God's Help, it would be a condemnable Doctrine; but that
he denied not God's Assistance, and asked what we had to say to that? whether
we denied the Necessity of that Assistance? We answered to it, by pronouncing
Anathema to those who denied it; and we cried out, that he was a Latin
Heretic; that we were Latins; that he ought to be judged by the Latins; and
that 'twas almost a piece of Impudence in him to pretend to judge of it, since
we were not Accusers. Because he said that I was the only Witness against
Pelagius, and that I was suspected; some of the Company thought themselves
obliged to say, that the same Person could not be a Heretic, an Advocate and a
Judge at the same time. 'Twas concluded, that Pelagius should be referred to
the Judgment of Innocent Bishop of Rome, and in the mean time should be silent.

Thus that Assembly acted, in which Pelagius, who understood only Latin, spoke
by an Interpreter with the Bishop of Jerusalem, who understood only Greek. A
Synod was held at Diospolis in Palestine, toward the end of the same Year 415,
where Fourteen Bishops met. Eros and Lazarus, Bishops of the Gauls, had
delivered to Eulogus Archbishop of Caesarea an Accusation in Writing against
Pelagius; but they could not come to that Synod, because one of 'em fell sick
in his Journey. Pelagius appeared in it, and answered the several Accusations
laid on him; so that the Council acquitted him, and even approved of his
Doctrine, according to the Interpretations he put upon it. Here Is in a few
words an Account of the whole Matter.

Aug. de Gest. Palaest. Syn*
Pelagius was accused of maintaining the following Propositions: 1. That none
can be without Sin, without knowing the Law. He answered, That he meant only by
it, that the Law was a help to avoid Sin; not that such a Knowledge was
sufficient not to Sin. 2. That all Men are led by their Will. He owned that
Proposition, by saying, That though Man has a Free Will; yet when he chooses
well, it is by God's Assistance. 3. That in the Day of Judgment, God will not
forgive the Wicked and Sinners. That Is, said Pelagius, the Doctrine of the
Gospel. 4. That Evil does not so much as come into one's Thoughts. He assured,
he had only said, That Christians should endeavor to have no ill Thoughts. 5.
That the Kingdom of Heaven is promised in the Old Testament. This he maintained
by Dan. vii. 18. 6. That Man may be without Sin, if he will, Pelagius said,
That he had maintained, that this was possible by the Grace of God; but, that
he never taught, that any Man had lived without Sin from his Childhood to his
Old Age. He also denied, that he had maintained some other Doctrines, of which
he was accused. Whereupon he was asked, whether he did not Anathematize those
who were of that Opinion? I Anathematize 'em (said he) as Fools, not as
Heretics; for what they say is not a Doctrine. 7. He was accused of
maintaining the Opinions which had been condemned at Carthage, which have been
before mentioned; and besides, That a Child may be saved without Baptism. He
replied, by denying that he ever taught any thing after the manner it was
reported, especially that ever he said, that those who lived before Christ,
have been without Sin. 8. Some places which were said to be extracted out of
Celestius his Books, were proposed to him; but he said he could not warrant
what another had writ, and that he anathematized those who maintained
Propositions so worded. Amongst other Propositions, this was one of 'em, That
Sinners who repent, obtain the Forgiveness of their Sins, not by the Grace and
Mercy of God, but according to their Merits and Penitence. Perhaps, this was
only a Consequence drawn from Celestius's Opinions; for in this whole
Controversy, both Parties ascribed to one another well or ill drawn
Consequences, as express and formal Doctrines. Besides, those Propositions
which Eros and Lazarus extracted out of the Books of Pelagius and Celestius,
being separated from the Series of the Discourse, might have a fence contrary
to that which they had in those Books.


The Council having approved all his Answers, declared him worthy of the
Communion of the Catholic Church. But the Enemies of Pelagius accused him of
having concealed his true Opinions and deceived those Greek Bishops, to whom he
spoke only by an Interpreter. St. Augustine says that Pelagius his Answers De
Gest. Palaest. Syn. c. 1, 2.
were Orthodox, as the Fathers of the Council understood 'em, not as Pelagius
did. But those who have not so bad an Opinion of Pelagius as he had, observe,
that St. Augustine, who understood not the Greek, could not know, by his own
knowledge, the Opinions of the Greek Church concerning that Matter. If he had
been able to read those Fathers, say they, he would have found that they spoke
not otherwise than Vid. Bull. Harm. Apost. Diss. 2. c. 7.. 14. and Exam. Cens.
p. 157.
Pelagius, as may be seen by an infinite number of Places out of St.
Chrysostom, and St. Isidorus of Damietta, his Disciple, whom some late Authors
have openly accused of Pelagianism. Therefore it is not to be wondered, that
Greek Bishops should approve the Language of that English Monk.

Before the Acts of that Council were published, Pelagius wrote to a Friend of
his, that his Opinions had been approved in it, and made his Letter public. He
also made a kind of an Apology for that Council, in the Year 416, which he sent
to the Bishop of Hippo, who having received no other from Palestine, durst not
trust it. He, together with some other African Bishops, wrote to John Bishop of
Jerusalem, to have the very Acts of the Council of Diospolis. In the mean time,
St. Jerome, who had written against the Pelagians, and especially against the
Bishop of Jerusalem, occasioned a Disorder which happened at Bethlehem, where a
Deacon was killed, and some Monasteries were burnt. The Bishop was accused of
having stirred that Tumult; but they had not time enough to bring him to an
account for it, because he died the same Year. St. Jerome, having also offended
the Bishops of Palestine, by despising their Assemblies, thought the best way
to maintain himself, was to rely upon the Friendship of those of Africa, though
he was not of their Opinion in every thing, being of that of the
Semi-Pelagians, of whom I shall speak in the Sequel of this History. Wherefore
he wrote to St. Augustine, in these terms; I am resolved to love, honor,
respect and admire you, and to defend what you say, as if I had said it: Mihi
decretum est te amare, te suspicere, te colere, te mirari, tuaque dicta quasi
mea defendere.

Pelagius was accused every where of denying altogether the Assistance of
Grace. To justify himself, he wrote a Book concerning Free Will, where he
showed, that he Petav. de Pelag. c. 2, etc.
acknowledged six sorts of Grace.

First, It Is a Grace of God, according to Pelagius, to have a Rational and Free
Soul; that is to say, which may obey or not obey God, without being unavoidably
determined either to the one or the other. Pelagius maintained, that all Men
were born in that state; so that if they applied themselves to Evil, it was not
by an Unavoidable Necessity, but by an ill use of their Liberty. St. Augustine
maintained, First, That what we receive from God by Creation, ought not to be
called a Grace, on this occasion, but only what we receive from him, by virtue
of our Redemption. But that is only a Dispute about Words. Besides, St.
Augustine denied that Men are born otherwise than unavoidably determined to do
Ill; and said, that 'twas impossible for them to do any Good, without an
extraordinary Assistance of God, which he only bestowed upon some; and that
those who had not that Assistance, were unavoidably inclined to Evil. Thus,
though he admitted of the Name of Free Will, he put a new sense upon those
words; since Freedom, in his Opinion, is only a mere Spotaneity, and does not
imply a Power of not doing what one does. The difference therefore that was
between St. Augustine and Pelagius in this Matter, is, that the former believed,
that since the Fall of Adam, Men are so corrupted, that they are born with ill
Habits, which do necessarily incline them to do Evil; That if God would incline
them to Good, he must bestow upon them, for every Good Action, a Grace, which
makes 'em unavoidably willing to do Good: And further, That those to whom he
gave not that Grace, were Damned; God, by a Wisdom which we do not comprehend,
being willing that Mankind should be born with an unavoidable Necessity of
Offending him, and of being afterward tormented with Everlasting Punishments,
without freeing from that dismal Necessity but a very small number of Persons,
upon whom he bestows an Irresistible Grace. St. Augustine believed that this
was to give God the Glory due to him. Pelagius, on the contrary, believed that
God had not permitted that Adam's Sin should cause so great a Disorder in the
World; that those who descended from him, should not be able still to obey or
not obey God's Law, who gave their Souls the power of avoiding Evil, and doing
Good; so that they were Damned only by their Fault, without being bound to Sin
and Everlasting Misery by any unavoidable Necessity. Having received a
Free Will from God, 'twas not necessary that God should interpose in every
Action. Vsser. p. 141. ubi sup.
To be able to do Good (said Pelagius) comes from God, who gave it to his
Creature; but to be willing to do Good, and to practice Virtue, depends on Man.

The Second Grace, which Pelagius acknowledged, is the Forgiveness of Past
Sins, which God grants to those who mend their Lives. Pelagius Anathematized,
in the Council of Diospolis, whosoever durst say that God has any respect to
Merits on this occasion. St. Augustine complains, that Pelagius, being content
to acknowledge that God freely forgives us our Past Sins, confessed not that he
helps us to abstain from them hereafter. But Pelagius maintained that that
Forgiveness helped us to do our Duty for the time to come, seeing we cannot
betake our selves to serve God when we have offended him, but by being
persuaded that he will freely forgive us what is past. He further said, that as
to those Sins which were committed in the very time of Penitence, that is, in
the state of Regeneration, they were forgiven us, in consideration of our Good
Works, by which we also come to Glory. And in that sense he maintained that
Grace is given according to Merits, that is, according to Good Works. Forasmuch
as Children, before the use of Reason, commit no Sin, they are not concerned in
that kind of Grace.

The Third Grace (according to Pelagius) is the Law, that is to say, the
Preaching of the Gospel, and the Example of Jesus Christ, which those who lived
under the Old Dispensation had not. He said, that this Grace was altogether
necessary, to live like Christians.

The Fourth sort of Grace, is an Inward Illumination of our Minds, which
Pelagius expressed thus: Apud Aug lib. de Great. Chr. c. 7.
I maintain, that Grace does not only consist in the Law, but in the Assistance
of God, etc. Now, God assists us by his Doctrine and Revelation, by opening the
Eyes of our Hearts; by showing us things to come, to hinder us from being too
much taken up with present things; by discovering to us the Snares of the
Devil; by enligthning us with the various and unspeakable Gifts of his Heavenly
Grace. Do you think (adds Pelagius) that those who speak thus, deny the Grace
of God? Do they not rather acknowledge both Free Will and the Grace of God
together? -- St. Augustine accuses Pelagius, on this occasion, not of having
positively denied Grace, but of having denied the Necessity of it; and said,
that God did only give it, that Free Will might the more easily incline to
Good. That Grace, according to Pelagius, does not infallibly and by it self
produce the Will of Doing Good, and Good Works, but only enclines to be more
easily Willing.

The Fifth is, the Grace of Baptism, by which, according to him, although
Children receive not the Forgiveness of Sins, which they have not committed,
being, according to Pelagius, altogether Innocent, yet they enter into a better
state, which consists in their being thereby adopted by God, and becoming Heirs
of the Heavenly Kingdom. On the contrary, St. Augustine maintained, that
Children being born Sinners, Baptism confers upon them the Forgiveness of Sin,
and sanctifies them by a Grace which God has annexed to it.

Lastly, The Sixth Grace consists, according to Pelagius, in Eternal Life, and
the Kingdom of Heaven. He is accused of having distinguished those two things;
and said, that Eternal Life might be obtained without the Revelation of the
Gospel, but that God gave the Kingdom of Heaven only to those who were
Baptized. According to Pelagius, that Grace was given consequently to Merits,
that is to say, a Good Life. It Is a hard matter to know wherein that
Distinction of Eternal Life and Kingdom of Heaven did consist, and to reconcile
it with the Accusation raised against Pelagius, that the Kingdom of Heaven was
promised under the Old Testament. St. Augustine said upon this last Article,
that if by the Old Testament the Legal Covenant was understood, it did not
promise Eternal Life; but if all the Books of the Old Testament were understood
by it, 'twas true, that it was promised therein, although the Kingdom of Heaven
is not mentioned in them, that Phrase belonging to the New Testament.

There was never a Dispute more intricate than this, because each Party being
urged with some troublesome Consequences, endeavored to get rid of them with
the help of some Terms, upon which they put a Sense different from that which
they had in the Mouth of their Adversaries. The word Grace, when used by
Pelagius, did not signify the same thing as when used by the Bishop of Hippo,
and the latter gave the Name of Liberty to a thing which was not ordinarily so
called. In short, several People believe, that if the chief Words that have
been used in that Controversy, and the Idea's that have been fixed to 'em,
were examined, it would be found, that there is scarce any of those Idea's that
is very distinct, so as to know perfectly the meaning of a Word to which one of
those Idea's is fixed, when it is pronounced. Nay, there is, in their opinion,
some of those words to which no Idea at all has been fixed: so that in some
parts of that Dispute, both Parties do in a manner imitate a Frenchman and an
Arabian, who knowing only their Mother Tongue, should speak by turns as loud as
they could, and sometimes both at one time, without understanding one another,
and should afterward boast each of them of having overcome his Adversary.

Thus we have seen wherein the Opinions of Pelagius and his Adversaries,
concerning Grace, did chiefly consist. As to Election, it seems that Pelagius
believed Two sorts of it; the one to Grace, and the other to Glory. God was
resolved, as he thinks, to call certain Persons to the Knowledge of the Gospel,
to make the way to Everlasting Happiness more easy for them. That Is
Predestination to Grace. God resolves afterward to save those whom he has
foreseen should persevere to the end in a good use of those Graces. That Is
Predestination to Glory, which is grounded upon Merit, whereas the other is
altogether Free. St. Augustine, Disputing against Pelagius, confounded (as Page
614. ibid.
Petavius thinks) those two Predestinations, and made but one of them; because,
according to him, all those who have received the Means necessary in order to
Salvation, do infallibly come to it. Hence it is that he does so loudly exclaim
against those who maintain Predestination according to Works; as if they meant
Predestination to Grace, whereas they understood it only of Predestination to
Glory.

The next Year after the Council of Diospolis, that is, in 415. two Councils
met in Africa concerning the same Matter, the one at Carthage, and the other at
Milevum. Aurelius Bishop of Carthage presided in the First, where there was
Sixty seven Bishops. The Acts of Diospolis had not yet been received in Africa;
but Eros and Lazarus had writ what past there, and sent their Letter by
Orosius, who returned from Palestine to Africa. It was Resolved, upon that
Report, to Anathematize the Opinions of Pelagius, lest they should spread; and
to Anathematize him afterward, together with Celestius his Disciple, if they
did not clearly condemn those Errors. Afterward they sent the Acts of the
Council to Pope Innocent, to engage him to condemn the same Opinions. The
Council of Milevum, made up of Sixty one Bishops, in which Sylvanus Primate of
Numidia presided, did the same with that of Carthage. Besides the Synodal
Letters of those two Councils, Innocent received some private ones from some
Bishops of Africa, among whom was St. Augustine. The Design of those Letters
was the same with that of the foregoing, viz. to oblige Innocent to condemn the
Doctrine ascribed to Pelagius, and to summon him to appear, to know whether he
continued to maintain it. Wherefore they intimated, that Pelagius had perhaps
deceived the Bishops of Palestine, though they durst not assure it positively,
for fear of setting the Churches of Africa against those of the East. The next
Year (417.) Innocent wrote an Answer to the two Councils, and the Bishops who
wrote to him in private. He said that he believed Pelagius and Celestius
deserved to be Excommunicated, and that the former could not have cleared
himself at Diospolis, but by Equivocations, and obscure Expressions.
Notwithstanding, having not yet received any certain News from that Country,
and knowing not well how things were done there, he says he can neither approve
nor disapprove the Conduct of the Bishops of Palestine. He also excuses
himself, with respect to the summoning of Pelagius, because of the Distance of
Places. Innocent wrote those Letters in the Beginning of the Year, and died
soon after; seeing the Tenth of March, in Beda's Martyrology, is marked for the
Day of his Death.

After the Death of Innocent, Vid. Vser ubi sup. c. 10.
St. Augustine and Alypius wrote to St. Paulinus Bishop of Nola, to exhort him
to oppose Pelagianism in Italy, if it was like to make any progress in it. In
the mean time, Celestius, who returned from Asia, whither he was gone, after he
had stayed some time in Sicily, went of his own motion to Zosimus, born in
Cappadocia, and Successor of Innocent. He delivered into his hands a little
Writing, in which he explained his Belief.

He mentioned therein all the Articles of Faith, from that of the Holy Trinity,
to that of the Resurrection from the Dead, and declared that he held the
Doctrine of the Catholic Church concerning all those Articles. To which he
added afterward, That if some Disputes were started up concerning some things
which were not of Faith, he had not assumed to himself the Authority of forming
any settled Doctrines out of them; but that he offered to the Examination and
Judgment of Zosimus what he had taken out of the Writings of the Prophets and
Apostles concerning those Matters, to be corrected, if there was any Error in
it. -- Lastly, He explained the Doctrines which I have before mentioned, and
expressly denied that Men are born Sinners.

Zosimus summoned Celestius to appear before him in St. Clemens's Church, where
he caused that Writing to be read, and asked the Author whether he truly
believed what he said in it. Celestius assured it; and then Zosimus asked him
several questions, which amounted to these two; Whether he condemned the
Doctrines of which Paulinus Deacon of Carthage had accused him? To which he
answered, That he was able to prove that that Paulinus was a Heretic, and he
would not condemn the Propositions of which he had accused him. The other
Question which Zosimus asked him, was, Whether he condemned not what Pope
Innocent had condemned? and whether he would not follow the Sentiments of the
Church of Rome? Celestius answered, he would.

After those Formalities, Zosimus wrote a pretty long Letter to the Bishops of
Africa, wherein he tells 'em after what manner Celestius had appeared before
him, and how he was examined. Afterward, he reproaches them with having acted
in that Affair with too great a Precipitancy (Fervore fidei praefestinatum
esse) and with having too slightly believed some general Reports and certain
Letters of Eros and Lazarus, without being very sure of their Sincerity.
However, he did not take away the Excommunication which the Bishops of Africa
had pronounced against Celestius.

Forasmuch as at that time the Judgment of a Synod, and even of a Bishop,
especially of that of Rome, was of great moment; and because Zosimus was
afterward accused of having Prevaricated, by condemning Pelagius, after he had
approved of his Doctrine: De Pec. Orig. cap. 5, 6, 7.
St. Augustine endeavored to put as handsome a varnish as he could upon
Zosimus's Conduct, as if that Pope grew milder with respect to Celestius, only
out of Pity; and thinking that Celestius having advanced his Opinions only to
be better instructed, they could not be ascribed to him as his settled Doctrine,
and even that it would be no difficult Matter to convert him.

In a word, Zosimus (according to St. Augustine) had only approved in
Celestius, (who was a very ingenious Man, and who being corrected, might be
serviceable to many others) the Will of Mending his Opinions, not the Falsity
of his Doctrine: Ad Bonif. l. 2. c. 3.
In homine acerrimi ingenii, qui profecto si corrigeretur plurimis profuisset,
voluntas emendationis, non falsitas Dogmatis approbata est. But the learned
Vossius (says Brit. Eccles. Antiq. p. 147.
Bishop Usher) has showed, a great while ago, that that great Bishop sweats to
no purpose to hide the Bunch of Zosimus with his Purple. It cannot be doubted,
after the reading of the Letters which he wrote to the Bishops of Africa, that
he did favor not only Celestius, but Pelagius, as being Catholics, without
having ever departed from the True Faith.

Zosimus having sent his Letter into Africa, received from Palestine a Packet
directed to Innocent, whose Death they knew not yet. It contained some Letters
of Praylus Bishop of Jerusalem, and an Apology of Pelagius, with a little Book,
wherein he explained his Opinions very clearly, as it will appear by the
reading of it. Praylus did openly side with Pelagius, and Zosimus caused those
Letters and Writings to be publicly read, which were approved by every Body,
as Zosimus wrote it a little while after to the Bishops of Africa: Would to God
(says he to them) my most Beloved Brethren, that some of you had been at the
reading of those Letters! How great was the Joy of the Holy Men who were
present at it? In how great an Admiration were they All? some of them could
scarce forbear shedding Tears. Is it possible that Men, whose Belief is so
pure, could be so slandered? Is there any place in their Writings in which they
do not mention the Assistance and Grace of God?

Besides, he condemned, in that Letter, Eros and Lazarus, Accusers of Pelagius
and Celestius, as Men guilty of great Crimes, Erubes cenda factis and
damnationibus nomina, and spoke with great contempt of the others, who had
prosecuted him.

Yet the Bishops of Africa had no regard to those Letters: Two hundred and
fourteen of them met together at Carthage, and condemned a new Pelagius and
Celestius, till they would acknowledge the Necessity of Grace, in the same
sense it was taught in Africa, without using any shift, as they had done
hitherto.

That Assembly met in the Beginning of the Year 418, and sent its Constitutions
with a Letter to Zosimus, wherein those Bishops exhorted him to proceed against
Pelagius, agreeably to their Constitutions. Their Letter had the Effect they
wished for; and Zosimus and his Clergy, who had admired the Writings of
Pelagius, wherein he very clearly expressed his Opinions, Being attentive (as St.
Augustine relates it) to what the Romans, whose Faith is to be praised in the
Lord, believed concerning it; they saw, that all their Opinions, which agreed
with one another, were full of ardour for the Catholic Truth, against the
Error of Pelagius. -- However, when Zosimus condemned him, he spoke not so
eagerly as he did when he gave Sentence in his Behalf, (as may be seen in
Bishop Usher.)

The Emperors Honorius and Theodosius received also the Acts of the Council of
Africa, and thought themselves obliged to maintain them by their Authority, by
making an Edict which they sent to the Three Praefects of the Praetorium, to be
published through the whole Empire, by which they banished Pelagius and
Celestius from Rome, and also condemned to a perpetual Banishment and
Confiscation of Estates all those who should maintain their Doctrine,
wherever they might be, authorizing all manner of Persons to Accuse them.

The Praefects of the Praetorium added to that Imperial Law particular Edicts,
one of which is still extant in the Tom. 5. Col. 849.
Centuriators of Magdeburg. It Is Palladius's Edict, and it runs thus; If he who
is fallen into the infamous Opinion of that Dark Heresy be Layman or a
Clergyman, by whomsoever he be drawn before the Judge, and without minding the
Accuser, his Estate shall be confiscated, and he shall be condemned to
perpetual Banishment: Et si sit ille Plebeius ac Clericus, qui in Caliginis
hujus obscoena reciderit, a quocnnque tractus ad Judicem, sine Accusatriois
discretione Personae, facultatem publicatione nudatus irrevocabile patietur
exilum.

Some will suspect that that Edict, expressed in words so Emphatical, was penned
by a zealous Clergyman; but it is nothing, if compared with that of the
Emperors Honorius and Theodosius, which may be seen at large in Vbi sup. p. 151.
Bishop Usher.

Those who know the Style of the Preachers of that time, will easily believe
that it required a long Experience, to begin an Imperial Edict with these
Terms, which I shall not undertake to translate into French. Ad conturbandam,
Catholicae simplicitatis Lucem, puro semper splendore radiantem, dolosae antis
ingenio, novam subito emicuisse versutiam, pervulgata opinione cognovimus; quae
fallacis scientiae obumbrata mendaciis, and furiato tantum debacobata
luctamine, stabilem quietem coelestis conatur attrectare fidei; dum novi
acuminis commendata vento, insignem notam Plebeiae aestimat vilitatis sentire
cum cunctis, ac prudentiae singulatis palmain fore, communiter approbata
destruere. etc. The rest runs in the same strain; and one may see thereby, that
in Honorius's time, the Spiritual Exactations to convert the Heretics, were
not very different from those that have been made use of in these latter Times.

In the mean time, the same Bishops of Africa who had condemned Pelagius,
knowing nothing yet of the Emperor's Edict dated from the last Day of April,
met again the next Day at Carthage, and Anathematized those who should say, 1.
That the First Man was Mortal by his Nature. 2. That Little Children ought not
to be Baptized, or that they may be Baptized, although they are not infected
with Adam's Sin. 3. That the Grace by which we are Justified, serves only for
the Forgiveness of Sins, and is not an Assistance to abstain from them for the
time to come. 4. That Grace helps us, only by teaching us our Duty, and
produces not the Obedience it self. 5. That Grace is given us, that we may more
easily do by its means, what we should do with greater difficulty without it.
6. That it is only out of Humility that we are all obliged to say that we are
Sinners. 7. That every one is not obliged to say Forgive us our Sins for
himself, but only for others who are Sinners. 8. That the Saints are obliged to
say the same words only out of Humility.


It seems that that Council intended not only to condemn the Opinions of
Pelagius, but also to anathematize before hand those who should fall into some
Opinions which should have some relation with his. For one may easily perceive,
that according to his Principles, he might have altogether denied the Four last
Propositions. He did not believe that Grace did only teach us our Duty, nor
that any Man had lived without Sin, except Jesus Christ.

But it has always been the Custom of Councils to anathematize such Erros as
no body maintained, when they condemned the true Opinions of the Heterodox;
perhaps to inspire a greater horror for Heresy, and lest any one should be so
rash as to protect Heretics. Thus (as Ep. 157.
St. Augustine speaks) by the Vigilance of the Episcopal Councils, with the
Assistance of the Savior who defends his Church (and that of the Imperial
Edicts,) Pelagius and Celestius were condemned through the whole Christian
World, unless they should repent.

In the mean time Pelagius, who was at Jerusalem still, being urged to it by
Pinianus and Melanius, published a Declaration as to what concerns the
Necessity of Grace, which he acknowledged to be necessary in every Act and at
every Moment. He also said, That with respect to Baptism, he was of the same
Opinion which he had set down in his Profession of Faith to Pope Innocent, viz.
That Children ought to be Baptized as they were wont to be. But whatever he
might say, they did not believe that he understood what he said, in the same
Sense as the Church of Africa. In the mean time Julian Bishop of Celaena in
Campania, published some Commentaries upon the Song of Solomon, a Book
concerning Constancy, and four Books against the first of St. Augustine, De
Concupiscentia and Nuptiis, wherein he maintained the Opinions of Pelagius. In
the last of those Works, he openly called the Bishops of Africa Seditious Men
and Innovators; and said, that they must needs not have Reason on their side,
since in the Dispute they frighted those who dared oppose them, with Imperial
Edicts; but that by such Proceedings they persuaded not Understanding but
Timorous Men. Ap. Aug. cont. Jul. lib. 3. c. 1.
Laborare illam partem rationis inopia, quae in disserendo cum terrorem
Surrogat, nullam a prudentibus impetrat, sed coecum a meticulosis extorquet
assensum. He accused Zozimus of having prevaricated, by condemning Pelagius
after he had approved his Opinions: And with respect to the Councils of Africa,
he said, That those who had been condemned in them, could not defend their
Cause; That none is able to judge well of controverted Matters, unless he
examines them with a Mind free from Hatred, Friendship, Enmity and Anger; and
that the Bishops of Africa were not in that Disposition* seeing they hated the
Opinions of Pelagius before they were acquainted with them; That Advices ought
not to be numbered but weighed; and in short, Whatever is commonly objected
against the Judgment of Great Assemblies.

A New Council made up of 217 Bishops was held at Carthage in the Year 419.
wherein whatever was done in the foregoing against Pelagius was confirmed, and
indeed, to use the Terms of St. Prosper, in his Poem de Ingratis, An alium in
finem posset procedere Sanctum
Concilium, cui Dux Aurelius, ingeniumque*
Augustinus erat?


But the Episcopal Authority was again upheld in this occasion by that of the
Emperors, who, by a Letter directed to Aurelius, confirmed their precedeing
Edict, and ordered, Vsser. ubi sup. p. 161.
That if any one knew in what part of the Empire Pelagius and Celestius lay
hid, and did not discover 'em, or presently drive 'em from it, they should be
liable to the same Punishment as Heretics. And in order to correct the
Obstinacy of some Bishops, who maintained, by a tacit consent, those who
disputed in the behalf of Heresy, or did not destroy it by publicly
assaulting it, Aurelius should take care to Depose those who would not
subscribe to the Condemnation of Pelagianism, and that they should be
Excommunicated and Banished.

Aurelius received Orders to publish that Edict through all Africa; and he did
punctually perform them, sending a Circular Letter to the Bishops of the
Byzacene and Arzugitane Provinces, by which he exhorted to subscribe to the
Acts of the last Council both those who had assisted at it, and those who could
not come to it, that it might appear that there was in the Bishops neither
Dissimulation nor Negligence, or lest perhaps there might remain some just
Suspicion of some hidden Heresy.

The Bishops who were of Pelagius's Opinion, had much ado to subscribe to the
Acts, and Eighteen of them wrote to the Bishop of Thessalonica, to endeavor to
get the Eastern Bishops on their side. To engage them the more easily to it,
they accused their Adversaries of Manicheism; because the Manicheaus maintained
also the unavoidable Necessity of Sin, and the Natural Corruption of Man.

That Accusation was so much the more odious, because St. Augustine, the chief
Defender of those Opinions, had been infected in his Youth with the Opinions of
Manes; and because having abjured them, he had confuted them by the same
Principles which the Pelagians used, which he afterward forsook when he came
to be a Bishop.

On the other hand, Julian wrote to Rome, and Celestius went to Constantinople
in the Year 419, to endeavor to get Friends there. But after the
beforementioned Imperial Edicts, 'twas not likely they should be successful in
it. Celestius was ill received by Atticus, who had succeeded Arsacius
substituted to St. Chrysostom, who died soon after.

The Pelagians were also ill treated (as St. Prosper relates it) at Ephesus,
and in Sicily: And Constantius, whom Honorius had made Partner of the Empire,
made, in the Year 420, an Edict like that of that Prince, against those who
should conceal Celestius.

St. Jerome died that Year; and St. Augustine wrote his Four Books dedicated to
Boniface, Successor of Zosimus; and Six against Julian, dedicated to Claudius.
He makes the Encomium of St. Jerome in them, and assures us that he was of the
same Opinion with the Bishops of Africa, in all likelihood because he wrote
against the Pelagians, though he made not use of the same Arguments with St.
Augustine.

Lib. 1. in Pelag.
St. Jerome said, That God's Commands are possible, but that every one cannot do
whatever is possible; not by any Weakness of Nature, which would be a
Reflection upon God, but by the Custom of the Soul, which cannot have all
Virtues always and at the same time: Possibilia praecepit Deus, sed haec
possibilia cuncta singuli habere non possumus, non imbecillitate Naturae, ut
calumniam facias Deo, sed animi assuetudine, qui cunctas simul and semper non
potest habere virtutes.

St. Augustine was so far from being of that Opinion, that in 191 Sermon de
Tempore, he speaks thus; We detest the Blasphemy of those who say that God has
commanded Man any thing that is impossible; and that Gods Commands cannot be
observed by every one in particular, but by All in common: Execramur
blasphemiam eorum qui dicunt impossible aliquid homini a Deo esse praeceptum,
and mandata Dei non a singulis, sed ab omnibus in commune posse servari. --
Here we must supply, By the Assistance of Grace.

Whilst Vsser. ubi sup. c. 11.
Pelagius lay hid in the East, and kept silence, Julian wrote Eight Books
against the Second of St. Augustine de Concupiscentia and Nuptiis,, having
refuted the First in the Four Books abovementioned. St. Augustine undertook to
Answer the Last Work of Julian, as he had answered the First; but he could not
finish his Answer, being prevented by Death. We have Two Books of his with the
Two Books of Julian which he confutes, printed at Paris by the care of Claudius
Menard, in the Year 1616. Julian expressed his Mind boldly in those Books, and
seems, by his giving the Adversaries of Pelagius ill Words, to have been
willing to take his revenge of the severe Edicts which they had obtained
against him. But his Conduct proved prejudicial to him, seeing Celestinus
Bishop of Rome caused him to be banished out of Italy, together with Florus,
Orentius, Fabius, and all the Bishops of the same Party.

It appears notwithstanding that Pelagianism spread it self maugre its
Opposers, seeing the Emperor Valentinian published an Edict at Aquileia, in the
Year 425, to drive it from the Gauls* by which he ordered Patroclus Bishop of
Arles to go and see several Bishops who followed the Opinions of Pelagius, and
to let 'em know, that if they did not retract their Errors within Twenty Days
allowed them to deliberate about it, they should be banished from the Gauls, and
deprived of their Bishoprics.

Joaunes Cassianus, a Scythian by Origin, whom some will have to be an
Athenian, others a Roman, and others to be born in the Gauls, who had been
Deacon of St. Chrysostom, and Ordained a Priest by Innocent I. having retired
to Marseilles, betook himself to write some Books then; by which softening a
little the Opinions of Pelagius, whom he otherwise condemned as a Heretic, he
gave birth to those Opinions, which went since under the Name of
Semi-Pelagianism. His Opinions may be seen in his Collationes, or Conferences,
which St. Prosper confuted, and which he maintained to contain mere
Pelagianism. Petav. lib. Laud. c. 7.
Here Is in a few words what his Opinions may be reduced to.

1. The Semi-Pelagians confessed that Men are born corrupted, and cannot free
themselves from that Corruption but by the help of Grace, which is
notwithstanding prevented by some Motion of the Will, as by a good Desire;
whence it is that they said, Meum est velle credere, Dei autem gratiae est
adjuvare; To be willing to believe depends on me, but it is the part of God's
Grace to help me. -- God, in their Opinion, expects those First Motions from
us, and then gives us his Grace. 2. That God invites All Men by his Grace, but
that it depends upon Men's freedom to embrace or reject it. 3. That God caused
the Gospel to be preached to the Nations which he foresaw should embrace it,
and would not have it to be preached to the Nations which he foresaw should
reject it. 4. That although he would have all Men to be saved, yet he had only
elected to Salvation those whom he foresaw should persevere in Faith and Good
Works. 5. That there was no particular Grace absolutely necessary to Salvation,
which God gave only to a certain number of Men, and that Men could lose all the
Graces they had received. 6. That among little Children, who died in that Age,
God permitted that those only should be Baptized, who, according to God's
Foreknowledge, would have been Pious Men if they had lived; and on the
contrary, that those who were to be Wicked, if they had come to a more advanced
Age, were excluded from Baptism by Providence. 7. The Semi-Pelagians were also
accused of making Grace altogether External; so that, in their Opinion, it
consisted only in the Preaching of the Gospel. But some of them maintained that
there was also an Inward Grace, which Pelagius himself did not altogether
reject. Some others confessed besides, that there is a Preventing Grace.
Thus it seems that the Difference between their Opinions and those of
Pelagius, consisted in their owning that Men are born in some sort corrupted,
and in their insisting more upon the Necessity of Grace, at least in Words.

Although the Difference is not very great, yet they Anathematized Pelagius.
Which perhaps they did, supposing that Pelagius maintained all the Opinions
condemned by the Councils of Africa. St. Augustine accuses them of making the
whole Grace of God to consist in Instruction, which concerns only the
Understanding; whereas he makes it to consist in a Particular and Inward
Working of the Holy Ghost, which unavoidably determines us to Good, and that
Determination is not the Effect of the Light we have. The other Opinions of
that Father, either contrary to the Doctrine of Pelagius, or that of the
Semi-Pelagians, are well known. One may learn them especially in his Books
concerning Predestination and Perseverance, which he wrote at the Desire of St.
Prosper, against the Semi-Pelagians, and in the Works of this latter.

To return to the History, it is said that in the Year 429, one Agricola Son of
Severianus a Pelagian Bishop, brought Pelagianism into England; but St. German
Bishop of Auxerre was sent thither by Pope Celestinus, or the Bishops of the
Gauls, and soon extirpated it. Many Miracles are ascribed to him in that
Journey, and whilst he staid in England, which may be read in Bishop Usher. But
if what Hist: Scot. lib. 8.
Hector Boethius, a Scotch Historian, who lived in the beginning of the last
Century, says, be true, he used a Method which is not less efficacious for the
extirpating of Heresy; it is this, the Pelagians who would not retract their
Errors, were burnt by the care of the Magistrates.

But whilst St. German was purifying England, the Seeds of Pelagianism which
Cassianus had spread among the Monks of Marseilles, and in Gallia Narbonensis,
made it grow in France. St. Prosper and Hilary wrote to St. Augustine about it,
and let him know that many Clergymen in the Gauls looked upon his Opinions as
dangerous Novelties. St. Augustine answered their Objections in the Books which
I have just now mentioned: But the Toleration which Hilary Bishop of Arles, and
Maximus Bishop of Riez, granted the Semi-Pelagians, hindered every body from
molesting them, though they showed a great Aversion to the Doctrine of St.
Augustine.

Julian, and the other Bishops, who were banished (as I have said) from Italy,
went to Constantinople, where they importuned the Emperor to be reestablished:
but because they were accused of Heresy, he would grant 'em nothing, without
knowing the Reasons for which they were expelled.

Nestorius Bishop of Constantinople wrote to Celestinus about it, who returned
him a very sharp Answer, and as if it had not been lawful to enquire for the
Reasons of their Condemnation, upbraiding him at the same time with his private
Opinions. His Letter is dated the 12th. of August, in the Year 430.

St. Augustine died about that time, whose Encomium's may be found in Bishop
Usher, who approves the Praises bestowed upon him by Fulgentius, in his Second
Book Of the Truth of Predestination, wherein he calls him an Inspired Man. A
little while after his Death, the Letters of Theodosius, who' called him to the
Council of Ephesus, came to Africa, from whence some Bishops were sent to it.

That Council, made up of Two hundred and ten Bishops, met to Condemn
Nestorius, in the Year 431. Cyril of Alexandria presided in it; and whilst it
sat, John Bishop of Antioch met, with Thirty other Bishops, who made some
Canons opposite to those of that Council. What is singular in it is, that the
Party of Cyril and that of John accused each other of Pelagianism; but the
greatest Party approved the Deposal of Julian, and the other Italian Bishops,
whom Nestorius had treated more mildly. He is accused of having been of their
Opinion, and of having maintained that Christ became the Son of God, by reason
of the good use he made of his Free Will; for a Reward whereof, God had united
him to the Eternal Word. Hence it is that Pelagianism and Nestorianism were
condemned together in that Council.

But notwithstanding all this, and the care of Three Popes, Celestinus, Xystus
III. and Leo I. Semi-Pelagianism maintained it self in the Gauls. Perhaps the
manner after which Celestinus wrote to the Bishops of France, contributed
toward it; because although he condemned Pelagius with heat, and praised much
St. Augustine, yet he said at the end of his Letter, That as to what concerned
the profound and difficult Questions which were mixed with that Controversy,
and had been handled at large by those who opposed the Heretics, as he durst
not despise 'em, he did not believe neither that it was necessary to determine
one's self thereupon.

One may see in Vbi sup. c. 12.
Bishop Usher, how much St. Prosper, and the Popes Xystus and Leo, labored to
confute or destroy Pelagianism and Semi-Pelagianism. About the same time,
Vincentius Lirinensis wrote his Commonitorium, that is, three Years after the
Council of Ephesus. He is suspected to be the Author of the Objections which
St. Prosper confuted, under the Title of Objectiones Vincentianae. His
Commonitory was reprinted last Year (1687.) in Twelves, at Cambridge, with
Balusius's Notes, and Sr. Augustine's Book de Haeresibus.

One may also see in Ibid.
Bishop Usher the Devastation which the Scots and Picts made in England in that
Century, the Arrival of the Saxons into that Island, after what manner they
made themselves Masters of it, and the other Events of that Time.

Before Vid. Vsser. ubi sup. c. 13.
those Misfortunes happened in England, a Monk whose Name was Faustus went from
that Country into Gallia Narbonensis, where he became Abbot of Lerins, and
afterward Bishop of Riez after Maximus, to whom he had also succeeded in the
Abbey of Lerins. He assisted at a Council held at Rome toward the End of the
Year 462, wherein it was agreed that a Council should be held every Year in the
Gauls, which should be convocated by the Archbishop of Arles. There was one
held a little while after in that City, which ordered Faustus to declare his
Opinions concerning the Matter of Grace; and another at Lions, by the Order of
which he added something to what he had already written, because some new
Errors had been discovered. Those Errors are those to which the Divines of
Marseilles gave the Name of Predestinarian Heresy, which some maintain to have
been a true Heresy, and others the Opinion of St. Augustine.

We have no more the Acts of those two Synods, but Faustus's Work is still
extant; it is entitled De Gratia and Libero Arbitrio, directed to Leontius
Bishop of Arles, and contains very clearly the Semi-Pelagianism. Erasmus
printed it for the first time at Basil, in 1528, and it was since inserted into
the Eighth Tome of the Bibliotheca Patrum.

Faustus sent the Opinions of the Second Council of Arles to a Predestinarian
Priest, named Lucidus, to oblige him to retract his Errors, and subscribe to
the Doctrine of that Council: We have still his Letter to Lucidus, and the
Answer of that Priest directed to the Bishops who met at Arles, wherein he
declares, That he condemns the Opinions of those who believe that Free Will was
altogether lost after the Fall of the First Man; That Christ died not for all
Men; That some are designed for Death, and others for Life; That from Adam to
Christ, no Heathen was saved by the First Grace of God, that is, by the Law of
Nature, because they have lost Free Will in our First Father; That the
Patriarchs, Prophets, and greatest Saints, have been in Paradise before the
time of the Redemption. -- This is almost an Abridgment of Faustus's Book.

Some learned Men have maintained that Faustus did more than he was ordered,
and that many of those who assisted at the Councils of Arles and Lions would
not have subscribed to his Book. But it is hard to apprehend how a Bishop, who
was very much esteemed (as it appears by the Letters of Sidonius Apollinaris,
Bishop of Clermont in Auvergne, who makes his Encomium in many places, and by
Gennadius, who praises that Work,) it is, I say, somewhat hard to apprehend how
he could have been so bold as to ascribe to a Council some Opinions which the
greatest part of them would have abhorred, and that the Members of that Council
should show no resentment of it.

Indeed, those who say that Faustus did more than he was bid, give no reason
for it, only they cannot believe that there was so many Semi-Pelagians in the
Gauls.

One may see in Bishop Usher the Judgment of several learned Men concerning
Faustus, and whereof the greatest part do not much favor him. Baronius himself
speaks ill of him; so that what happened formerly to the Pelagians, happens
nowadays to the Semi-Pelagians; viz. those who maintain their chief
Doctrines, condemn them, only because some Men, who were more esteemed than
they, have formerly condemned them.

Faustus his Book Vsser. ubi sup. c. 14.
did not remain unknown, seeing they brought it to Constantinople, where the
Minds were divided concerning the Doctrines which it contained. Some affirmed
it was Orthodox, and others Heretical, as it appears by a Letter of Poss^^^ an
African Bishop, who was then at ^^^^tantinople, and wrote from thence to Pope
Hormisda, in the Year 520, to know what he thought of it. Some Persons of the
greatest Quality, among which were Vitalian, and Justinian, who was since
Emperor, desired to know the Opinions of the Church of Rome thereupon. Hormisda
disapproved Faustus his Book, and referred them to those of St. Augustine, Of
Predestination and Perseverance.

There was then at Constantinople a Monk whose Name was John Maxentius, who
wrote an Answer Tom. 6. Bibl. P. P. Ed. Col.
to Hormisda's Letter, wherein he compares the Opinions of St. Augustine and
Faustus, and sharply censures Possessor, and those who maintained that Faustus
his Book was Orthodox. It appears from thence that Possessor was a
Semi-Pelagian, and consequently, that the Councils of Africa had not been yet
able to bring all the Bishops of that Church to their Decisions.

The Vandals had invaded Africa, during the heat of the Pelagian Controversies;
and because they were Arian, they turned out a great number of Bishops, who,
followed the Decrees of the Council of Nice.

Thrasamond King of the Vandals had sent Sixty of the Byzacene Province into
Banishment to Sardinia. They were consulted from the East concerning the
Controversies about Grace, rather to have a public Declaration of their
Opinions, than to be Instructed; seeing those who wrote to them were already
fixed in their Opinion, and condemned in their Letters not only the Pelagians,
but the Books of Faustus.

Fulgentius Bishop of Esfagues answered in the Name of the others, and
explained the Opinion of St. Augustine, in a Letter, and a private Book
directed to Paulus Diaconus. The same Fulgentius wrote also some other Books
concerning the same Matter. He had composed Seven Books against Faustus his Two
De Gratia and Libero Arbitrio, but they are lost. Those African Bishops
returned to their Churches in the Year 523, in which Thrasamond died, as we
learn from Victor of Tonneins, in his Chronicle.

Fulgentius had confuted Faustus, before he departed from Sardinia; from whence
it follows, as well as from Possessor's Letter, that Binius should not have
placed the Third Council of Arles, the Opinions of which Faustus had explained,
in the Year 524* But this is not the only Fault he has committed: he has
corrected, or rather corrupted, as he thought fit, a vast number of Places in
the Ancient Councils, without having any regard to Manuscripts: Wherefore Vb.
sup. p. 231.
Bishop Usher gives him the Title of Contaminator Conciliorum.

As Hilary and Leontius, Archbishops of Arles, had favored Semi-Pelagianism;
so Caesarius, who succeeded Leontius, favored what the Divines of Marseilles
called Predestinatianism, that is, the Opinions of St. Augustine. The Second
Council of Orange was held under his Direction, in the Year 529, which approved
St. Augustine's Opinions, and whereof the Acts may be seen entire in Vb. sup.
p. 262.
Bishop Usher. A little while after, another Council was held at Valence,
concerning the same Matters, which did also condemn Semi-Pelagianism. Boniface
II. approved the Acts of that Council, by a Letter which he wrote to Caesarius,
in the Year 531, which the same learned Primate of Ireland has inserted in his
Work.

Here ends the History of Pelagianism and Semi-Pelagianism, which
notwithstanding was not extinguished in the Gauls and England by so many
Endeavors and Decrees of the Defenders of Grace, as may be seen by the History
of Godescale, written by the same Bishop. What can one conclude from thence,
according to St. Augustine's Principles, but that God was not pleased to bestow
his Grace upon Anathema's, Confiscations, Deposals and Banishments, which the
Godly Emperors and Holy Councils made use of against the Unfortunate Pelagians?

FINIS.

