IEPON SOLOONIOS.

THE TEMPLE OF SOLOMON Pourtrayed by Scripture Light

(...)

Act: 7:47 (...).

Heb: 10.1 Lord I have loved the habitation of thine house and the place where
thine honor dwells

ps. 26.8. London, Printed by Io: Streater

Whither the Tribes go up, the Tribes of the Lord, unto the testimony of
Israel,

Psalm. 122.4. PATMOS

St. John on the isle of Patmos I saw the holy City, the new Jerusalem coming
down from God out of heaven.


SOLOMON
depiction of Solomon ZADOK
depiction of Zadok

ORBIS MIRACULUM, OR THE TEMPLE OF SOLOMON, POURTRAYED BY Scripture Light:
WHEREIN All its famous Buildings, the pompous Worship of the Jews, with its
attending Rites and Ceremonies; the several Officers employed in that Work,
with their ample Revenues: and the Spiritual Mysteries of the Gospel veiled
under all; are treated of at large.

Psalm. 27.4. One thing have I desired of the Lord, that will I seek after, that
I may dwell in the House of the Lord all the days of my life, To behold the
beauty of the Lord, and to enquire in his Temple.

Psalm. 43.3. O send out thy Light and thy Truth, Let them lead me, let them
bring me to thy Holy Hill, and to thy Tabernacles.

Psalm. 84.1.2. How amiable are thy Tabernacles O Lord of Hosts: my Soul
longs, yea, even faints for the Courts of the Lord: My heart and my flesh
cries out for the Living-God.

LONDON, Printed by John Streater, for George Sawbridge, at the Sign of the
Bible on Ludgate Hill. MDCLIX.

In this vacant side, be pleased to take a view of the whole work in this
following Scheme.
The History of the Temple of Solomon, in 10 Chapters, contains the Proem
treating concerning the preparations of Chap. 1. David, p. 3. Solomon, page 6.
Dimensions Chap. 2. of the Foundation. p. 19. Porch. p. 21. Sanctuary. p. 22.
Oracle. p. 25. Side-Chambers. p. 29.
Buildings about the Covered Temple, wherein of the Chap. 3. quantities of the
outward Court, p. 45. Priests Court, p. 48.
Gates, p. 51. Porches, p. 55.
Vessels, Utensils and Ornaments. Chap. 4. In the Oracle as the Cherubims and
Palm Trees on the Walls, p. 58. Ark of the Covenant. p. 59. Cherubims on and by
the Ark. p. 60. Golden mercy-Sear. p. 60.
In the Sanctuary the Incense-Altar. p. 62. Table of Shewbread. p. 65. Golden
Candlestick. p. 66.
Porch the two Brazen Pillars. p. 68. Priests Altar of Brass. p. 70. Court the
Brazen Sea. p. 73. Lavers 10. p. 77.
The High Priests Vestments* p. 87.
Worship and service, whereof in the Chap. 5. Officers. High Priest. p. 91.
Priests, p. 92. Levites. Singers. p. 95. Porters. p. 101. Judges. p. 105.
Nethinims. p. 107.

Things offered, The Quantities and measures. p. 109 Festival times. p. 111.
Number of Sacrifices. p. 112.
Various Sacrifices as the Burnt offerings. p. 114. Sin Offerings. p. 116.
Trespass-Offerings. p. 118. Peace Offerings. p. 121. Meat Offerings. p. 122.
Drink Offerings: p. 126.

Revenues and Endowments, arising from the Chap. 6. Land and Cities assigned.
p. 129. Offerings and Gifts. p. 133.
Dedication. Chap. 7. p. 136. Duration. Chap. 8. under -- Priests. p. 145.
Kings. p. 152.
Sacred Mysteries. Chap. 9. relating to the Covered Temple. p. 206. Courts. p.
238. Utensils. p. 247. Officers. p. 285. Services. p. 320. Endowments. p. 354.
Destruction. Chap. 10. page 364.

A Catalogue of the several Views, cut in Copper.
1. A general Draught of the Temple, with its encompassing-Buildings. Page 14
2. The covered Temple, by itself. Page 20 3. Ground-plot. Page 34 4. Cherubims
and Palm Trees. Page 58 5. Ark of the Covenant. Page 59 6. Altar of Incense.
Page 62 7. Table of Shewbread. Page 65 8. Golden Candlesticks. Page 66 9. Two
Brazen Pillars. Page 68 10. Altar of Brass. Page 70 11. Sea of Brass. Page 73
12. Brazen Laver. Page 78 13. High Priest in his gorgeous Attire. Page 87
Of the Temple built by King Solomon at Jerusalem.
THe glorious Fabric of Solomon's Temple at Jerusalem, was the first House in
the whole World, that was ever dedicated to the Honor and Service of the
Sacred Majesty of the true and Living GOD: which for stately Magnificence, and
the Antiquity of its foundation, does most justly challenge praecedency to all
Buildings, set apart for public Worship, in any Nation under the Sun. For the
delineation of this ancient and pompous Structure, once beautifying the Land of
Canaan, that I may proceed in some clear method, Let me lay the Scene of the
ensuing Discourse in this following frame. First of all, I shall contrive the
Porch or Proem of the Tract, exposing to view the grand and famous preparations
for the Building; which being absolved in the first Chapter, I shall then
descend to the main body of the work in nine succeeding Chapters, wherein may
be treated, P 20: 1. In the 2d place, concerning its Dimensions and Figure. P:
15. 3. The Courts and Buildings round about it. P: 35. 4. The Ornaments and
Utensils. P: 57. 5. The Services and constant Worship therein managed. P: 91.
6. The Endowments and Revenues. P: 128. 7. The Solemn Dedication. P: 130. 8.
The Continuance and Duration. P: 140. 9. The mystical Significations. P: 166.
10ly and lastly, Its fatal Period and Dissolution. Of all which, when I shall
(by Divine permission) have finished my Discourse in this its designed order, a
period shall be fixed to this Treatise. P: 364.


To the Reverend and Learned, The Warden, Fellows, and Students of Wadham
College, in the Famous and Flourishing University of Oxford.
Reverend and Learned,
IT was not long since my happiness and honor, through the gracious Providence
of God, to enjoy a Fellowship for several years in that your goodly Seminary of
all polite Literature; wherein I hope several hearts are under Divine hewing
and squaring for the service of God in his Temple. During my continuance there,
I received many favors from you in those Academical preferments which I then
enjoyed: Your great love therein I cannot but gratefully acknowledge, and
constantly bear in mind, having been greatly animated and encouraged to the
discharge of those Employments by your aid and assistance. Since that time, it
has pleased the All-wise Majesty of heaven to place me as a Labourer (though
most unworthy) in his Vineyard. Most stately and magnificent is the Fabric of
God's house therein situate, yiedling admirable delight to such whom
Free Grace is vouchsafed to give spiritual eyes to discern it, far surpassing
the splendor of its ancient Type, The Temple of Solomon; which was once the
wonder of the world. Some spare hours from my constantly returning services I
have through mercy enjoyed, wherein to take some solitary turns among the beds
of Spices, and there to refresh my thoughts with the view of the corresponding
Parallels. After several retirements, having taken some small survey thereof; I
conceived it my duty (which I owe to your Foundation) to present the first
Essay of this my impolished draught thereof to your view, earnestly craving of
you to undertake the Patronage of your Incumbent in this work. I confess I
should have accosted you in the language of the Gowned Nation; but I seriously
profess, I had no design (when the whole work was finished except the ninth
chapter) to have appeared publicly in it, having resigned it up as a piece of
service to a friend, for the company of a larger Treatise of his written in our
Mother Tongue upon a subject of this like nature; and thereby I should have
passed through the world with more contenting secrecy. But since some urgent
providence (well known to several of my friends) have overruled me to walk
without another's shelter, I thought it no unsafe course to pitch upon your
Candid and Learned Protection. Obliged Duty challenges the tender of my
respects, and former experience lays the foundation of your expected Favor.
The natural love and affection which I ever found planted within me toward that
place of my Education (even as I have generally observed I know not what Genius
[may I so term it] or affectionate tincture to run in the veins of such as have
been bred at Wadham) strongly invites me to the former, and I cannot dispute
the equitable return of your kindness in the latter; being grounded upon past
experiment. I shall meanwhile not cease to breathe out hearty Prayers toward
the Golden Mercy-Seat, That all within your Walls may be set up for standing
Pillars in the House of God, that your hearts may be flaming Altars, your
Tongues golden Harps, and that Garments of praise may be your Covering. That
the great High Priest would please to sprinkle your Consciences from all dead
works with his own most precious blood, and that he would carry your Names
engraven upon the Stones of his Breast Plate continually before the Father. That
Holiness, Virtue, all savoury and wholesome Knowledge, and whatsoever is
Praiseworthy, may flourish and be ever verdant within your Walls. That golden
Crowns of Learning, imbellish'd with sparkling Diamonds of Grace may adorn your
Heads and Hearts, and give forth a most Orient and Radiant luster in the
Schools of the Prophets. That not only the Lamp of Knowledge shining out of the
Sanctuary may illustrate your minds with Scripture discoveries; But that also
the Soul satiating Bread of life from the golden Table (as of old it was the
Priests every Sabbath) may be your portion. That ye might all taste of the
hidden Manna, that Aaron's Rod might fragrantly blossom among you, and that
God would write his Laws, according to the tenor of the New Covenant, not in
Tables of stone, but the fleshly Tables of your hearts. That your hope may be
fixed within the Vail, sure and steadfast; whither the Forerunner is entered for
all the Saints. It would be one of the choice joys of the Lovers of that place,
to hear concerning you, that Mercy and Truth have met together, that
Righteousness and Peace have kissed each other: That all profaneness and
unholiness being utterly rooted up and cast out to the Dunghill, there may such
proceed from thence, as may prove Truth's able Champions against the Goliahs of
Error; and persons of cementing and healing Tempers, to soder and salve the
Schisms and Rents in the Church: that Trees of Righteousness may be
transplanted out of your pleasant and fruitful Nursery into the Garden of God,
which may yield all manner of fruit in due season. That silver streams of
consolation may flow from your Spring (being seasoned with the salt of Grace)
to refresh wearied souls, and abundantly to water the dry and thirsty places of
Immanuel's land. That God's Urim and Thummim may be with you, enabling such of
you as are consecrated to God, to teach Jacob his Judgments, and Israel his
Law: That you may burn the spiritual Incense of sweet smelling Prayers before
him, and offer up the whole burnt Sacrifices of the Divine Ordinances upon the
glorious Altar within his Gospel Temple.

So Prays Your hearty Well-wisher, Samuel Lee.

A PREFACE to the READER.
Courteous Reader,
I Here present thee with the sometime most pompous and splendid Glory of the
whole world, The Temple of Solomon at Jerusalem: For prospect, the most
pleasant; for foundation and walls, the strongest; for all its circumambient
buildings, the most Magnificent; for costly Ornaments, the richest; and for its
mysterious Rites, the most Sacred Structure that ever the Sun saw. It is
commonly reported (as I remember) of Austin, That if he could have obtained the
pitch of his wishes, he would gladly have seen Christ upon Earth, Paul in the
Pulpit, and Rome in her Glory. I wonder he mentioned not a fourth, viz. The
Temple in all its holy day bravery, I mean, at the solemn Dedication thereof by
King Solomon. In the Land-skip of this Treatise thou may have a short, and I
hope in some measure, a true glance of its Royalty. Though formerly, as a
Gentile, thou might not presume to enter these Sacred walls: yet now, the
partition wall being down, thou may draw near to the Holy of Holyes, without
fear of Crassus his doom, never to thrive after his irreverent and bold
intrusion. But before I lead thee (Good Reader) into the Temple it self, give
me leave to detein thee, while I discourse of some few things in haste, which
are necessarily to be premised to the following Work. Some matters, I confess,
might have been handled more concisely, and some consequences might possibly
have been wrapped up in a narrower compass. But considering that Obscurity is the
daughter of Brevity, and that the unproficiency of some Readers proceeds from
the over-frequent use of terms of Art, and too compendious expressions: I have
taken the counsel of Aelian, in the first Chapter of his Tacticks, not to
involve the sense in obscure and intricate words; who blames most of the
preceding Writers, in his kind, thus, [(...), etc.] That they wrote, as if all
men knew already the things about which they compiled their Treatises:
manifesting by their dark terms (wherein they labored to be intricate) that
they intended not instruction, but ostentation. To let that pass, The same
Author promised (...), Types or Figures to Illustrate the matter, that the Eye
might assist the understanding: So in this Treatise thou will find some figures
of the Temple interserted, which though not fully to my mind, yet may
moderately serve for the advancement of the true and genuine apprehension of
its description, as well as to delight the pious fancy of the devout Reader.

The next thing I am to mention, is that form and figure of the Temple which is
exhibited in the fifth part of the Apparatus preceding that late famous Work of
the many Languaged Bibles. I should not for modesties sake, and the great
respect I bear to such noble Labors, whereby not only our Country, but the
very age is honored, have mentioned any thing of this nature: Had it not
openly exhibited the frame thereof different from what is here produced,
whereby the very Body of this Work at the first blush, would have lain under
dislike in the Censure of every vulgar eye.

However, I am not a little satisfied, that the Learned and worthy Publishers
of that splendid Work, have not declared it as their own determinate
Judgment, but nakedly proposed it as the conjecture of Villalpandus and
Capellus; and have themselves only ordered some Plate-views to be contracted
for the beautifying of their preliminary Tract, leaving the assertion of the
identity of that visionary Structure with Solomon's unto others. I hope to make
it evident in as brief a manner as possible, befitting a Preface) that there
was never such a Temple extant, as is described by Villalpandus (the most
learned and laborious Temple student, that ever proceeded into public light)
which he has deduced from the profound and mysterious visions of the Prophet
Ezekiel.

Not to speak at present to any other particulars, The wall of the outward
Court described by that Prophet, will yield an invincible demonstration to this
assertion. Ezekiel. 42:16, 17, 18, 19, 20, and 45.2.
For in his 42. and 45. Chapters, he does plainly declare, that every side of
the square walls of the outward Court, did contain 500. Reeds in length, which
will produce in full sum 2000. and that compared with furlongs, is co-extended
with very near 31. of that measure, as may appear evidently by the 49. page of
this Treatise, beneath. But that the Temple should be near 31. furlongs in
compass, is very incongruous, and not imaginable, because the whole mount
Moriah (whereon the Temple was built) fell vastly short of this compass in the
whole circuit thereof: there being spare ground left upon the mountain, besides
what was immured within sacred walls, according to the general consent of
Temple-Writers. Nay, that which amplifies the incongruity, the Compass of the
whole City it self, was but 33. furlongs, as in the forecited place of this
following Treatise, is undeniably proved out of Josephus, a person no doubt
sufficiently acquainted with Jerusalem. So that consequently, if the Temple
wall should be 31 furlongs in circuit, according to express measures mentioned
in Ezekiels visions, then there will remain but two furlongs for all the
stately Palaces and private buildings in the City, a thing apparent to every
eye, how much it declines from the path of truth. Nay the very Map of
Jerusalema given in by Villalpandus himself, sufficiently convincing in this
matter. Wherefore Capellus being much perplexed with these measures laid down
in the Prophet, is over-liberal in his censure upon the sacred Text it self,
Page 15. Col. 2. ad Calcem.
and expressly affirms a corruption of the place. [Vitium omnino videtur, and
pro (...), legendum (...)] There seems evidently (says he) a fault, and that
we ought to read Cubits for Reeds. But this strange dealing with, and hard
measure meted out to holy Scripture, to make no less then four such gross
faults in four Verses together, I leave to the Judgment of others, of what
dangerous consequence this will prove for learned persons to exercise the
acuteness of their fancies to torture, and wrest the sacred Writings, and to
expel whole words to justify a private persuasion of their own. Wherefore
being himself somewhat jealous it seems, how such dealings would be resented
by sober spirits, at last he flies to a spiritual meaning of the place, that
since the Temple limits in the Prophetical description do so wonderfully
surpass the Circuit of the very Mountain it self, surely it was to Typifie the
Church of Christ, being the Gospel-Temple, whose great enlargement was
signified by that vision: which interpretation seems to be very solid, and may
be farther evidenced by the portions set out by the same Prophet for the City
of Jerusalem, for the Priests, for the Prince and the whole Land in succeeding
Chapters, which do all exceedingly transcend the true Geographical limits of
the City, Ezekiel 45.6. and 48.
or the Holy Land, or any of the other portions; So that these visions which
the blessed Prophet saw in the fourteenth year after the City was smitten,
Ezekiel. 40.1:
and the Temple ruined, cannot be laid as a firm ground and Basis for the
erection of the true Figure of Solomon's Temple. For who can convincingly and
demonstratively assert, that the Prophet does there describe the state of that
first Temple in its pristine glory, because some things therein mentioned do
correspond to what is laid down in the Books of Kings and Chronicles. Or else,
that it was the pattern of the second Temple, because the Builders thereof in
many particulars framing their structures according to the president of
Solomon's, (which some of the Ancients had seen) possibly might fall in with
some points of Ezekiels: Seeing it appears obviously, that it did disagree in
the main dimensions, if we compare the general delineation of the covered
building mentioned in the Commission of Cyrus, Ezra. 6.3:
with that of Solomon's, or the other in the Prophet Ezekiel. Wherefore I fully
close with his last apprehension as most kindly and genuine, that it was a
Typical Figure of the spiritual Church, and no other in the main design
thereof.

Upon these accounts I have not taken this Prophetical vision as the
groundwork of the following Treatise, but have proceeded upon others hereafter
suggested. Possibly more light might have shined in upon these descriptions,
had the Work of Eusebius been preserved to our days, whereof Jerome in the
Proem to his Tract of Hebrew places, makes mention in these words, [Ipsius
Jerusalem Templique in ea cum brevissima expositione picturam, Hieronym: Tom:
4. p. Edit: 1520:
etc.] That he had exhibited to public view, a Picture of Jerusalem it self,
and the Temple, with a short explanation. But he does not acquaint us whether
it were of the first or second Temple: Neither is it much material, (though I
suspect it to have been of the last) seeing now it is past recovery, And of
such things that cannot be obtaind, its vain to bewail the loss.

According to what helps are extant, and have fallen within the compass of my
knowledge. I have endeavored to compose this Tract, tendered with all humble
submission to the Godly and Learned in the Church of Christ. In any thing
wherein I differ from others, I have been exceeding tender and sparing of any
the least reflection, always concealing the names of such as dissent from my
persuasion, as indeed it became me according to the Rules of Christian modesty.

Through the whole discourse, I have endeavored to follow the advice of one of
the Tutors of Antoninus, Not to be sollicitous about words, Antoni* de Seipso.
p. 9. Plut. Vit. vol. 2. p. 273 Hieron. ad Rustic. Tom: 1. p. 44.
they being but the shells of things, having ever esteemed it (with Plutarch) to
be the sign of a low and sordid temper, to contend about terms. Sage is that
passage of an ancient; The Wine Press of Truth must not be filled with the
leaves of words, but the Grapes of substantial matter. Wherefore I shall
entreat of thee (Courteous Reader) that thou would not be offended with the
general plainness of my style, as not flourishing with the stately trappings of
Rhetoric, embossed with Gold. All my wishes are, that there may be therein
found matter suitable to sober palates. As to which though my own fears be
great, yet I hope the very subject being encircled with difficulties, will
obtain some protection for me at thine hand. For indeed it may speak of it
self, as the forefront of Minerva's Temple did at Saum in Egypt, Plut. de
Isid. and Osir. gr, m^r. Part 1. p. 631.
being adorned with this Inscription; [(...),] I am whatsoever is past,
present, and to come; Never did any mortal reveal [me] plainly. It Is indeed
true of Christ, the wisdom of the Father and his mystical union with the
Church foretyped by the Temple, which remains to be fully explained and
unfolded in Heaven.

Many were the Fables wherein the Heathens involved their spurious worship,
Aleand. Tab. Hell. p. 1: Clem. Alex. p. 509. and Plut. de Isid: p. 164: In his
Life.
that thereby they might attract the minds of the vulgar. Among other things,
the Egyptians placed Sphinges before the entrance of their Temples, to note
the sacred mysteries therein contained. But here, there is not one piece or
utensil, but may plead for a Sphinx to stand before it; Wherefore by reason of
the abstruse and hidden dephs therein, I remember Mr. Rothwel was once advised
by a Bishop, not to study Types: But having seriously thought, how much
admirable and spiritual matter might lie couchant under those legal vails, he
set himself seriously to the study of them, with great success and benefit to
the Church of God in those days; though his useful Book be now lost which he
compiled of them, as it is reported in his life. The Jews themselves were not
so rigid, but indulged the study of the most difficult Scriptures to such as
were past 30 years of age. The truth is, there are multitudes of Scriptures in
the New Testament, which cannot be clearly unfolded but by the exposition of
the legal Ceremonies: For when once the the leaves of Types are lifted up, we
may discern rich clusters of Grapes hanging underneath to admiration mixed with
joy.

But as to my particular dealing in this matter, I would crave leave to give in
a true report of my entering upon and completing of this present work, which in
brief is this:

A loving friend having had some intentions to publish a Work, holding some
consanguinity with this, entreated me as my leisure permitted, to draw up some
lines concerning the Temple at Jerusalem, which might be annexed to his as a
supplement, which having at length finished according to all the Chapters here
presented save one, I freely resigned my pains unto him for his use, to attend
his own work, according to his former intention, having obtained a strict
promise for the concealment of my name therein. But he perceiving what great
labor his own would cost him, and to what a volum it might arise, began to be
discouraged in his design. Hereupon I, who never before intended to have gone
alone in this, or to have been known, was urged at length to compose a ninth
Chapter concerning the mysteries of the Temple, to add it to the rest, and
commit the whole to the wise and holy hand of God, and to the word of his
blessing. So that indeed overruling providence has brought that to light
which was never designed in any considerable amplitude, but only in a few
sheets, in a private way to subserve the design of a friend, and testify my
respects to him.

I confess the subject, though very deep, yet was sweet in the meditation upon
it, and somewhat suitable to my intended inquiries, as the Lord should vouchsafe
me the enlargement of life, and give me gracious opportunities to perform it;
and that which was one comfort more, it lay somewhat out of the Road of the
bitter skirmishings of these Times. If any thing herein be spoken of as to any
present point on the stage of this day; it is not copiously handled, Praefat.
ad Grosted. de Cess. Legali.
but so far forth as my solitary path led me to cross over the main Road so
full of Dust and Justling.

But alas! being in the very midst of my labor and travel through the ninth
chapter, I met with enemies upon the Road, persons of sordid and most illiberal
Tempers, whose mouths are filled with the dirt of lies and slanders, whose
Tongues the Royal Prophet compares to sharp swords, and empoysoned arrows, who
have been the instruments of some late personal troubles (well known to many.)
The Lord rebuke them, and forgive them: Or else I had enlarged more amply, and
reviewed it more diligently then my time would then possibly permit. In respect
to which ninth part especially, as unto the whole likewise, I humbly crave the
pardoning love and kindness of all learned pious, and courteously disposed
Spirits. Many Sciolists there be, who looking through the tube of censure, will
cry out of spots in the very Sun; when alas, it is but a fly upon the glass of
envy, through which they pore: yet how many spots may be really discerned in
this poor Tract by able persons, I am very sensible: from such I crave
Indulgence.

I doubt not but it will meet with some irreligious Lucians, De Art. Poet.
that will scorn the very matter and subject of the Treatise, as times do go:
Others like Scaliger, that gave all the Poets the ferula, may possibly carp at
the contexture and composition of the work. Let the first remember, that though
no inherent, yet there was of old a typical and relative holiness within these
sacred walls: The Temple shaddows being cast from the Sun of Righteousness.
Such I shall leave to the Temple discipline of an awakened Conscience, which in
some good time may scourge them with the small cords of accusing thoughts, or
else cause them to approach more reverently. As for the latter, let them but
expose their conceited flourishing wits to public view, and I may promise them
this deserved favor and equitable requital: That some may as Liberally, as
Magisterially, and with as Stoical a frown condemn their rare and polite
Writings, as they have dealt by others. In the mean time, let me desire them to
ruminate on that true saying of our profound Countryman [Hi prae caeteris
solent aliena liberius carpere, qui nihil proprium ediderunt,] Bradwardin:
Praefat. de Cause. Dei.
Those are the freest censors of others labors, who never published any of
their own. Solid Learning holds no oonsort with dis-ingenuous morosity. None
more subject then children to fling stones at others; Chrysostom cont. Judaeos
A. Christi, 400.
as a great Light once in the Church said concerning the scorn and laughter
which the Jews in his days poured out upon the Christians, that thereby they
betrayed their childishness and folly, and unacquaintance with Divine
knowledge. Such as sail upon the vast Ocean of Learning, perceive their own
knowledge to be equally boundless with the natures of things; which have no
shoars (now in our lapsed estate) to terminate the Intellectual vision, and
therefore usually of all others are the most modest and sparing in their
censures: when as mean spirits that sit in little Cock-boats upon narrow
Rivers, can easily spy Banks on both sides; on the right hand of spiritual
mysteries, and on the left of humane Learning, being generally most confident
of their own seize; and like shallow Brooks, make the greatest prattling.
Noble minds that can engrave an (...) upon the golden Ring of Sciences, are
usually of the calm and mild temper of Archimedes. It Is for Dogs to bark, and
Swine to mire it; when as generous spirits, well balanced in their Morals, can
trample upon aspersions as low things, and count it a matter below a Heathen to
return them.

But hoping that the excellency of the Sacred Mysteries lodged within these
Palaces will attract all sober persons, possessed with a serious frame of
spirit, to take delight in waiting at the posts of Wisdom, and beholding the
beauty of the King of Saints, when held in his galleries, while the Spikenard
sends forth the smell thereof. 2 Chro. 7.2.
For such I desire to pray most ardently, That as the glory of the Lord did in
ancient times fill the Temple at its Dedication; so the same Divine presence
may constantly reside in the Temples of their hearts, and give them radiant
conceptions of these Divine Mysteries in the enjoyment of Gospel Ordinances,
where his Majesty holds sweet Communion with his people. There was of old a
Wall of separation intercepting between the soul and God; but now through the
blood of that glorious Sacrifice offered up once for all, there is a way paved
for us into the Holy of Holies. A vail of Ceremonies once darkened the glorious
light of Free Grace, Cant. 2.9:
but now it is rent in sunder. Christ of old stood behind the Wall, he looked
through a window of the Temple, and the Lattices of ancient Rites; but now he
shows his face more fully, and more gloriously. Then was the night of
Ceremonies and Shaddows; but now it is spent, Romans 13.1:
nay the dawning of the day has opened its ruddy Countenance in a full view of
Grace. Erasm. in Jerome. Tom 1. p. 35,
The Sun of the Gospel has long stood still in the Meridian, on this famous
day of our glorious Joshua, who has led his Church into the Land of Canaan;
and the Lord grant it may never go down, till all his enemies are made his foot
stool. Of the old Temple we may say, as our blessed Lord to his Disciples, when
viewing the stately stones thereof, Arise, Let us go hence: for a greater
person then Solomon is here: a more glorious Temple is now made manifest,
coming down from God out of Heaven.

THE TEMPLE OF Solomon.
CHAP. I. The first Chapter contains the Proem or Porch to the main Body of
this Treatise; Wherein, are exposed to view the famous Preparations for the
Structure of Solomon's Temple.
DAvid being anointed King by Samuel the Prophet at Bethlehem, and therefore
secretly maligned, and afterward openly prosecuted by Saul, fled in the time
of his distress to the Prophet of God, dwelling then at Najoth in Ramah, and
privately resided with him. Sanctified afflictions, 1 Samuel 19, 18.
enhance Spiritual Devotion, which being managed by a divine and a holy
Prophet, many times produce, according to the person's quality, noble, and
heroic designs for the glory of God: such a one [probably suggested by Samuel]
was this. Whereupon they consulted together at Najoth, that when David came to
the Kingdom, he should remember his Vow in distress to build, or at least to
prepare all materials for the erecting of a glorious Temple for Gods name in
the City of Jerusalem. We find these good men laying heads and hearts close
together in the contrivement of all things even to the very Porters that were
to watch in the gates of the Temple, and reckoning them up by their Genealogy
in their several Villages. 1 Chronicles. 9.22.
To this Building we read, that Samuel afterward was a principal Benefactor,
and set down by name in the first Book of Chronicles. Chap. 26.2^.
Nay we find Saul the son of Kish not wanting in dedicating some Treasures to
this house of God. After them, mention is made of Abner, the Son of Ner, the
Captain of King Sau^'s Host, and Joab the Son of Zerviah, Captain of King
David's Hosts (good patterns for Soldiers) nay the chief of the Fathers also,
and the Captains of thousands and hundreds, all dedicating some of their spoils
won in Battails, to maintain the house of the Lord. But above all, King David
bears away the Crown in this sacred business, bestowing vast and honorable
gifts toward its luster and beauty. What this King did, the Scripture does
largely enumerate, and God most kindly and favorably accept.

2 Samuel 24.24^
1. The first and main thing he did, yea the groundwork of all, was the Purchase
of the place, being the Lands and Possessions of Araunah the Jebusite; at the
particular direction of God himself by the mouth of the Prophet Gad. Happy that
threshing-floor that was turned into an Altar to dedicate First Fruits to God.
Happy that Husbandman, whose common field was turned into holy Enclosure: and
happy those Oxen that worn out in honest labor, do at last dye Martyrs in holy
flames; and happy that Jebusite that is converted into a true Israelite. O happy
that Mountain! that once being a Fortress of the Lame and Blind Idols of the
Pagan Canaanites, shall become the Temple and Palace-Royal of Jehovah Jiereh, 2 Samuel 5.6, 8.
the living and the seeing God. Genesis 22.14. Isa. 2.4. Mic. 4.3. 2 Samuel 24.22.
Those times are pronounced blessed, when Swords shall be beaten into
Plough-shares, and Spears anvilled into Pruning Hooks. But more happy sure are
these, when Plough-shares shall be turned into Fire-pans, Pruning Hooks into
Censers, when Plough-boot and Cart-boot shall be consecrated Wood, to burn upon
Gods Holy Altar.

But did David serve God with that which cost him nothing? No sure! He paid a
sufficient price, even fifty shekels of silver: which, together with the
succeeding sums, that I may reduce to our English value; it is necessary to
preface in a few words, concerning the Hebrew Coins, and their Divisions. In
brief then, 20. Gerahs make a shekel; 60 shekels, one maneh or pound, 50 manehs
or 3000 shekels one Talent, one hundred drams or Adarconims are equivalent to
60 shekels, or one maneh or pound, if you compare 1 Kin. 10.17. and 2 Chronicles.
9.16. together. As to the shekel, I Will speak a little both to its figure and
value; and first as to the figure, the chief face of it had inscribed about the
Pot of Manna these words (...) Shekel of Israel. The second or reverse, had
Aaron's Rod blossoming, with these words, (...) Jerusalem the Holy.

obverse of shekel, bearing the figure of the Pot of Manna reverse of shekel,
bearing the figure of Aaron's rod blooming

For the weight and value, Caspar Waserus, and Edward Brerewood, in their
Treaties of this nature, tell us, according to their best inquiries, that each
shekel was in value proportionable to 2 s. 6 d. English, and that it weighed
about half an ounce Troy. Hist. p. 249.
Sir Walter Raleigh sets a shekel at the rate of 2 s. 4 d. But I rely rather
upon the learned Treatise of Mr. Greaves his Denarius, who with the consent of
the learned Primate of Ireland, Dr. James Usher, Page 77.
having exactly weighed several of them,states it according to the English
standard, to be exactly 2 s. 5 d. only, according to which, one Hebr. maneh of
silver will be 7 l. 5 s. of our money. One Talent will be 362 l. 10 s. which is
50 manehs, or 3000 shekels. Exodus 38.26.
For if 603550 men be rated to pay half a shekel a piece, then they paid 301775
shekels, which is recounted to be one hundred Talents, and 1775 shekels. Ver.
25.
So that 300000 shekels which the 600000 men paid, is equal to one hundred
Talents, whereof each Talent contains three thousand shekels: which number of
shekels contained in one Talent, seems also probable by the Brass mentioned, v.
29. whereof there being not found fully 71 Talents, Moses shows there were 70
Talents, and two thousand four hundred shekels, whereas if there had been full
three thousand, it had filled up the quantity of another Talent. So that it
seems there was above two thousand four hundred shekels in one Talent by this
verse, and exactly three thousand, as appears by the former calculation. One
thing more I would speak to, and that is the proportion of gold to silver;
which according to Plato, Julius Pollux, Bodinus, Bornitius, Villalpandus,
Brerewood, and generally all learned Authors is accounted to be duodecupla, or
twelve times as much in value as the like quantity of silver: Which although it
has now and then a little vatied, according to the Standards of Princes, or
the scarcity of metals; yet a twelfth-fold proportion is the generally received
Opinion and Custom of most Nations; according to which, we shall rate our gold
in these preparation-Offerings for the Temple.

So then, according to this valuation of a shekel, King David paid fifty
shekels of silver for the threshing floor of Araunah, li. s. d. 6 0 2


i. e. according to 2 s. 5 d. the shekel. 6 l. -- 0 s. -- 2 d. Now whereas it is
said he paid six hundred shekels of gold, we are to understand it of the whole
Mountain of Moriah to build the Temple thereon; 1 Chronicles. 21.25.
which according to twelve-fold proportion is 870 l. of our money. li. s. d.
870 0 0


For it is not Adarconim but (...) shekels in the Hebr. text: Now six hundred
shekels of silver at 2 s. 5 d. the shekels arise to 72 l. 10 s. which increased
by 12. gives the sum forementioned. This then is the first thing which King
David did, to buy the place, 1 Chronicles. 28.11, 12, 13.
which at two payments came to 876 l. 0 s. 2 d. the whole.

2. The second thing that David performed, was the model of the Temple, and all
its Buildings, received from God, and given to his Son Solomon, being the
pattern of the Porch, Houses, Treasuries, Upper-Chambers, inner Parlors, the
place of the Mercy-Seat, of the Courts of the House, the Chambers round about;
the Treasuries of the house of God, and the Treasuries of the dedicate things.
Of the Courses of the Priests, the Vessels and the work of the service in the
house of the Lord.

3. Thirdly, he furnished his son with many rare and costly materials: 1 Chronicles.
22.14.
whereof for metals he first dedicated a hundred thousand Talents of gold: Now
one hundred thousand Talents of silver [according to the forementioned rate of
a shekel at 2 s. 5 d.] arise to 36250000 li. of our money. Which being twelve
times increased, according to the proportion of silver to gold, will give the
sum to be 435000000 li. of our Sterling money. 4350000000 l.
All this gold was for the Instruments of gold, the Candlesticks, Lamps,
Tables, 1 Chronicles. 28.14, 15, 16, 17; 18. 1 Chronicles. 22.14.
Flesh-hooks, Bowls, Cups, and Basins; as also for the Altar of Incense, and
the Chariot of Cherubims. He set apart moreover a thousand thousand Talents, or
a million of silver, which arises to 362500000 li. of our money wherewithal to
make the instruments of silver, even for Candlesticks, Lamps, Tables, and
Basins. Besides this, he provided Brass in abundance, 362500000. C. 28. v. 15,
17. 1 Chronicles. 22.3. 1 Chronicles. 18.8. Ver. 10, 11.
even without weight: some whereof was brought from Tibhath and Cun the Cities
of Haderezer, King of Zobah, and therewith Solomon made the Brazen Sea, and the
Pillars and the Vessels of Brass. He dedicated also Vessels of gold, silver,
and brass, that were sent him as a Present from the King of Hamath, and those
Treasures also, which he brought from Edom, Moab, Ammon, the Philistines, and
the Land of Amalek.

1 Chronicles. 22.3, 14.
Moreover he gave Iron in abundance, and that without weight, for the Nails,
Doors of the Gates, and their joints.

As to precious stones, we find him to have prepared Onyx stones, and stones to
be set, and glistering stones, and of diverse colors; nay, all manner of
precious stones, 1 Chronicles. 29.2. C. 22.2.
and Marble stones in abundance, and hewn stones wrought by Masons, that were
strangers in Israel.

C. 22.4. 2 Chronicles. 7.6.
He provided also Cedar-trees in abundance.

He gave also many Instruments of Music, which he had made for the Levites
therewith to praise the Lord.

4. Fourthly, he appointed the Orders and Offices of the Priests and Levites in
their courses of service for sacrifice and singing, together with the stations
of the Porters in their Watches at the several Gates of the Temple. 2 Chronicles. c.
23. and 24. and 25.


5. Fifthly, and lastly, Besides all this, out of his affection to the house of
his God, 2 Chronicles. 29.4
he gave even of his own proper goods three thousand Talents of the gold of
Ophir: which in sum results, according to the former stated proportions to
13050000 li. of our Coin. 13050000. li.
Besides this, he gave seven thousand Talents of refined silver, to over-lay
the Walls of the House withal, which is equivalent to the sum of 2537500 li.
of our money. 2537500 li.


After this grand mass of Metals, and other Treasures given by himself alone,
He calls out to others to lend their helping hand, saying: And who then is
willing to consecrate his service this day to the Lord? 1 Chronicles. 29.5, 6.
Then the chief of the Fathers, the Princes of the Tribes of Israel, and the
Captains of thousands and hundreds, with the Rulers over the King's Work,
offered willingly this ensuing sum: 21750000 li.
First, five thousand Talents of Gold, that is, 21750000 l. and above that, ten
thousand drams of the same metal. Each dram being the hundredth part of the
maneh, or Hebr. pound: which is usually so among most Nations, and may be
cleared to be so among the Hebrews (I suppose) from these two places compared.
The first whereof says, that Solomon made three hundred shields of beaten gold,
and that three pound of gold went to one shield. 1 King. 10.17. 2 Chronicles. 9.16.
The word is (...) three manehs. The other place says, he made three hundred
shields, and that three hundred ( Shekels, we say) went to one shield. In the
Hebr. it is only said, that three hundred of gold went to one shield: Whereby
we learn, that one maneh, and an hundred of some one sort of the Hebr. Weights
were equal, which could not be shekels: For in Ezekiel it is expressly recited,
Ezekiel. 45, 12.
there went but sixty shekels to a maneh: Therefore it remains most probable
they were these drams, one hundred whereof were in one Hebr. pound,
equiponderant to sixty shekels, which in silver is 7 li. 5 s. of ours. The
hundredth part whereof is 1 s. 5 d. q. and of our money. Now according to the
twelvefold proportion of silver to gold, a dram of gold is 17 s. 5 d. ob. q.. I
know the learned Brerewood does count it by a round number of 15 s. being near
in value to the Adarconims in the text. But it is to be considered, that Ezra,
or who else, that wrought the Book of Chronicles, while in the Captivity, using
the Aurei Darici, or these Adarconims of the Persian Empire, might make use of
them, to express the Hebrew drams of gold, as being the nearest piece in value.
Though it is evident enough, that it is neither an Hebrew word originally, nor a
coin used by Solomon, who lived some hundreds of years before Darius, whose
stamp and rate it bare. Now that one Adarconim fell in so jump with the
hundredth part of the Hebr. pound, is but a naked conjecture. Wherefore
according to the proved division of a li. into one hundred pieces, we have
adventured to take it in the Rate assigned.

According to which the Princes added to their former sum 13986 li. -- 13 s. --
4 d. of our money, in valuable proportion to their drams of gold. 13986 -- 13
-- 4.
After that we read of an addition of ten thousand Talents of silver, that is,
3625000 li.
3625000 li. of ours. Moreover they added of Brass eighteen thousand Talents,
and one hundred thousand Talents of Iron, besides precious stones. These two
inferior Metals I shall not stand to reckon according to the u^uall proportion
of their value to silver. For if we lay together the several sums of gold and
silver, I think we have a bag big enough to build the Temple Walls of massy
silver, and Vessels of massy gold, as a learned man thinks, Brerewood de
numm^s, cap. 6.
and therefore suspects the Talent of gold not to have been of such a quantity,
as usually stated. I confess there is one place which much favors this
Conjecture, and that is concerning the Crown of the King, or, as some
apprehend, of Molech the God, of the Ammonites, which weighed a Talent of gold,
with the precious stones taken from him at Rabbah, and set upon King David's
head: which had it weighed three thousand shekels, 2 Samuel 12.3*
or fifty Hebr. manehs or pounds, or one hundred and twenty five pound of our
Troy weight, reckoning three thousand shekels to the Talent; and each shekel to
avoid prolixity and trouble at 2 s. 6 d. or our half Troy ounce, it would have
proved a weight for a Crown not imaginable, and would have almost crushed the
Conqueror under this triumphant Ornament into his grave. Yet herein the learned
Scotchman, Mr. John Weemse, in his Observations Natural and Moral, p. 141.
offers his Solution, by a Conjecture that the Crown was first broken, and
purged by fire, and then made up into a convenient form into a less quantity,
and fitted for the victorious Temples of David. But I rather adhere to the
conceit of Dr. Rivet, upon Exodus 25. who expounds it of the value of a Talent
of gold, and not of the weight, by reason of the precious stones that were in
it. But however this be answered, (with some fair and probable interpretations
of Villalpandus, and others, to secure this place, which I cannot now fully
insist upon) seeing it is generally agreed upon, that the Talent was of this
quantity and value fore-stated, we shall not be Niggards in these sacred
Expenses; but draw up all the sums in Battalia together, and see what a Volley
of Shot they will pay toward the discharge of Temple-Expences, wherein we
shall account each shekel of silver at 2 s. 5 d. each Talent at 362 l. 10 s.
and for gold, each dram at 17 s. 5 d. ob. q.. and each shekel of gold at 2 l. 9
s. and each Talent at 4350 li. of our current money.

li. s. d. Talents. Shekels. The Purchase first 000000006 00 02 0000 50 Silver.
2 Samuel 24.24.
la st 000000870 00 00 0000 600 Gold. 2 Chronicles. 21.25.
In Gold. 435^00000 00 00 100000 1 Chro. 22.14.
In Silver. 362500000 00 00 1000000 Ibid.
Gold 013050000 00 00 3000 1 Chronicles. 29.4.
Silver 002537500 00 00 7000 Ibid.
813088379 00 02 The sum total of David's Offering alone.

The Princes Offering. Talents. Shekels. Drams. In Gold 021750000 00 00 05000
0000 00000 000013986 13 04 00000 0000 10000 1 Chronicles. 29.7: Ibid. 10000 drams.
Silver 003625000 00 00 10000 0000 00000 The Princes 025388986 13 04 1000000.
00050. 00000 David's 813088376 00 02 0007000. 00000. 00000 0010000. 00000.
00000 The sum 838477362 13 06 1017000. 50 of Silver. Talents. Shekels. Drams.
100000. 600. 10000. 3000. 50000. 108000. 600. 10000. of Gold.

Hereby you may perceive that K. David, and his Princes together, gave 108000
Talents, 600 shekels, and 10000 drams of Gold, and 1017000 Talents, and fifty
shekels of silver to this Work: which in our money amounts to eight hundred and
thirty eight millions, four hundred seventy seven thousand, three hundred and
sixty two pounds, thirteen shillings, and six pence, all deposited in the hands
of Shelomith, a famous Lord Treasurer, the 6th in a direct Line from Moses,
being the Son of Zichri, Joram, Jeshajah, Rehabiah, Eliezer the son of Moses.
Nay, so magnifique a sum it was, that Dr. Done, sometime Dean of Paul's, in his
Encoenia, or Dedication Sermon for Lincolns-Inne Chapel, conjectures, that if
all the Christian Kings that are, 1 Chronicles. 26.25. Exodus 18.4.
would send in all they have at once to any one service, it would not equal
this Royal-Sum of David and his Princes.

A noble sum indeed! yet David modestly and humbly acknowledges all that he
gave, 1 Chronicles. 22.14.
to be but of his poverty; which we must understand, as reflecting upon his
many troubles and wars, much wasting his Treasury. But he adds a very divine
passage, 1 Chronicles. 29.14.
saying, It was all of Gods own, and rejoices that he and his people had hearts
to offer so willingly.

After all this, David being forbidden to build, yet went as far as he durst,
having set Masons to work in hewing of stones, and provided cunning Gravers, 1 Chronicles. 22.2.
and men skilful in Works, both of Metal and Embroidery: the like whereof
Solomon desires the King of Tire to send him. All which being done, 2 Chronicles.
2.7.
David falls asleep in the Arms of the great Shepherd of Israel, and leaves
the management and perfecting of all to his Son.

In the last place, we come to Solomon furnished with so vast a purse, the
nerve of Peace as well as War, to empty upon so glorious a Work, as the
building of an Habitation for the God of Israel: and yet notwithstanding, let
us see what stately preparations he made. Stately, indeed, if some say true, 2 Chronicles. 5.1.
that he used not one mite of his Fathers Treasures that were thus dedicated to
God. Because it is written, say they, That he brought all (which his Father had
dedicated) into Gods Treasury, as a Reserve for extraordinary Emergencies and
Reparations. But if these Suggesters had remembered the foregoing Story, which
tells us, that such gold, and such silver of David's gifts were laid out by
weight upon such and such Ornaments and Utensils, 1 Chronicles. 28.
they would never have troubled their Readers with such a needless help to the
advancement of Solomon's magnificence; appearing splendid enough, and according
to the rate of his vast and Royal Revenues: which (if Villalpandus hit right,
in his comparing and casting it up,) far exceeded the Annual Incomes of the
richest of the Roman Emperors. But as to this King in the first place, for
Gold, we find him supplied by Hiram with sixscore Talents of that metal, 1
King. 9.11, 14.
amounting, according to former proportions, to 522000 li. of our money: which
some may conceive to have been employed in the Temple, though it does not
clearly so appear, but that it was a help to him in the building of all his
stately Structures, Ver. 15.
both Sacred and Civil. To which purpose, he had besides laid a great Tax upon
his own people.

In the next place, we read of his providing stones of several sorts and sizes,
1 King. 5.17.
under the name of great stones, costly stones, and hewed stones: which you may
lay together, if you please, as great costly hewn stones, for the Foundation of
the house of God.

As to Timber, we read of three sorts only, 1 King. 5.8, 10.
Cedars and Fur in one place, and of Almug-trees in another: some whereof
were brought in ships from Ophir, to make Pillars in the Temple, as we
translate it: But concerning the use thereof we shall find a more full
discussion in the 2d Chapter, where we speak of the Westgate Shallecheth in the
Outward Court, and of Solomon's stately ascent to the house of the Lord; which
was beautified and strengthened with Pillars or Rails of Almug-trees. Some
whereof he used for the Harps and Psalteries of the Singers. The like of these
Trees from Ophir were never seen before, nor since in the City Jerusalem. Some
quantity of these kind of Trees, he received out of the Forest of Lebanon. 2 Chronicles. 2.8. C. 2. v. 7, 14.


Other things he provided, as Purple, and Crimson, and Blue, and fine Linen,
together with cunning Artificers to weave them for the Vailes of the Temple and
Vestments of the Priests.

All these materials being thus prepared to his hands, this mighty King
undergoes the charge of all the Workmanship, and gathers a magnificent Army of
skilful and industrious persons to manage the business: 183601. 1 King. 5.15.
80000. 70000. 3300. v. 16. 2 Chronicles, 2.2, 17, 18. 3600.
which arose to a sum of an hundred eighty three thousand, and six hundred men
and one. Fourscore thousand whereof were hewers in the Mountains: Threescore
and ten thousand were bearers of burdens: and three thousand three hundred
Officers, as it is related in the Books of Kings: but there were three thousand,
six hundred, as we read in Chronicles. To solve it, Possibly three hundred at a
second Review might be added to the number of Officers, for the greater care of
the business. 2 Chronicles. 8.10.
There being fifty Head-Officers, and at first but two hundred and fifty
Officers next inferior to them among three thousand three hundred; and after
review, there were three hundred added more: so that then there were fifty
supream-Officers, 1 King. 9.23.
five hundred and fifty of the next rate and employment, and three thousand
Underofficers, which makes the full sum of three thousand six hundred. All
which, with their Workmen, were but strangers in Israel, not Natives: 1 King.
9.21. 2 Chronicles. 2.17.
or rather strangers in blood, though neighbors in habitation, being remnants
of the Canaanites not yet destroyed, their number being in full 153600. Besides
these, he employed thirty thousand men of Israel to work in Lebanon by courses,
ten thousand in every month, 1 King. 5.13.
and each third number rested two months at home; over whom, the King placed
Adoniram as chief Officer: which being joined to the former number of
strangers, makes up the whole sum at first mentioned even 183601.

Moreover, we read of a vast number of men sent to him from his Father-in-Law
Vafres, the King of Egypt: so says Eupolemus in Eusebius, who recites also a
like vast number of the Tyrians. Scripture mentions nothing of the former: But
as to the latter, that King Hiram, 1 King. 5.6: 2 Chronicles. 2.8
upon Solomon's Request, did assist him with the help of his Subjects, is
clear, though not to the number: Which surely was considerable, if we poll the
men by their bellies, and if all the specified quantity of Provision was
dispensed only to these Workmen; which seems to be so in one place, which
says, 2 Chronicles. 2, 10.
That these measures were allowed for the Hewers, viz. Twenty Thousand Measures
of Wheat, and as much of Barley; Twenty Thousand Baths of Wine, and as much of
Oil: Although another place tells us, it was allowed as an Annual Pension for
King Hiram's Household (...) for his House: which may be admitted by a metonymy
to signify these his servants, 1 King. 5.11.
as by the parallel place, it seems to be so interpreted: Now, though the King
might take a taste possibly, yet certainly the quantities in general were
employed to the Work-mens content. The word here for Measures is (...) Corim,
now a Core is equal to a Homer: and usually as a Homer contains ten Ephahs in
dry, Ezekiel. 45.11. and ver. 14.
so does a Core, because of equal capacity. The quantity of the Bath we have
endeavored in the fith Chapter of this Treatise to find out, according to the
proportion of an Omer to seven Attick Coryla's laid down by Josephus, whom we
shall endeavor (God lending life and opportunity) to examine in another Tract,
as to Measures: only at present, this supposition being granted for true and
exact, then does the Bath, and the Ephah its Symmetrical Vessel, contain 52
pounds or pints, and or six Gallons, one Pottle and pint. Now because of the
hard Work in the Mountains, we will allow these proportions to the men in Wine.
There being spent 616 Tun, and 16 Gallons of Wine upon them, and as much of
Oil, and double as much of Wheat and Barley in a year; we cannot, in
conscience, allow less then a pint of Wine in a day for a poor Labouring-man to
encourage him: which being of the Red-wine of Palestine, mixed with water, would
be a good refreshment. So that there being 1241984 pints of Wine in Twenty
Thousand Baths, they will serve 3402 men fully throughout the Julian year of
365 days, and somewhat more then a Tun of Wine over, viz. 254 pints for the
chief Officer. But if you make enquiry, by the quantity of Corn, allowing a
pound of Wheat; and a pound of Barley to each man, generally drinking Water,
but sometimes encouraged with Wine and Oil, which is more probable: Then the
number by this computation will prove to be ten times as many; to wit, 34022. A
company not much above the number of Solomon's own servants, which was thirty
thousand, as you heard before. We read in Herodotus a choenix of corn allowed
to each person in Xerxes his Army for a day, in his Polymnia, p. 446. Edit.
Steph. 1618. that is, two pound and a quarter, as learned Agricola rates it in
his second Book, de Mensuris Graecis, p. 120. and Moses also allowed an Homer
of Manna for each man in a day in the Wilderness; that is, above a pottle of
that food a day, Exodus 16.13.
as you may see, Cap. 14. Now although I read in Bibl. Hist. l. 2.
Diodorus Siculus, that Semiramis drew together two hundred Myriads, or 20
hundred thousand men to build the famous City of Babylon, a number almost 14
times as many as these Builders of Solomon, both of his own, and Hiram's
Subjects put together, which were but 217623 persons: Yet we must consider, She
built a City of most vast extent and compass, viz. of 365 stadia; that is, of
45 miles, ^
and of a mile, according to the laxe and ordinary proportion of 8 stadia to a
mile: whereas this Temple was but about half a mile in circuit, as we shall see
hereafter. Besides, we must remember the vastness of the Walls, and the 250
Towers upon them round about that City, together with all the Buildings within
it. Moreover, we find that City to have been finished in a year, whereas this
was 7 years and a half before it came to its perfection; all which time this
number of men was employed. That I may let pass Diodorus his report of her
ambitious mind, calling her (...), that she endeavored to out-vye all her
Predecessors. To conclude, I might suspect the Author's Relation, as being of a
thing far distant from his age and much relying upon Ctesias in that matter, a
Writer whom Aristotle himself in his History of Living Creatures, lib. 2. cap.
17. gives the Lie in plain Greek, without a Complement. Whereas Solomon's
builders are reckoned up in those sacred Pages, which know not what a Lie
means; and far exceed the number of those that Chaeops employed in building the
portentuous Pyramid which was ten Myriads, or one hundred thousand men by the
testimony of Herodotus, l. 2. To proceed, the Timber fetched out of the
Mountains of Lebanon by these Laborers, was brought by Sea, in flotes, 1 King.
5.9. 2 Chronicles. 2.16. Quaresm. de terra Sancta, l. 4. c. 1. 1 King. 7.14. 1 Chronicles. 2.14. and 4.11.
to Joppa the Seaport of Judea, and thence to Jerusalem by Land, which was
about 40 miles of Italian measure distant from Joppa as one Author places it.
Moreover, Hiram King of Tire (being moved thereto by King Solomon in a Letter)
sent to Jerusalem his own Namesake, one Hiram, a rare Artificer, skilful in
all manner of curious Works; as Casting, Graving, Polishing: etc. who
accordingly made the two Brazen Pillars, the Molten Sea, the ten Lavers, and
the several Instruments of the House of God. At last, when all was finished and
completed, 1 King. 9.11, 12, 13.
King Solomon gave to King Hiram twenty Cities in the Land of Galilee, as a
Present: But they pleased him not.

One Proemial Enquity more we shall crave leave to exhibit, before we come to
the main Design, and that is the exact distance (as far as may be deduced out
of Authors) of this famous City Jerusalem (wherein the Temple was built) from
London the Metropolis of England; That we may know whereabouts in the World our
Discourse lies. To this purpose, it is necessary, first, to know (if possible)
the exact Position of Jerusalem under the Heavens. Mr. Seldom, a man that has
made many useful Collections tells us out of a Rabbi, De anno Civili, cap. 13.
Edit. Bertii; lib. 5. c. 16.
that for Longitude Jerusalem lay in 66 gr. and from the first Meridian, and
for Latitude in 32 gr. Ptolomy acquaints us, that the Longitude was 66 gr. and
the Latitude 31 gr. 40 minutes; and moreover that London has 20 gr. 0 min. of
Longitude, and 54 gr. 0 min. of Latitude. But we shall rather follow more
modern Observations, and particularly that of Kepler, in his Rudolphin Tables,
who sets Jerusalem in the Lat. of 32. 10. and London at 51. 32. and their
difference in Longitude to be three hours, and four minutes: or rather as
Longomontanus, his Scholar, at 3 hou, 6 min. So that if London lie in 24 gr.
20. from the first Meridian in the Azores, then Jerusalem will lie in 70 gr.
and 50 of Longitude from the same place.

Long. Lat. London, 24. 20. 51. 32. Jerusalem, 70. 50. 32. 10.

To calculate their distance then by the Doctrine of Triangles, In this
following Sphaericall Triangle, A. B. C. Let D note the situation of London,
its Latitude spherical triangle B

D

A

E

E

C

BD 51 gr. 32 min. Its Longitude being 24 gr. 20 And let E point out Jerusalem:
its Latitude CE 32 gr. 10 min. Its Longitude being 70 gr. 50 min. So then the
Data or things given are, First, the side DA. the complement of London's
Latitude 38 gr. 28 min. Secondly, the side AE the complement of Jerusalem's
Latitude 57. 50. Thirdly, the Angle DAE being the difference of Longitude 46.
30. The Quaesitum, or thing sought after, is the side DE. The Work whereof,
according to the Canon of Logarithms will stand thus: Rad. AC 90 gr. 10,000000
AE. 57. 50 Diff. Longit. Cousin. DAE 46. 30. 9,837812 AF. 28. 40 Compl. Lat.
Tang. DA 38. 28. 9,900086 London. OF 29. 10 Tang. AF 28. 40. 9.737898. Co sin.
AF 61. 20 9,680982 Cousin. FE 60. 50 9,687842 Cousin. DA 51. 32 9,793832 Cousin.
DE 50. 55 9,799692

Whose complement is 39 gr. 5 min. the exact distance of Jerusalem from London
raised from this computation. Now that we may convert these degrees and minutes
into miles: the Question will be, how many miles on the Surface of the Earth
answer to a degree in the Heavens? The common, though false Vote, will give in
an account of 60 miles of Italian measure to a degree: Which some would seem to
maintain and confirm by the dictate of the Learned Ptolomy in his Geography,
lib. 1. cap. 11. and lib. 7. cap. 5. who says, that one degree of such a
Circle, which contains 360 in its circumference, does (...); that is, take up
five hundred Stadia or Furlongs upon the Periphery or Exterior Surface of the
Earth. But Snellius in his Eratosthenes Batavus, lib. 2. cap. 3. page 138.
labors to prove out of Hero, and others, that five Alexandrian feet (which
probably were used by Ptolomy, an Inhabitant of Egypt) were equal to six
Roman; and consequently* that the Egyptian stadia were larger then either
Grecian or Roman: and thence would infer, that the quantity of a degree upon
Earth, was much larger then sixty Italian miles, according to the mind of
Ptolomy. Martianus Capella speaking to this purpose, says, that by Ptolomies
account, every degree takes up five hundred stadia, that is, says he, sixty
two miles, and five hundred paces, each stadium being equal to one hundred and
twenty five paces, lib. 6. page 198. Edit. Grotii. If any desire to peruse the
several Opinions of the Ancients, concerning this matter, he may find them
recited by Clavius upon Sacrobosco, cap. 1. in the Section, Page 104. Edit.
Londin. 8. lib. 2. cap. 13. Sea-mans Practice, chapter 2.
de ambitu terrae. But to proceed to more certainty, if we consult Gassendus
the late Astronomy-Professor at Paris, we shall find him abundantly larger,
even to the allowance of seventy three Italian miles to one degree. To which
account, Mr. Norwood, a late learned Improver of his Mathematical Knowledge
toward the advancement of the Art of Navigation, does very near agree in a
little Tract of his: Wherein he relates his Observation of the Altitude of the
Pole taken at the two prime Cities of this Nation, London and York, in two
Summer-Solstices by a large Instrument. The difference of the two Altitudes he
afterward comparing with the measured distance of those places, performed by
great and industrious pains and diligence along the Highways, lying betwixt
them, in the year, 1635. having allowed for Obliquities, ascents and descents,
found a degree in the Heavens to be co-extended with 69 miles, 4 furlongs, and
14 Poles of English Statute-measure, upon Earth. Now forasmuch, as an Italian
mile consists of five thousand feet; whereas the English contains five
thousand, two hundred, and eighty, (not troubling our selves at present with
the inconsiderable difference of an English foot from the Roman; it being but
66 parts longer then the Roman in such an assumed quantity, as takes up two
thousand such like parts (whereof more in the next Chapter) if we reduce the
seventy three Italian miles into feet by five thousand, we find a degree in the
Heavens to take up on the surface of the Earth 365000 Italian feet, Gassend.
Epicur. Philosoph. Part 1. p. 243. Edit. 1649.
according to Gassendus and Snellius. Again, if we reduce the English quantity
of miles, furlongs, and poles into feet, the Product will be 367191 feet
answerable to a degree: Whence it is apparent, that the difference is but
small, wherein the English Observation exceeds the other, viz. but three
furlongs, twelve pole, and thirteen feet; that is, not half a mile in all: As
to which, if we adjoyn Gassendus his Proxime to his 73. which he uses, we may
even count them coincident. Our industrious Countryman, in his next Chapter,
most ingenuously acknowledges his Experiment not to be performed with that nice
exactness and curiosity; which might be used, Mr. Greaves in his Roman foot, p.
31.
according to the Rules he ther^ lays down; it being a thing worthy the
attempt of some noble person to perform; nothing unbeseeming a Prince, who in
the Eastern parts did once undertake it: But our Observations and Experiments
are now come to greater maturity, for the encouragement of so worthy a Work:
especially since the useful Invention of Logarithms has been brought to light
for more compendious Calculation. But as to our purpose, I shall mention one
Opinion more concerning the former business, and that is of the incomparably
learned in the Mathematics, Mr. Oughtred, the great Ornament of our Nation,
now deceased; who in his Appendix concerning Navigation, Page 21.
at the end of his Book, called, The Circles of Proportion, Cap. 3. Probl. 3
allows only 66 of our English miles, and somewhat more to a Degree. Now then
according to the vulgar account of 60 gr. to a mile, Mr. Wingate in his use of
the Logarithms, setting Jerusalem's Latitude at 32 gr. 0 min. London's at 51
gr. 50 min. and the difference of Longitude at 47 gr. 0 min. has calculated
their distance to be 2355 miles. If any be pleased with Mr. Oughtred's quantity
of 66 miles, he shall find 39 gr. 5 min. the distance before found, betwixt
Jerusalem and London, in degrees and minutes, to be resolved into 2579 miles,
and. But according to Mr. Norwood's proportion of 69 miles, 4 Furl. and 14.
Pole to a degree: he that compares them in account with 39 gr. 5 min. will find
2717 miles, 7 Furlongs, 30 Poles, and to be the distance of these two Cities
inquired after. Only two Suppositions must be admitted in this Calculation:
First, that the Longitude and Latitude of Jerusalem is exactly stated:
Secondly, that the Earth is smooth and plain in its Surface or Convexity. For
the distance will be much augmented to the Travelers sweaty brows, in climbing
the Alpine Mountains, and sliding down the many steep Declivities, which he
shall meet with, in his way: besides the many impediments, by reason of the
Rivers, Seas, and Highways, in their various Obliquities, according to the
different Customs of diverse Nations.

Furthermore, if any shall desire to know the Point of the Compass, on which
Jerusalem bears from London, he may determine it even to a degree, if he will
take the pains to make a true Chart, and by the Scale of Rumbes to set off its
distance, according to the direction of an ingenuous person, Mr. Henry Philip's
cap. 4. Probl. 2.
in his Book, called, The Geometrical Seaman: Or if any be desirous to hunt
after more punctual exactness, even to minutes, let him consult Mr. Norwood's
Trigonometry, in the Appendix of his second Book, Probl. 2. and 6. whence he
may perform it by Logarithms: or Mr. Oughtred's Tract of Navigation, in the
Appendix to his Circles of Proportion, Chap. 7. Quaest. 5. Or Mr. Wingate, in
his use of the Logarithms, Chap. 4. Prob, 2, set forth in Octavo, Anno 1633.
which may very easily be calculated, according to the ensuing Figure A

B

C

D

rectangle and Method: wherein A shall represent London's Latitude 51 gr. 32
min. D, Jerusalem's Latitude 32. 10. C, D. the difference of Longitude 46 --
30. The Meridional difference of the two Latitudes 26. 19. These things being
the Data, we proceed to the Calculation by propoportion, and say: As the side
AC. 26. 19. 1,4174319. To the side CD. 46. 30. 1,6761678. So the Radius.
10,0000000. 11,6761678.

To the Tangent of DA.C. or AD. B. 10, 2587359. which is 61 gr. 8 min. 20.

56. 15. 0. The fifth Rumbes Angle Subtracted, which is SE. and by E. 4. 53.
20.

So that Jerusalem lies from London SE and by E, 4 degrees, 53. 20. Easterly.
But because Rumbes are Helispherical lines, therefore I shall rather proceed
according to the method proposed by Mr. Norwood, for sailing by a great Circle,
Probl. 6. page 13. Whereby we find (though I shall omit the Transcription of
its Calculation) that the distance of Jerusalem from London, in the Arch of a
great Circle arises to 38 gr. 49 min. whereby we see the difference from the
former Calculation producing 39 gr. 5 min. is but 16 minutes. We find moreover
by this last method, that the Angle of Jerusalems Position lies from the South
part of the Meridian 46 gr. 2 min. 52. So that it lies from London South-East,
and 1 gr. 2. 52. more toward the fifth point of the Compass, viz. of SE and by
E, which is the most exact place of its Situation, respecting the Metropolis of
England. It bears then we see from London toward a point in the Compass, which
lies betwixt the South-East, and the East South-East in a direct Line of
Position, being the Segment of such a Circle, which is equivalent to any of the
greater Circles of the Sphere. According to which, some devout Architects
(perhaps respecting the Mother Church of all Nations at Jerusalem) have built
many of our Churches not full East and West, but looking toward a Point
between the full East, and the South-East. But as to the most precise
determination of its distance and position, if some curious Artist, residing
among our Consuls in the Levantine Countries had formerly, or should hereafter
exquisitely observe a Lunar Eclipse at Jerusalem, which might be visible, and
also observed at London the very same time, we might obtain a more punctual
decision of this Inquisition, upon which we have insisted. But least the
situation of Jerusalem, as to the Altitude of the Pole there, and its distance
from the first Meridian should not prove (by some Eclipses perhaps to be
observed hereafter at the same time in both places by the mutual consent of
some able Astronomers resident in each) to have been exactly stated by
forecited Authors: We shall add its bearing and distance from some famous
Towns in the same Country, and so conclude.

In the first place, not being fully satisfied about the direct Position of
Joppa (the Port-Town of Judea) before-cited, out of Quaresmius, to be 40 miles
from Jerusalem: I observed out of Ptolomy (who being a near Neighbor in
Egypt, might possibly himself have made Observations in Syria) that the
Longitude of Joppa, from the Canaries, is reckoned at 65 gr. 40 min. and its
Latitude from the Equator at 32 gr. 6 min. According to these Data, having
calculated by the former method, I found it to be near about 27 minutes distant
from Jerusalem in a direct line: which being resolved into miles (by Mr.
Oughtred's allowance of 66 to a degree) brings forth their distance to be of
English miles 29 42/60. or 7/10, or which is all one 3696 feet, that is, almost
of a mile. But seeing the English miles exceed the Italian by 280 feet in each
mile, there will arise 31 miles, and 1816 feet of Italian measure for their
distance: If there were no Hills, nor Windings in the common-high-ways,
according to the supposed stating of Joppa's Situation by Ptolomy.

But according to Gassendus and Norwood (which I rather adhere to) allowing 73
Italian miles to a degree, the 27 minutes distance will produce 32 51/60 miles
upon Earth in a straight line. To which agrees the modern Observation of one
Timberlake, an English Traveller, in the Description of his Pilgrimage to the
Holy Land, setting it just at 32 miles distance. Brocardus the Monk (I know)
says, it was eight Leagues from Jerusalem; Page 33. Edit. Colon. 1624.
which, at 4 to a mile, makes 32 miles: Although I confess in the Preface to
his Book, a League is said to be an easy hours travel. But I rather suspect an
error in the Copy because the same Author page 45. tells us, that Rama was ten
leagues from Jerusalem, and in the same Rode that Rama was* three from Joppa:
which, by three to a League, makes 39 miles. To which account Breidenbachius,
sometimes Dean of Mentz in Germany, does assent in the recital of his Travels
in those parts, that Joppa was ten miles, Edit. Mentz. An. 1486. page 36, 38,
82, 83.
or three leagues from Rama, and that Rama was thirty long miles, or ten
leagues from Jerusalem. Whereby, as also by Moryson's Travels in Turkey, giving
in the same distances, it appears to be the common account of the Country. I
have spoken the more of Joppa, because thence was brought the Timber of
Mount-Lebanon all by Land: which though distant in a direct line, but about 33
Italian miles; yet might be 40 miles, according to the crooked Windings, and
the great Hills that were in the way, according to the Observations of modern
Travelers, both of our own Nation, and Foreigners. A tedious way to bring all
the Timber of the Temple through: But the noble Heart, and large Purse of
Solomon, thought nothing too much for the House of his God.

Now as to other Towns round about Jerusalem, St. Hierom in his small Tract of
Hebrew places, says, That Bethel was 12 miles, Anathoth 3, Bethlehem six.
Concerning this Bethlehem, our Saviors Birthplace, Justin Martyr (who was
born in Palestine, as he himself attests in the beginning of his second
Apology) says, that Bethlehem was but 35 stadia from Jerusalem. Bethsur,
twenty; Bethany, two; and Rama, in Benjamin, Antiq. l. 8. c. 2. Page 62. Edit.
p. 58. Sylburg. Edit. Bertij in folio, p. 12. Aelia, or Jerusalem. 20.
Eleutheropolis, 24. Ascalon. Ptolom. Geogr. lib. 8. Asiae Tab. 4.
six miles from Jerusalem. Which last, Josephus says was 40 stadia. The same
Father places Hebron 22 miles from Jerusalem, and Beersheba in the outmost
Border of Judea, twenty miles South of Hebron. I might proceed to calculate the
distance of Samaria, Tire, (where Origin was buried, according to
Breidenbachius) Damascus, Jericho, Nazareth, and the rest, if I intended a
Geographical Description. But I shall only add one more, and that is the
famous place in St. Hierom, called, Eleutheropolis, long sought for by some:
Which appears out of Antonines Itinierary, to lie twenty miles from Jerusalem,
South-Westerly in the Highway to Ascalon, and that it lay 24 miles North East
of Ascalon; and furthermore 18 miles South of Diospolis, or Lidda.

To conclude, Jerusalem was the Head-City of Palestine (a Province of Asia the
Great) bounded on the West by the Mediterranean Sea. The longest day at
Jerusalem was fourteen hours, and, or 7 minutes, 30 seconds, according to
Ptolomy: But if any will state it exactlier; they may, according to the
supposed Latitude, calculate it more precisely.

Having now finished this inquiry of our Cities Situation, we shall conclude
with a Petition for favor, at the hand of every courteous Person, for so long
detention in this previous Discourse, and draw toward a period of this first
Chapter.

In this City thus situated, stood the Mountain Moriah, Nicol. Fuller, Miscel.
sacr. l. 2. c. 14.
whose significations, with sundry Observations annexed, may be learned out of
an excellent Critic of our own Nation.

On this Mountain stood our famous Temple, which we are about to describe,
whose Eastern-Gate and Wall, faced Mount-Olivet. The Holy of Holies, within
this Temple, stood Westward; partly to imply, that the Worshippers of the great
and living God should not worship the Sun, according to the Superstitious
Customs of the Eastern Heathens: Procopius Gazaeus, in Reg. lib. 1. cap. 6.
page 192. Edit. Menri.
But the omnipotent God, and Creator of that Sun, who appointed his Temple to
be so situated, in opposition to Pagan Idolatry; which is one reason of many of
the Jewish Rites and Ceremonies, if Gulielmus Parisiensis may be Judge. Partly
also it was thus situated, to denote the motion of Gods presence into Europe,
and the Western parts of the World: Or lastly, as others think, to have a
respect to Mount-Calvary, the place of our Lords suffering; whose body was
typified by the Temple; and his meritorious death, by all the
Temple-sacrifices. Having thus finished, what was purposed by way of Preface,
it rests, that we now proceed to the main Body of this Treatise in the Nine
Chapters following.

Place here the Figure of the view of the Temple-Building, and its Courts.

overview of the Temple building and its courts

CHAP. II. Of the Dimensions, and Figure of the Temple.
THE Foundation of this Sacred Pile was laid in the two thousand nine hundred
ninety third year of the World current, The Time.
in the four hundred eightieth year after the Children of Israel came up out of
Egypt, in the fourth year of King Solomon's Reign, in the second day of the
second month; which the late most Learned and Reverend Primate of Ireland, in
his Annals of the Old Testament, 1 King. 6.1.
Part 1. page 57. and Petavius, in his Rationarium Temporum, Part 2. l. 2. cap.
11. make to synchronize with the three thousand seven hundred and second year
of the Julian Period, May 21. being Monday, and the one thousand and twelfth
year current before the common Christian Era. To which, ^
if we add One thousand six hundred fifty seven complete years, thence will
issue 2669 complete years, fully ended this May the 21, 1658. since the
Foundations of Solomon's Temple were laid.

The place of its structure was in the Mountain of Moriah, The Place.
within the Walls of the City Jerusalem, very famous for the intended Offering
of Isaac by his Father Abraham, and designed by God himself for this famous
Temple, when the Angel appeared to King David (at the ceasing of that fearful
Plague for numbering the People) by the Threshing-floor of Arannah the Jebusite.
In which very place, the King built an Altar, and offered sacrifice to God. In
the room whereof, K. Solomon afterward erected the great standing Brazen Altar
of the Temple. The quantity of ground, which this Mountain spent in its
Circuit, is not set down in Scripture; neither is it precisely and
Geometrically determined by any of the ancient Writers, or modern Travelers,
that I have yet had the happiness to peruse. This is certain, that the whole
compass of the Mountain of the Lords House was much larger, Josephus de bello
Judaico, lib. 1. cap 16. page 746. says, it contained as much more, being
walled in by Herod.
then that distinct piece of Holy Ground, on which the Temple and its Courts
were built: especially, since we find the famous Antonian Tower at the
North-West end of the Temple, to have stood upon the sacred Mountain. But as to
the quantity and measure of the Holy Ground, we shall speak in the third
Chapter, where we treat of the several Courts. For our purpose is to proceed in
the Description, as near as may be, according to the method of Solomon's
Architects.

But before we set to the main Work, it is doubtless expected on all hands, that
we should exactly define the length of the Hebrew Cubit, in proportion to our
English measure. This Task might have been taken off long since; if the most
curious and exquisite Labors of that learned and painful Traveller Mr. John
Greaves, sometimes Astronomy-Professor in Oxford, had been perfected and
printed; which he mentions at the end of his choice Tract of the Roman Foot.
It Is hoped, that persons of Learning and Virtue, will scorn to suppress so
useful a Piece for the Commonwealth of Learning, if it be in any tolerable
measure prepared and left in their hands, to whom his Books and Papers were
committed. In the mean time (though I intend not to weave a long Discourse at
present upon this point, yet) I shall offer to consideration, a short Parallel
between those two renowned Authors, Josephus and Tacitus, in their Description
of the Walls of Jerusalem, at the Siege of Titus, which may give some light in
this particular.

Lib. 6. De bello Judaico, c. 6. p. 913. G. Edit. Graeco Lat.
Josepus speaks thus of the Wall -- (...). The solid Wall was twenty Cubits
high; indeed the Battlements were five Cubits higher. And further, (...). But
the Towers exceeded the Wall by twenty Cubits: First, they were forty Cubits
high in all. And again, concerning the Tower Hippica, he says, That the main
body of it was (...), thirty Cubits high. Above that, there was a Well to
receive Rainwater, and that he calls (...), and says it was (...), twenty
Cubits high. On the top of that there depiction of a portion of the Walls of
Jerusalem a. (...). b. (...).


was a house (...), 25 Cubits high: Over this, (...) the open places 2 Cubits:
and yet higher (...): The battlements 3 cubits high: and then concludes, (...),
that the whole height came to 80 cubits. Now pray let us ask Tacitus what he
says to this point, who breaks his mind in a few words, but fully thus, Extrema
rupis abruptu, and ^arres, ubi man^ juvisset in sexaginta pedes, inter devexa,
in centenos vicenosque a^tollebantur: What more clear to our purpose? Lib. 5.
Histor. p. 625. Edit. Tug. Bat. 1640.
He tells us, the Towers upon the Walls, where the Wall ran on the brow of the
Hill, was sixty foot; which Josephus told you before was forty Cubits. Tacitus
says, where the Wall ran in the Valleys, there the Towers were one hundred and
twenty foot high: such a Tower was that called Hipp^ea, standing in the Walls;
which Josephus says was eighty Cubits: so then hence we learn, that forty
Cubits, and sixty feet; eighty Cubits, and one hundred and twenty feet are
equal: and the proportion betwixt Hebrew Cubits, and Roman feet, was Se^qui
altera; i.e. One Cubit of the Hebrews, was one foot and of Roman measure.

In a word then, to reduce the Cubit to our English foot: wherein the happy and
curious pains of our fore-praised Author, has determined our labor, as to the
proportion betwixt the Roman and the English foot. Forasmuch, as he with great
judgment has fixed upon the Foot taken from the Monument of Cossuti^s in the
Colotian* Gardens at Rome, and manifested it to be the true Roman foot, page
32. And moreover, having exactly compared it with the English foot taken by
himself from the Iron-yard or Standard of three feet at Guild Hall in London,
he found it to contain punctually 1934. such parts whereof the English foot
contains two thousand. See page 22. and 33. It rests then (upon this
supposition, that the Roman foot and half punctually answers to the Hebrew
Cubit) that we proceed to reduce this, to English measure. As to this
reduction, let us first add One thousand nine hundred thirty and four, the
whole Roman foot, and nine hundred sixty seven its half together; and it
produces two thousand nine hundred and one parts; which subtracted from three
thousand parts, the foot, and of English measure, leaves ninety nine like
parts, wherein the Roman foot, and, and consequently, the Hebrew Cubit falls
short of an English foot, and or 18 inches of our measure.

Lastly, seeing three thousand parts gives eighteen inches, what will ninety
nine deficient parts yield to be cut off from our half yard, that it may
precisely answer to the Hebrew Cubit?

For answer to which: First, suppose our inch to be divided into an 100 parts:
and the result will be, 59 6/15 of an inch; Inches. Parts 17 99 15 0 59 6 17 40
9


which being cut off from our English half yard, leaves one foot, five inches,
forty parts, and 9/1^: or more roundly, neglecting the last fraction, we say,
that the Hebrew Cubit contained of our measure, according to Guild Hall
Standard, 17 inches, 40/100 parts, or of an inch.

To conclude, I dare not hence peremptorily determine as to this punctual
nicety, that the Cubit did neither exceed, nor fall short of this proportioned
dimension. For who knows not, that Historians work is not to act the
Geometrician: Neither do any sober men expect such exactness from any, but an
Euclid, an Archimedes, a Vitruvius; and not from a Josephus, or a Tacitus.
Therefore, when we read in them the proportions of Measures, we are to expound
them (...), and according to the vulgar acception. For in this very present
point, who would not count it a pretty little Wonder, that the Hebrew cubit
should fall in so exactly with a Roman Foot and half, without the least
Fraction? But that it is very near the matter, I am much inclined to believe
upon several other accounts: Whereupon as a more firm Basis, I hope to build a
larger Discourse concerning this, and other the like points of measures, if God
grant life and leisure.

But you will say, What a small House will this prove; that is termed in
Scripture so exceeding magnificent; and in another place very great? 1 Chronicles.
22.5* 2 Chronicles. 2, 9^
if the Hebrew Cubit be of no larger extent. I answer, the magnificence is not
to be understood only of the covered Holy House, but of all the Courts and
Porches, Buildings, and Gates, in and about it, throughout the whole Mountain:
which you will find in the next Chapter to be of a very large compass. Besides
the admirable cost, and mighty sumptuousness of it, which made it exceed in
glory all the Structures that ever were in the World beside.

But, secondly, you will say this Temple-measure was different from the
ordinary Cubit, by the testimony of Scripture it self; which tells us, 2 Chronicles.
3.3.
it was built by Cubits after the first measure.

I answer: This infers not, that it was built by a greater Cubit, but parallel
to the first: Whether greater, or less, the Scripture does not determine.
Indeed the place seems to refer to the Tabernacle-measures of Moses: which when
any will clearly demonstrate to be greater, I shall be of his mind. In the
mean time, all that I have to offer is, that as usually in the erecting of a
new frame, or model of Government, wise Princes of old stated and cized all
manner of measures; and as for measures of Longitude, usually took them from
the proportions of their own bodies. The Grecians had their foot from Hercules;
and I have read (as I remember) that our K. Henry I. made our English Yards
according to the length of his own Arm. And so might Moses give the Hebrews
their Cubit from his own Elbow. Now as a man's foot (if he be a
well-proportioned man) is usually the sixth part of his own height; so the
Cubit is the fourth part, according to the Observation of Vitruvius. If so be
Moses took off the Cubit from his own Arm, or the fourth part of his own Body:
Lib. 3. c. 2.
it being not probable, that the stature of man was decreased by half, in that
space of time, betwixt him and Solomon, Then may the Cubit prove to be near
our present Dimension, (though I see little reason to conclude any notorious
Declination in the World, or any of its parts since the Flood); especially
seeing we find, that Sesoosis, King of Egypt, the Son of Amenophis,) who was
drowned in the Red Sea; as may very probably be gathered, by comparing of
ancient Authors) styled Sesostris by Herodotus, lib. 2. Vexores by Justin, lib.
2. cap. 3. Vesores and Vesozes by Oorosius, lib. 1. cap. 14. and Vesosis by
Jornandes, cap. 6. is related by Diodorus, Sic. to be in stature but four
cubits, and four palms, lib. 1. which, according to the Saemian cubit of
Herodotus, being the same with the Egyptian, or the Roman of Vitruvius,
yielding a quantity betwixt 6 and 7 foot of our English measure: of which
stature, there have been some even in our days. Further, in his Calliope,
speaking of the dead bodies, that after the Plataean Battle, were carried into
one place, he reports, among other rare and wonderful things; as of a Skull
without a future: of a Jaw Bone, that had a set of Teeth of one continued bone;
and of the body of a man of five cubits length: He mentions it, as a most
strange matter, worthy to be recorded to Posterity. Besides, we find the Tomb
of Chaeops, or Chemmis, one of the Successors of Sesostris, King of Egypt,
(accurately examined by Mr. Greaves, Pyram. p. 97 and 98.
at his visit of the great Pyramid built by that King) to be but six foot, and
488 parts of a 1000 in a foot, according to the English Standard: As also many
other Observations of his, from embalmed bodies in Egypt. This Tomb was made,
as he relates, out of Diodorus, by Chaeops, who began to rule 1266 years,
before the coming of our Lord. Page 38.
Besides, we must account, that the body being wrapped up in manifold Fillets, as
Herodotus relates, 1000 Else, being spent upon one body, as learned Greaves did
find in Egypt. We must allow some part of the Tomb for this. Page 50.
Herodotus relates also in his Clio, that in the days of Cyrus, Croesus the
Lydian King, sent to Delphos an Image of a Woman, who was his Baker, (...). but
of three Cubits height; and in the same Book relates of Phya, a Woman, that for
great stature should be a counterfeit of Minerva, to command the Athenians to
introduce Pisistratus into his Tyranny; and yet she was three Digits less then
four Cubits in stature, Vegetius also in his first Book, de re Militari, cap.
5. says, That C. Marius, when Consul always enjoined, that the Chief of the
Roman Soldiers should be six foot high, or five foot and ten inches high at
least. Now his first Consulship fell out in the Cimbrick Wars 105 years before
Christ, according to Helvicus, and others. Therefore what is said of Goliath,
being six Cubits and a span, and of an Egyptian of great stature to be five
Cubits, 1 Chronicles. 11.23. I take to be meant of this Cubit. I cannot then but
wonder, that any should so fondly dream of the declination of humane stature,
and absurdly conclude from such a thin and jejune conjecture, that by Cubits of
the first measure, must necessarily be meant a Duplicat to the Present of
Solomon's. Others, Cappellus.
from the misapplyed Stories of the Brazen Pillars, would have a Sacred Cubit
to be double to a Common. But there is as much reason for that, as for two kinds
of Weights and Moneys: Whereas shekels are not said to be according to the
Sanctuary, because double to the common; but because equal to the
Standard-shekel of the Sanctuary, which was the place for all Measures and
Cizes to be laid up, as in a most Sacred Repository, 1 Chronicles. 23.29. Whereby we
may learn, that commutative justice was near in as high reputation with God, as
his own Divine Sacrifices. Nay, he regarded not the Peace Offerings of
Fat-Beasts, unless Judgment also did run down like Waters, and Righteousness as
a mighty stream, Amos 5.22, 24. It were to be wished, that in ours, and all
other Christian Nations, that all Measures were, throughout the same Country,
of the same proportion and dimension, according to the Statute of Magna Charta,
(so little observed among us, though so extremely behoofeful in that point, to
the public interest, that the crafty Sellers might not so constantly impose
upon harmless and simple persons, as to the legerdemain of Measures among
Traders:) Which commands, cap. 25. That there shall be but one Measure for
Wine; but one for Beer, but one for Corn, but one for Cloth; and so concerning
Weights: Which, though confirmed by many Parliaments, and so to be esteemed a
Fundamental-Piece of our Liberties and Birthright: Yet to our shame, and the
general loss of the Buyers, is not that Law restored to its purity. That as the
Jews; so might we also, have but one Weight, and one Measure, and these laid up
in our Temples, as most sacred things, under the tuition of Sacred Persons, to
be kept close in the most secure Archives possible.

But as to present Cubit in hand, one thing more I have to offer about the
first Measure, (seeing Moses was learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians,
the principal part whereof was Geometry, Act. 7.22.
they being necessitated every year after the overflowing of Nilus, to measure
the Limits and Bounds of most men's Land anew; as Herodotus in the Life of
Sesostris, in his Euterpe: together with Diodorus Siculus, in his first Book,
and 81 Section (according to some Copies,) do both attest.) That possibly Moses
and his People, might use the Egyptian Measures: which if true, (though we
have no word in Scripture for it) then I will recommend to the Readers
consideration, a notable Memorandum of the Egyptian Cubits out of Herodotus;
holding it not convenient to spin out any more time on this Subject. The place
is in Euterpe, Herodotus.
or of his History, lib. 2. In English thus:

A Pace is six Foot, or four Cubits. A Foot is four Palms; A Cubit six Palms.
If you say it is Samian measure, generally used by that Author, I answer with
his own words in the same Book, (...). The Egyptian Cubit is equal to that of
Samos.

To conclude, what ever the Cubit were, either of Moses, or Solomon, the
Dimensions of the Temple being described, not by yards or feet; but under the
name of Cubits, the judicious Reader may imagine its length, according to his
own most exact conception, and so conceive the House as large and magnificent
as he please: sobeit he be careful, that the Battering-Ram of his fancy, do not
cast the Walls, Gates, and Porches, and the poor Levites in their Watches, into
the Valleys of the Moriah-Mountain. For the whole Hill, with the Temple, and
Antonian-Buildings included, did not contain much more, then about six stadia
in compass, as Josephus has left upon Record. De Bell. Judaic. lib. 6. cap. 6.
What a stadium in Josephus is, you may see in the third Chapter of this
Treatise.

Since we have then a little cleared off our hands, this tough and knotty
rubbish of a Cubit, so much as to our present Design: let us begin to lay the
Foundations of the Temple, and so proceed forward to the Top-stone of that
admirable Fabric.

The Foundation.
THE Foundations of this Royal-Building were laid with great costly hewn
stones: Of what depth, Scripture is silent. Foundation. 1 King. 5.17. De re
rust. l. 1. Tit. 8.
But if Palladius be a good Architect, they should be in depth a fifth or sixth
part of the height, when the place is solid. This being on a Rocky Hill, as
Josephus writes, we may allow for the Porch of one hundred and twenty Cubits
high, the depth of Twenty Cubits; and for the whole House, being Thirty high,
five Cubits depth, for the Foundations; and on each side, half a cubit broader
then the Walls of the House.

The full thickness of the Walls are not deducible out of Scripture: Walls, 1
King. 6.6.
Only thus much we may clearly evince, that they were four cubits thick at
least, just by the ground: For we read of three Cubits abated in the thickness
of the Walls, for the Beams of the side-chambers to lie upon. On which
account, we do allow but one Cubit for the thickness of the Temple-wall, from
above the Roof of the third and highest Story of the Chambers, to the Roof or
Top of the Temple it self.

But if we allow 6 at the Bottom, there will remain three at the Top which is
the least we can allow; considering the height, together with its magnificence,
and designed duration. If six at Top, as usually most do grant, then there will
be found nine at Bottom, or 10, as the learned Ribera would have it. I know
some would squeeze six Cubits out of Ezekiel's Visionary Temple, for the
thickness of its Walls: but we shall go in the middle proportion, and in our
Figure, add to the internal capacity the thickness of six Cubits for the
Walls, till some Rabbinical Architect shall conjure up the Ghosts of Solomon's
Builders to decide the Controversy.

depiction of the convered Temple The Figure of the Covered Temple.
1. The Tower of the Porch 2. The Porch 3. The Holy place 4. The Oracle 5. The
windows of the holy place 6. The side Chambers.




Of the Porch.
BEfore I enter upon the Proportions of this Building, Situation.
its necessary we should remember the Temple-Student, what point of Heaven the
Porch and its stately Entrance did face: For which purpose, let us consider,
that Ezekiel in his Captivity-Vision, being brought into the Inner-Court of the
Lords House, saw 25 men between the Porch and the Altar, with their backs
toward the Temple of the Lord, and their faces toward the East, Ezekiel. 8.16.
worshipping the Sun toward the East. Whereby is tacitly employed, that the
Body of his Visionary-Temple, or the Covered House (the Pattern in many things
of Zorobabels Structure) was Westward of the Brazen-Altar. If this be not
enough, observe out of another place, that the Gate of the outward Sanctuary
[that is the Holy-place of forty Cubits long, Ezekiel. 44.1.
as I shall show by and by] which looks toward the East, was shut: Yet once
more, when he was brought to the door of the same House again, we read, That he
saw Waters issuing from under the Threshold of the House Eastward. For the
Forefront of the House stood toward the East. Ezekiel. 47.1.
I hope this is a sufficient Testimony, being treble-twisted, to draw any sober
man's consent to us, seeing that the situation of the second Temple, according
to the concurrent judgment both of Jews and Christians, did imitate the former
of Solomon's. So that now none need fly to any Idiotismes, or Proprieties of
the Hebrew Language for a Sanctuary, to shelter the true situation of the
Temple, as some have done.

The beautiful face of the Porch, we will then begin to erect toward the
East-quarter of Heaven, 1 King. 6.3. Length. Breadth. 2 Chronicles. 2.4. Height. Dr.
Lightf. Templ. p. 89.
whose inward Capacity shall be contained within a Line of Twenty Cubits length
from North to South [for its length ran parallel to the breadth of the House]
and a Line of Ten Cubits for its breadth from East to West. The height of the
whole Porch was very stately and pompous, viz. One hundred and Twenty Cubits.
Not that it was all empty and void to the Top, but probably had Chambers and
Winding-stairs, ascending up to the Roof. But that the lowest Concameration of
the Porch was more then 22 Cubits, and in height may be evident by the height
of the Pillars of Brass, whereof we shall speak anon. Probably, the height of
its lowest Room within, might be equal to the rest of the House, viz. Thirty
Cubits.

As for the Battlements on the Top of the Porch, Battlements.
we may conceive them to be much of the same proportion with those of the Walls
of the City foredescribed, that is, the height in the open spaces, was two
Cubits, and the Propugnacles three Cubits, or thereabouts, or rather stately
Rails of Stone, besides the more curious Ornaments of Pinacles. From the Top of
this Porch I have read, that the Dead-Sea might easily be discerned: Bell.
Judale. lib. 6. cap. 6.
which claims affinity with Truth, according to what Josephus relates
concerning the Tower Psephina, in the North-West Angle of the Walls of the
City, which was 70 Cubits high from the ground; and that not so high as this
upper part of Moriah, according to some: from whence he tells us, that Arabia,
the Sea, and the utmost Coasts of the Hebrews, might be seen.

This is attested also by Brocardus (who saw its Ruins) that all Arabia,
Jordan, Page 35. Page 36.
and the Dead-Sea-might be perceived from that Tower in a clear day: (...).
says Aristeus, That the Temple was built on the Summity of the Moriah
Mountain, which was built on higher ground then that Tower of Psephina.

What an admirable Prospect may Towring-Fancies conjecture to have been within
view, from the Top of this rare Pile, which stood (as some relate) on more
elevated ground then any part of the City, and was withal fifty Cubits higher,
then the former Tower of Psephina, where leaving our devout Students in
Perspective, to plot the Land of Canaan after a more exact manner then yet we
have received; let us descend into the Lowest-Room of the Porch, which we find
without Gates, according to the general Opinion: but there was a very
magnificent Entrance raised by many steps out of the Area of the Priests Court.
The height of the Arched Portal is not laid down in the Sacred Leaves: But that
the Room within was wholly overlaid with pure Gold, we have sufficient
Testimony enough to dazzle the eyes of the greatest contradiction. 2 Chronicles. 3.4.
Which Radiant Adornment, might cause some hesitation, concerning the received
Opinion of its being without Doors, because of the grand Curiosities within,
which would else be exposed to all Weathers; but especially since we find
mention of the Doors of the Porch, 2 Chronicles. 29.7.
in the Book of Chronicles, expressly called in the Hebr. (...) which that they
were the Doors of the Outer-Sanctuary opening into the Porch, I leave it as an
improbable Answer to the determination of Learned Rabbis.

Of the Sanctuary.
THE Sanctuary, or Holy Place, or Body of the Temple, sometimes called the
Greater House; sometimes the House only: or the middle-part betwixt the Porch
and the Oracle, had these Dimensions. For the extent of its length within the
Walls, 1 King. 6.17. 1 King 6.2, 3. page 89. in quarto.
from East to West, it contained 40 Cubits. The breadth from North to South was
20, and the height 30. I know Arias Montanus would have it within, to be but
20 Cubits high, parallel to the height of the Oracle; and that there were
private Chambers over it, as well as over the most Holy Place: but because he,
nor any else, have yet proved it out of Scripture, we leave it to the decision
of the Judicious Reader.

The Doors.
1 King. 6.33, 34, 35. For the Partition Wall, see the next Section. 2 Chronicles.
4.22. 1 King. 6.35.
The Doors of this House, or Holy Sanctuary, at the West end of the Porch, or
the East End of this Holy Place, were of folding leaves made of Fir Tree, and
the Posts on which they hung were of Olive Tree, made apiece. Now whereas
it is said, these Doors were of Gold in one place, we understand the meaning by
another place, which says, they were covered with Gold; that is, with thin
Plates of that excellent Metal, which were laid and embossed upon carved
Cherubims, Palm Trees, and open Flowers.

The Walls.
As to the Walls, the Outside exposed to open view, was, as is conceived by
some, all over-layed with silver. For which very purpose, we read, that David
appointed seven thousand Talents of refined silver, 1 Chronicles. 29.4.
yielding a most glorious and shining Spectacle to all Beholders, though others
apprehend them only to be of white polished Marble. 1 King. 6.18.
The inside of the Walls was first covered with Cedar, and carved with Knops
and Open-Flowers; or, as it is expressed [ verse 29.] with carved Figures of
Cherubims, Palm Trees, and Open-Flowers; and all these laid in Gold of Parvaim.
Nay, we find that it was also in some select places most gorgeously adorned and
garnished with precious stones: Ibid.
but of what sorts, and in what curious method disposed, we cannot learn.

The Floor.
The Floor of this House was first laid with Planks of Fit, 1 King. 6.15, 30.
and Boards of Cedar, and all over-laid with pure Gold.

The Windows.
Concerning the Windows, we neither read of their number, nor the particular
dimension of any: neither their fashion, or of what materials. A Question might
be moved, Whether they were of Glass, seeing the Phoenicians, Plin. 1. 36. c.
26.
the first Inventers of it, were Neighbors to the people of Israel, and gave
in great assistance to this glorious Work: Besides, it is sufficiently known,
that the Glassie Sands of the River Belus, were within the Territories of the
Tribe o^ Asher. But whether the Discovery were so ancient as the time of
Solomon, I have not yet read. What Herodotus has spoken in his Thalia of the
Aethiopians, burying their Dead in a Tomb of Glass, dug out of a Rock, is
mentioned by him, to have been seen by the Messengers of Cambyses, sent to the
Ethiopian King: but he does not tell us of any more ancient use of it. To this
about Glass Tombs in Aethiopia, Strabo, in the 17th Book of his Geography, p.
822. of Casaubon's Edition, and Diodorus Sic. l. 2. Sect. 15. and lib. 3. Sect.
9. and Ctesias Cnidius in Diodorus, agree with Herodotus, though Ctesias
dissent from Herodotus, about the manner of intombing. To this purpose, I
remember also in the Arabian Story of the Pyramids, recited by the learned Mr.
Greaves. That the King which built the Pyramids* put in the Westernmost of them
glass, that might be bended, and not broken, p. 82. All which Story, is by him
counted little less then a Romance: Yet possibly, there might be Rocks in
Aethiopia, like to those in Moscovia, mentioned by M. Fletcher in his History;
whose Scalings might be transparent and flexible (and not so fragile, as our
Artificial Glass) which we use for Ship-Lanthorns, and other ends. But how
ancient the Invention of Glass truly was, I have not yet found, so as to give
any real satisfaction. For although Theophrastus (the Successor of Aristotle in
his School, in the 114th Olympiad, as Laertius writes, which was about 320
years before our Lords Incarnation) does recite a story of a Glassie matter
made of Earth and Brass mixed, in his Book de Lapidibus: yet he puts a (...) to
it, that he received it but by Tradition, and does not speak clearly to the
point in hand, about the time of its Invention. Yet concerning the Antiquity of
Glass, I have one thing more to offer, and that is, Jos. 11.8. and 13.6.
what we read of in the relation of Josua's victorious pursuit of his Enemies
(as we have it in our Text) even to Sidon, and Misrephoth-Maim; in which
places, Arias Montanus renders the Hebrew words thus, [Vsque combustiones
aquarum] unto the place of the burning of Waters. Another Version has it*
[Vnto the Confluxe of Waters.] Another, [unto the place of hot Baths] Another,
[to the Salt-pit Waters] But Junius translates it thus [Usque ad fornaces
vitrarias] that is, to the place of the Glass-Furnaces, which much fancied the
Learned Knight Sir Walter Raleigh, conceiving that this place might raise a
good conjecture, that the Glassie Sands of the River Belus were in request for
that use among the Sidonians, even in the days of Josuah; as may appear in his
Marginal Citation, in the second Book of the first Part of his History, Chap.
2. Sect. 1. 2. p. 282. But certainly, had this Invention been so anciently in
use, Solomon's Temple should have enjoyed the improvement of it, and we should
not have found King Ahaziah falling through a Lattice in his Upper-Chamber, but
a glasse-window rather, as being a more excellent Ornament for a Kings Palace,
Nay, 2 King. 1.2.
it is very probable, we should have had famous mention of this rare Invention
in Scripture in case it had been in use. For as to the Looking-glasses of women
mentioned by Moses, Exodus 38.8.
it is clear by the Text, that they were of polished Brass. Neither read I, as
to the time of the Invention of our Artificial Glass any determination
precisely set down in Pliny, or Pancirollus, or his Commentator Salmuth; or in
Polydor Virgil, or Rhodiginus, or in Isidorus Hispalensis, who have professedly
handled the Inventions of the Ancients: Wherefore, at present, we shall be
content with gilded Lattesses for the Temple-windows. I know Procopius Gazaeus,
on 1 King. cap. 6. says thus: (...). They were of bored stones: But I leave
that Author peeping through them. For their form or fashion, it is probable they
were of an oblong square, their length being perpendicular to the plane of the
Horizon, and according to the mode of ancient sacred Buildings; narrow without,
and broad within; partly for the strengths sake of the Building, partly for
devotion, which is much distracted by great and glaring Windows. Much like it
seems they were to the Windows of some of our ancient British Churches; as
particularly, that of Saint Paternus, now Llan-badern vawre, in Cardigan-shire
in Wales, or some of the more ancient Saxon Churches in this Land. For their
length, we can produce no clear testimony: only this is certain, the lowest
part must be conceived to have been at least fifteen Cubits from the Pavement,
because the Chambers on the Outside of the Temple-Walls did reach so high, if
not more, as shall be manifested by and by.

The Roof.
The Roof of the House, we may safely conclude to have been flat, according to
God's general command, Deuteronomy. 22.8. Neh. 8.16. 1 Samuel 9.25, 26. 2 Samuel 16.22. 2
King. 23.12. Act. 10.9. Jer. 19.13. Jer. 32.29.
and their practice at the Feast of Tabernacles in the days of Nehemiah;
together with several other places of Scripture to that purpose. At the Sides,
it was guarded with Battlements, and probably adorned with Pinacles. It was not
sustained by any Pillars (that we read) either of Metal, Stone, or Timber;
which, by the way, yields some help, as to the fore-stated Cubit: which if it
were in duple or sextuple proportion to what is mentioned, as some would plead,
the Building would have needed supporting-pillars, or else the Roof must have
been built with Arch-Work drawn from the Side-Walls, Neh. 8.16.
and so have proved circular, or (...) contrary to the Jewish Custom whose
Roofs were made so plain, that they usually, 2 Samuel 11.2.
in Evenings, took their delight in walking upon their Houses.

But as to the Temple, whether there were a crested Rising in the middle I will
not dispute: but certainly, as to the breadth of the House, according to our
Cubit, there is no need of such a cresting, in respect to the Beams of Cedar,
whereof plenty enough might be had of twice the length of 20 such Cubits; 1
King. 6.9.
only, possibly there might be a gentle Rising to cast the Rainwater off. The
Covering then was of Beams and Boards of Cedar without: but surely the Cedar
was not exposed to the injuries of Weather, without some slatting, or
Metal-sheets most probably. But with what Metal this Covering sub Dio was, the
Scripture is silent: probably, not of Lead, because nothing is spoken of that
Metal at all in any particulars of the Temple. If we should over-lay the Boards
with Gold, I suppose none devoutly given, would grutch at such expense,
especially being out of another purse.

But it is not probable that the Outside did equal the Inner: therefore what
if we allow it to have bin sheeted with sliver; seeing a King of France, St.
Dagobet the 11th from Pharamund, (far inferior to Solomon in riches, i^
Villalpandus count right, Gagvinus's Hist. fol. 38. Gall.
who says, the Revenues of our K. exceeded those of the Roman Emperors)
covered the famous Church of Saint Dennis with Silver. To countenance this
conjecture a little, let it be thought as proper that the Roof should be plated
with silver, as that the Walls below should be on the Outside beautified with
that Metal, as some conceive. Some being a little niggardly, and secretly
stealing away the Silver-Covering, would impose upon the Roof with Tiles of
Brass, thinking possibly there was no sight or show of such a costly material,
as Plates of Silver in that place: Which Plates, whether of Brass, or Silver,
might be laid on and fastened, much like those upon Saint Mark's Tower, and part
of the Dukes Palace in Venice; as Schottus in his Itinerar. Italiae, p. 40, 47.
relates. But let such as grutch at this pomp know, Cieling.
that the greatest glory of this Building was hidden from common or profane
eyes, and that vain Ostentation was no end aimed at by our sacred Artificers.
On the Top of all, I have read in Eusebius, out of Eupolemus, that there were
Bells disposed in an Artificial Method, to fright away Birds: 2 Chronicles. 3.5, 6.
See Eusebius. Prepar. Evangel. lib. 9. cap. 34. page 451. Edit. Paris,
Graeco-Lat, The inside of the Cedar-Beams of this stately Roof was cieled with
Firre-Trees adorned with Carvings of Palm Trees, and Chains, and over-laid with
Gold.

Of the Oracle.
THE Oracle, sometimes called the Inner-House, the Inner-Sanctuary, the Holy of
Holies, and the most Holy House, comes next to be surveyed: Where first its
requisite we should view the Partition between the Holy place, and this Holy of
Holies: Partition.
which minds me of what I should have mentioned before concerning the
Partition, between the Porch and the Holy Place. That there was a Partition, I
am induced to believe; partly, because there is mention made of a stately Door
with Folding-Leaves, which needed not to be, if above it, and on both sides of
it, the Porch and Holy place were common. Besides, what an unhandsome and
improper Spectacle would it be, to have a Door to shut and hinder entrance, if
on all sides else it were open. Besides, I would fain know, what support there
was for the West Wall of the Porch, which was ninety Cubits higher then the
House, if there were neither Wall nor Pillars beneath; nor Arch-work from the
side-walls, because of the vast magnitude of such an Arch. Moreover, I am the
more persuaded to this thing, by the concurrent Opinion of our Reverend
Translators, who tell us, 1 King. 6.33.
that the Olive-Tree-Posts of the Doors of the Temple, were a fourth part of
the Wall. Well then: Let there be a Wall of six Cubits thickness erected
between the Porch and the Holy place, arising to One Hundred and Twenty Cubits
in height. The place for the Doors and Posts containing a fourth part of the
Wall, that is according to their construction of the Text: This Partition Wall
running North and South Twenty Cubits. The 4th part, viz. five Cubits of this,
was taken up by the Doors and Posts.

There remains but one Conjecture more, and that is, as if the words might
favor such a construction, as this, that the Posts whereon the Doors were
hanged, began to be set up on each side at the fourth Cubit distance from the
Wall. There remains then twelve Cubits for the Posts and Doors: which indeed
it is probable, were very large, because folding, and divided into two leaves,
But I leave both Conjectures to the consideration of abler Grammarians, as to
the Hebrew Text, and more expert Architects, as to the high Pile of Ninety
Cubits of stone over the Doors, if they be granted to be so large.

Now as to the Partition between the Oracle, and the Holy-place, it is
conceived generally, that it was but one Cubit thick: (but I shall set down
three Cubits, whereof in the conclusion of this Chapter) being attested by the
Writings of the Rabbis, in their Discourses about the second Temple, which had
its president in many things from this of Solomon's. But as to these
Partitions, 1 King. 6.2.
one thing may be objected out of that place in the Kings, which says, The
House (taking both Holy-place and Oracle together) was but sixty Cubits in
length: Whereas these Partitions being added, will produce sixty seven, for the
length of the house; besides the Porch.

To this, I answer; That Text is to be understood of the two inmost Plots, or
Area's laid together in one sum; i.e. Forty the House, and twenty the Oracle
within; whereas there is no account at all of any of the Walls. Now whether
this Partition Wall of three Cubits thick, from North to South, were built of
any rare precious Stones, or of ordinary Marble (conceived to be the material
of the whole Temple) we cannot decide. But that we may confirm this Opinion,
that there was a Wall in this place, it is apparent, according to the sentence
of Junius and Tremellius, who read that Text [and he made a Partition] fecit
interjectum parietem. 1 King. 6.21. De Rep. Hebr. lib. 2. c. 14. 1 King. 6.31.
Cunaeus also is flat in the point in these words, -- Inter Sanctum and Sanctum
and Sanctorum murus quidam unius cubiti latitudine, etc. First, there was
between the Holy place and the Oracle, a certain Wall of a Cubit breadth:
Besides, our Translators again imply their mind sufficiently in that Verse, The
Lintel and Side-posts were a fifth part of the Wall, (...) in Hebr. which one
renders, Posts pentagona: The Vulgar, Postesque angulorum quinque; The
Seventy, (...), One Version of the Arabic paraphraseth the Text thus; The
Doors.
On each side of the Doors he placed five Cubits length of Olive Tree, which he
made Arch-wise, and raised the Door five Cubits high, and made for it thick and
strong Posts. Junius and Tremellius render it, according to our Translators, a
fifth part of the Wall. Hence, from all these Versions, we may raise a
Threefold Conjecture of the meaning. Either that the Posts were made in form
of a Pentagonal-prisme: Or, as some usually, though absurdly, term it,
five-square. Or else we are to understand it, That the Door and Posts took up a
space of ground, lying betwixt five Cubits, and measured from the North and
South-Walls on both sides; that is, they were extended to and took up ten
Cubits space in the Wall: which implies, the Doors to take up as much place as
the Wall on each side did; Ezekiel. 41.11.
the whole breadth of the House being twenty. The Wall, on one side had five;
on the other side five; and the Doors, Ezekiel. 41.2. Dr. Lightfoot of the Temple
in Christ's days, p. 87.
with their Posts, ten; which is the Opinion of a man of our own Nation, very
learned in the Oriental Languages and Antiquities.

The last Conjecture is this, bottomed upon Tremellius, and our Translators
Versions; That the Posts and Doors contained a fifth part of the Wall; that is,
four Cubits; the Wall being eight Cubits long on each side. Thus the Notes on
the French Translation also, La cinquieme party de la parof. assa, quatre
cou^ees. But submitting wholly to acuter Judgments, and standing no longer upon
the Threshold, we will look upon the materials of the Doors, which were of
Olive Tree, and car^ed with Cherubims, Palm Trees, 1 King. 6.31. 1 King. 7.32.
and Open-flowers, and all over-laid with Gold. The Hinges of these Doors, as
also of the Holy-place forementioned, were of Gold.

The Walls of the Oracle.
The Walls of this most Holy place were of squared polished Marble (as is
generally received by the Jews of Old) their outside, as is conceived, 1 Chronicles. 29.4. 1 King. 6.16, 20, 21. 1 King. 6.29. 2 Chronicles. 3.8.
was covered with Plates of Silver; the inside with boards of Cedar, wrought
with Cherubims, Palm Trees, and Open-flowers, and all over-laid with fine Gold:
For we read, that the Walls of the House, both within and without, were thus
adorned; i.e. both the Holy-place, and the Oracle: The fine Gold expended upon
the Oracle amounted to Six Hundred Talents.

The Quantity of the Oracle.
The Dimensions of this most Holy-place, God's Parlour, 1 King. 6.20.
or Privy-Chamber, were on this wise, (in a word) A perfect Cube excavated, or
20 Cubits high, long and broad.

The Floor of the Oracle.
The Floor of this Oracle was first covered with Boards of Cedar, 1 King. 6.16,
20.
and then over-laid with Gold,

The Windows of the Oracle.
Concerning Windows; Whether this Holy of Holies had any or not, the Scripture
is very dark, and gives us no light at all, by express naming of any Windows in
the Oracle: it seems more probable on the Negative, because the Oracle it self
being but twenty Cubits high, could admit but of a very small quantity of Room
for those Windows, by reason of the Chambers round about the Outside of the
Temple: which Chambers, according to the inward capacity of each joined
together, 1 King. 6.10. 1 King. 6.6.
arose to a sum of fifteen Cubits, for each was five Cubits high; and of them
there were three Stories. Now, besides this inward capacity of the Chambers, we
must consider of room for the Beams of the three Floors, and Uppermost-Roof at
top. Insomuch, that Villalpandus, a most laborious and learned Temple-Student,
(in his Comment. upon Chap. 41. of Ezekiel, Tom. 2. Part 2. Lib. 4. Cap. 34.)
states the height of these Chambers on the Outside of the Temple, to be Cubits
18, and: So that hence there rests but one Cubit and a quarter for the Windows
of the Oracle, which would prove very uncomely, and not befitting the state and
magnificence of the Temple to have two or three little Pidgeon-holes at the Top
of the Oracle. Besides, if they be framed, according to Arias Montanus, they
will prove less then those of the Holy-place, which would be in no ways
beautiful, according to Rules of Symmetry and Proportion. Nay, he is pleased to
make part of the Oracle-Windows in his Scheme of the Temple, three or four
Cubits higher then the Oracle it self by his own Scale. But to let this pass, I
know it is observed by some, that several places of Scripture, (where God is
said to dwell in thick darkness) do allude to the Habitation of God's Majesty,
between the Wings of the Cherubims in that dark Oracle. To whom Darkness
shines as the Light. Psalm. 139.12.
Seeing the Creator needs not the black Sackcloth of the Sun, in comparison
with his most transplendent and inconceiveable glory; and the pale Moon, his
own-made Lamps, which he framed for his Creatures to do their work by. Besides,
this place was opened but once a year for the Highpriests Entrance, Lev.
16.13, 14, etc.
whose work was not of such a nature, as needed more light then what the opened
Doors of the Holy-place might yield.

There is nothing urged on the other side, of any moment, but the acce^tion of
the word (...) (where mention is made of windows) that Both comprehends the
whole Temple: 1 King. 6.4.
Whereas that allegation is false, if taken generally, and apprehended to be
constantly predicated of the whole Covered Temple, as it must; or else it makes
not against us. For if you observe the 17 Ver. of the same Chapter, the Temple
of forty Cubits length before the Oracle is expressly termed the House; and in
the Hebr. (...) The very same word being used for the Holy place apart by it
self, as well as for the whole Covered-Building; We shall therefore, at
present, till clearer light spring forth, close up these sacred Mysteries, from
the profane glances of Sun, Job 25.5.
Moon, and Stars, which are not pure in his sight.

The Sides of the Oracle.
To proceed then in the Description of this glorious place, let us take notice
of the Sides thereof within to have bin be over-laid with Gold; as also the
Floor and Roof, and fastened with Nails of Gold, according to the sense of the
Vulgar Latin, 1 King. 6.21.
which renders that perplexed place [He made a Partition by the Chains of Gold
before the Oracle] thus, Et affixit laminas clavis aureis, He fastened the
Plates of Gold ( viz with which on all sides this Holiest place was overlaid)
with Golden Nails, which was done by boring little holes into the
Golden-plates, and the Cedar-boards underneath; and so driving square
Golden-Rivets into those holes: The weight of which Nails, or Rivets, 2 Chronicles.
3.9.
we read, was fifty shekels, (each shekel being near about half an Ounce of our
Troy Weight:) which according to the usual value of Gold, viz. of 3 li. an
Ounce, will produce 25 Ounces in Weight for these golden Rivets, yielding 76
li. sterling, in value, of our money.

Antiq. Judaic. quarto, page 90.
But by the Chains, in the preceding difficult place, Arias Montanus understands
Chains of Gold, whereupon the Vail was hanged. Others, understand Artificial
flowred Wreaths, and Chain-works made in gold for Ornament in the sides of the
House; and so we will leave it, according to the mind of Dr. Lightfoot
beforementioned.

Yet there remains one thing which I have read in the Jewish History, of the
Spanish Jew, Solomon made more common by the Translation of George Gentius,
Page 358.
who tells us, That the Sides of this Holy of Holies, for ten Cubits high, (or,
as he has it, ten Else high) were all wrought of Network: In every square
hole whereof, there was fixed some resplendent and shining precious stone or
other. In one place, a Sapphire; in another, a Carbuncle, etc. Insomuch, that
the riches and value of that place was beyond estimation. To which Josephus
sets his Solemn Sacerdotal Attestation, Antiq. l. 8. c. 2 p. 267.

The Roof of the Oracle.
1 King. 6.15, 16, 18.
The Roof of this House was (as the whole) laid with Beams and Boards of Cedar,
and over-laid with gold, and set (as some conceive) with precious stones.

Of the Vail of the Oracle.
2 Chronicles. 3.14.
Last of all, we are to hang up the Vail, which doubtless was within the Wall of
the Holy of Holies; For else the High Priest might come within the Vail, and
yet not be in this most Holy place, if the Wall and the Doors were nearest to
the Oracle. Whereas the main mystery lay in the Vail, noting the flesh of
Christ. Besides, in Moses's Tabernacle, Heb. 10.19, 20.
there was no other Partition then the Vail; which when the High Priest was
entered through, he was within the Holy of Holies. But if Arias his forecited
Opinion be true, That the Chains of gold were for to hang the Vail upon, then
they being within the Oracle, this must necessarily. However, for its
materials, we have them clearly decided by Scripture to have been of blew, 2 Chronicles. 3.14.
and Purple, and Crimson, and fine Linen, all wrought with Winged Cherubims.

To conclude; there remains to be considered, Whether the outside of the Roof
of this House were covered, sub Dio, in the Open-Ayr, at twenty Cubits height,
or whether there were any Rooms within those Superior ten Cubits parallel to
the height of the Holy place. As to this, I fall those three Verses, viz. the
8th, 9th, and 10th, 2 Chronicles. 3.
(of 2 Chronicles. Chap. 3.) are to be understood concerning the Oracle, or Holy of
Holies, and its Parts, Dimensions, and Materials only, as it is most probable,
then it should seem there were Chambers over this Oracle. The very words [Of
the most Holy House] in ver. 8, and 10, do carry them clear: and as for the
Golden Nails in the beginning of the ninth, I know none but agree in it, that
they concern the Oracle. Why then must half a Verse be interpreted of Chambers
I know not where, seeing no other part of the Temple is mentioned near them,
but the Oracle, both before and after. Let us be excused then, if we adhere to
Montanus in this point, that the Upper-Chambers there mentioned to be over-laid
with gold, are two Chambers of five Cubits a piece, (according to the quantity
of the other Side-Chambers) which being over the Oracle, possibly were
Repositaries for those things of Moses, his Holy of Holies, viz. such, and so
many as were not used by Solomon, which was utterly unlawful surely to condemn
to any profane use.

Of the Side-Chambers.
THere yet remain to be viewed and described the Side-Chambers of the Temple,
by way of Appendix to this Chapter, as they were to the Temple it self.

Of the Situation.
In the first place, let us observe, that there were no Chambers adjoining to
any part of the Porch: For although the Text tell us, 1 King. 6.5.
there were Chambers round about, yet it explains it self, when it says, They
were round about the House; that is, the Temple and Oracle, 1 King. 6.6.
there being no mention of the Porch at all; which apprehension, agrees with
the general consent of Writers.

Of these Chambers, there were three Stories: the nethermost whereof was five
Cubits broad; the middle, six; the highest, 7.

Of the Breadth.
Now, how it came to pass, that the highest Chamber should be the broadest, the
Text, in our Translation, renders an account thus: For without, Ibid.
in the Wall of the House, he made Narrowed-Rests round about, that the Beams
should not be fastened in the Walls of the House] The Exposition of this place
will clear up the different Measures of the Chambers thus: The Wall of the
Temple for five Cubits height above the ground, was a Cubit thicker then it was
in its height above those five Cubits: So that at five Cubits height, there was
a plain parallel to the Horizon of a Cubit broad round about the Temple; 1
King. 6.10.
or if you will call it, a Seat of Stone, whereupon one end of the Cedar-Beams
of the Chambers did rest to bear up the Roof of the lowest, or the Floor of the
second Story. Five Cubits higher from thence, or at 10 Cubits height from the
ground, the thickness of the Temple. Wall was yet a Cubit less; and upon that
second Seat thus made by a Cubits rebatement in the Wall, rested the Cedars
Beams for the Roof of the second, and Floor of the third Story.

At 15 Cubits height from the ground, the thickness of the Temple-wall was yet
still a Cubit less then it was at 10 Cubits height, which yielded a third Seat,
on which the Beams for the Roof of the third and highest Story were laid. So
then, hence we learn, that as the Wall of the Temple abated in thickness, so
the Measure of the Chambers increased in breadth; that the lowest being five;
the second six; the third did prove 7 Cubits broad; and yet on the Outside,
the stone-work of the Chambers was perpendicularly equal: So that they made a
show to Spectators, at a distance, much like the lower Leads of our English
Churches.

The height of the Chambers of the Temple.
Here also remember, that we use the numbers of 5, 10, and 15 Cubits for the
Rebatings in the Wall at such heights, merely because Scripture is silent of
the thickness of the Floors between Chamber and Chamber: Whereas properly, when
the height of each Chamber is said to be five Cubits, we must apply this to the
inward content of the Chambers: For though Temple-Writers generally tell us, 1
King. 6.10.
that all the three Stories were 15 Cubits high, yet we read no such thing in
Scripture; only that each was five Cubits high: Which, that it is meant of the
inward capacity, is probable from the usual Descriptions of the other
Temple-Buildings; as of the Porch, Holy-place and Oracle, whose Dimensions are
only proportioned to the inward part: as is clear of the Oracle, by the extent
of the Cherubims Wings. Besides, from the quantity of a Cubit before-stated
(which I hope, by divine permission, more fully to demonstrate hereafter in
another place) If it be but a Roman-Foot and half, or very near that point,
then the Beams, and Boarding, and Carved-Work, will take up so much of each
Story, as that a very tall and proper man would almost touch the Cieling, which
would prove very unseemly in such Buildings. Besides, if the judgment of Arias
and Villalpandus may be taken, they raise the Top of the third Story to 18
Cubits, and allowing a Cubit, and for each Partition.

The number of Chambers belonging to Solomon's Temple.
How many Chambers there were appendant to Solomon's Temple, Scripture does not
recite: Ezekiel. 41.6. Antiq. l. 8. c. 2.
But Ezekiel, in his Visionary-Temple, mentions 30 round about: and Josephus
instructed by Jewish Tradition, acquaints us also with the same number, in
these words: (...). He built round about the Temple. Thirty little Houses.

Besides, in the second Temple, it is clear, there were just so many. All which
put together, strongly incline me (seeing the second Temple (though much
broader.) Yet was much of the same length with Solomon's) to believe that their
number was neither more nor less then 30. Wherefore, as they were in the
second, so we shall be content, at present, to set them down 12 on the North,
12 on the South, and 6 at the West End of the Temple; that is, four on a Floor
on the North and South, and two at the West.

The length of Solomon's Temple.
As to the length of each Chamber; this is a certain way, in case they were all
of one Size, to allot a fourth part of the length of the Temple and Oracle for
each Chamber, and its separation from the other, on the North and South sides:
But at the West End, the just half. Only here we must, in this distribution,
warily consider, that the thickness of the Temple-walls, conjoined in the
North-west, and South-west Angles, must extend the length of the Chambers as
far, as the thickness of the Wall did increase the outward Dimemtions, beyond
the inward of sixty Cubits, commonly so computed. Besides, we must consider,
that the Contignation, or Floorings of the Chambers themselves, did meet in
their own particular mutual Angle, distinct from the Angle of the Temple-wal.
For, if you observe the Ichnography of the Temple, the Chambers, and their own
Out-walls meet in an Angle; or else the Temple-Angle would be discovered:
Whereas they did circumscribe, or close round about, as you may see in the
Area, or Ground-plor of the Temple. So then, if you take the Measures thus:
forty Cubits for the Holy-House; three for the Partition, as I shall mention
anon, my conjecture in the close of this Chapter; Twenty for the Oracle, six
for the space parallel to the thickness of the Temple-walls; ^
and five for the space parallel to the Chambers at the West End, that they may
fall into a just square. It will then be apparent, that the spaces for the
Chambers, on both sides, and the end, with the Temple, will fall into a Figure,
containing four Parallellograms; as you may see in the 35 of the first of
Euclide. The length of these spaces, is 74 Cubits; which divided into four
parts, gives 18 Cubits, and for each Chamber and its Wall: Whereof the first
Wall begins at the West. But seeing the thickness neither of the Temple-walls,
nor of these Chambers is determined in Scriptures, we cannot apply any exact
measure for the length of each, or of all the Chambers together; and therefore
item would be very absurd to lay any stress upon such conjectures, which we
submit fully to every acute Architect. The Doors of the lower of these Chambers
were on the ground: But for the middle Chambers on the right side of the House;
that is, the South, 1 King. 6.8.
at the top of Winding-stairs; and out of the middle, there were Ascents into
the Upper-rooms. Where it is to be observed concerning the Door: First, that it
was in latere, or in the side of the House, not in the Front. And again, in
latere Domus, not in latere cellarum, in the side of the House; not of the
Chambers, that is between the Temple and the Chambers; and were made, as some
conceive, in the very thickness of the Temple-wall, on the South Side of the
Temple, and that the Door opened into the Holy place. Moreover, it is
conceived, that there were no Doors on the Outside at all; and that above
there were Galleries to walk round about on all sides the Temple, to any
particular Chamber: as also, into the chambers over the most Holy place: Nay,
and those over the Sanctuary also; according to Arias, who would have that
place within to be no higher than the Oracle, i.e. Twenty Cubits, and to have
the remaining Ten spent in Chambers; which some desire to extract out of
David's Pattern of the Temple, given to his Son Solomon; where we have mention
of Houses, Treasuries, Upper-chambers, and Inner-Parlours; that is, 2 Chronicles.
28.11.
of the Rooms over the Temple it self, the Upper-chambers, and Inner-Parlours,
being the Rooms above and below, in this Appendant-Building, which we are now
describing. But we shall obtrude nothing eagerly, leaving this, and all our
Labors, to be viewed and amended by exacter Judgments, both as to the
Interpretation of this Text, and the decision of the whole matter.

The Stairs forementioned, doubtless, ascended to the Top of the highest Roof
of these Chambers, which probably were adorned with Battlements, and Pinacles,
as the Top of the Temple it self.

Thus have we finished, by Gods good hand, the delineation of the
Covered-Temple: We have nothing now to do in this Chapter, but to give in a
naked Skeleton of the whole Work, as to its Dimensions, and so conclude,
leaving the Reader to the Cuts themselves, thereupon to spend the rest of his
Devout Meditations.

Here first, as to the inward Area's, or Ground-plots, leaving out the Walls,
the Proportions seem to be according to these Dimensions. Breadth. Cubits.
Chambers 5 Porch 10 Oracle 20 House 20 Length. Cubits. Chambers 15 Porch North
and South 20 Oracle 20 House 40 Height. Oracle 20 Sanctuary 30 Porch 120

The Cabalistical Mystery of these Dimensions of the Temple, lies in the Name
of JESUS, say the Rabbis, in this manner:

60 Long, 30 High, 20 Broad. 30 30 10] 60 [6 20 10 60 10 300 0 J E S U.

A rare Discovery! whereof may be read in Schiekard's Happerusch. Bechinath,
page 65. But I shall leave that to its Authors to justify, who doubtless were
infested with Hypochondriack Melancholy, and had need to have their sublimated
Mercury a little better fixed.

To quit this profound Abyss of the Pythian Tripos of the Rabbis, that knows
no solid bottom of Reason; We may observe from preceding Descriptions, that
the House was broad, 20; high, 30, long, 60 Cubits. The length was double to
the height, and treble to the breadth. The Porch was broad 10 cubits; the House
broad, 20; high, 30; long, 40. The house and Porch long, 50: the House and
Oracle long, 60: the Porch, House, and Oracle long, 70. The House was high, 30;
and the Porch, 120; that is treble to the height of the House. The House and
Oracle long, 60: the Porch high, 120: that is, double to the length.

In the last place, I will present my Conjectures (for any higher appellation I
dare not give them, in a matter so far distant from our Times, and so obscurely
recited) concerning the Dimensions of the Temple, considered together with its
Spaces and Walls; as also the Appendant-chambers, and their Walls. As to all
which particulars, I cannot in modesty undertake to determine, but leave that
to better Judgments. In general then, the breadth and length of this Temple, as
we shall at present plot it, Exodus 27.^. and 12.
will contain the full extent of Moses's Tabernacle, Court and all, if so be
you will allow the Chambers to be fully drawn out parallel to the East End of
the Porch. But it is true, they were not so; yet the Porch and Temple were of
the same extent for Longitude, as that Tabernacle in the Wilderness, according
to these following Dimensions.

The Breadth, thus:
Cubits. A The South Wall of the Chambers, 04 B The Chamber-floor 05 C The
South Temple-wall 06 D The Temple-floor 20 E The North-wall of the Temple 06 F
The North-chamber floor 05 G The North-chamber wall 04 The Breadth 50 The
length, East and West.
Cubits. H The West-wall of the Chambers 04 I The Floor of the West-Chamber 05
K The West-wall of the Oracle 66 L The Floor of the Oracle 20 M The
Partition-wal between the Oracle and the Holy-place; which being allowed 3
Cubits for to raise a Symmetry, or duple proportion to the breadth, will make
the whole an hundred: or if you please to allow the West-wall of the Chambers
six, and this but one only, as commonly, it comes all to one. 03 N The Holy
House 40 O The Wall betwixt the House and Porch, to support its height of One
Hundred and Twenty Cubits 06 P The Porch-floor 10 Q The East-wall of the Porch
06 The Length 100 The Height of the House.
Cubits. The inward height 30 The Roof one Cubit at least 01 The Battlements
above the Roof, according to the proportions of Josephus, in the Walls of
Jerusalem. 05 36 The Height of the Porch.
Cubits. The inward Height 120 The Roof 001 The Battlements 005 126

The Porches Breadth, East and West.
Cubits. The East-Wall 6 The Area 10 The West-Wall 6 22 Its Length.
Cubits. The South-Wall 6 The Area 20 The North-Wall 6 32

Here we see the Breadth 50, the Length 100, the Height 36: as to the House in
general. But as to the Porch in particular; its Breadth 22, its Length 32, its
height 126. So much for the second Chapter, treating of the Temples Dimensions,
which may be perceived in the annexed Figures of that Sacred Building.

ground plan of Solomon's Temple The Ground-Plot of the Temple.


CHAP. III. Of the Courts and Buildings about the Temple.
THere are various Opinions of the number, quantity, and form of the Courts of
the first Temple.

Some hold that Solomon built but one Court; and that, 1 King. 6.36.
by the two Courts mentioned in Scripture, we are to understand (say they)
first, the Priests Court, which indeed they grant he built, 1 King. 6.36.
and to be called the Inner-Court. But by that called the Outer or greater
Court they conceive we are to understand it of the Mountain of the House, which
lay wide and open.

Some hold there were two Courts built even by Solomon himself, which in
conclusion, I believe, will prove the truest. Others there be, that hold he
built four, though upon very improbable grounds.

As for the quantity of one or other, I find as yet none peremptorily
determining: for indeed Scripture in that is fully silent.

For the form or fashion, many hold that both Courts did compass the Temple on
all sides round about; which, with submission, I suppose, after serious search,
will prove most correspondent unto truth. Others are of a mind, that the
Priests Court did not compass the Temple, but that the outer did. Others think,
that neither of the Courts did compass the Temple; but that both of them stood
on the Eastside of the Temple, one before the other. Now all the Weight of this
last Opinion lies on poor Josephus his back; wherein we shall with all modesty
endeavor to clear, that his words seem to be misapplyed to their purpose: and
afterward (I hope) in some measure, make it appear evident, that there were
two Courts, or walled Area's in the time of the first Temple, built by King
Solomon, and attested by Josephus himself to be round about the Temple.

But first let us lay this Rub gently out of the way, by enervating that
Opinion of two Courts one before another, grounded upon misconstruction of
Josephus. The place cited for this fancy of theirs, Joseph. Bell. Judaic. lib.
6 cap. 14. page 915. Edit. 1634. Graecolat.
is de bello Judaic. lib. 6. in these words, -- (...) etc. Which place, because
I would neither burden the Press, or the Reader, with the Greek at length, I
shall give it in English thus. [But the Temple was built, as I have said, upon
a hard Mountain. At first, the uppermost Plain was scarce sufficient for the
Temple, and the Courts of the Altar [The word here in the Greek is (...) and is
taken for the Court of the Altar in this place; and page 918. D. and expressly
Josephus declares concerning David, when God accepted his Offering (after the
Plague) on Moriah, (...). He determined to call the whole place, i.e. of the
Holy Mountain, the Altar of all the people, page 245. F. To proceed then in the
recital of his words, as follows] For the Verge thereof (says he) was steep
and precipicious. But when King Solomon (who also built the Temple) had raised
a firm Wall on the East side, there was a Porch built upon the forced Bank of
Earth. But on the other sides, the Temple lay naked; till in aftertimes the
people always adding earth the top became even and large.] Now in this
citation, the great stress of the question lies in the sense of those words,
(...), the Temple was naked or open.

For the Explication of which words, I beseech the candid and judicious Reader;
First of all to consider, that Josephus does not say, The Plain was Not
sufficient: But (...) scarce sufficient. Besides, he does not say, [The Hill]
but (...): the smooth equal Plain at top without any the least declivity, was
scarce sufficient: Whereas in truth, it was the more fit and proper place for
to build the Temple upon, because of its praerupt declivities: Which being
framed into several squares superior each to other, might yield a most pleasant
and delicious Prospect, not unlike the stately Gardens of that ancient Seat of
Sir Edward Stradlings at St. Donats in Glamorgan-shire, or any other of the
like nature among the Palaces of our Nobles in this Nation. For according to
this projection of the frame of the Temples Situation, the Courts and other
Buildings might lie somewhat below it, that so by graceful steps and ascents,
out of one Court into another, the Temple might appear the more August,
stately, and lofty to all Spectators. But I mainly desire the ingenuous Reader
to remember, that Josephus is not here discoursing of Solomon's Temple ex
industria, but cursorily, (...) by the way only: Wherefore he is not here so
much to be attended to, as in those places, where he makes it his particular
work and business to describe the form and measure of Solomon's Buildings.
There you shall find him reading another Lesson. If then any shall insist upon
it, and take his words here so strictly and rigorously, I fear his provoked
Ghosts will prove angry, and engage fully against them by and by. Yet however,
as to this very place, the words immediately going before show, that he was
hinting at those mighty Foundations of four hundred Cubits deep in stone
(mentioned elsewhere fully) which being raised up to their intended height, by
a perpendicular Line, aggestions of Earth and Rubbish were added to the
declivity of the Hill, to make the Hill and the Stone-Foundations even. Upon
which Foundations, Solomon raised a stately Porch, called so in after-ages by
his name. Now immediately upon these words, comes in the controverted passage
[But on the other sides the Temple was naked] Of what was it naked? of Courts
and Walls? as they would hence infer? No sure! the last thing he spoke of, was
of Porches: of such then we will, grant the Temple was naked, viz. As to such
rare stately double Porches built on such vast and famous Foundations, as were
upon the East Side, we may yield, that the other parts were somewhat less
splendid and famous: Nay possibly at the first Work of Solomon, the other sides
might not be porched by him: but that after he had finished his own and the
Queens house, it appears somewhat probable by Scripture it self, that he
porched both Courts round about, as in after lines may more fully appear: and
therefore this (...) possibly may be favorably interpreted of the first days
of King Solomon, that so we may salve Josephus his credit and reputation: Which
will else appear to be very infirm and lubricous. We will not then construe him
in that sense, as if there were no ordinary Wall compassing the Mountain of the
House, or ordinary Porches enclosing a piece of ground, which was termed the
Outer-Court. This, according to Josephus himself, we cannot grant: For,
concerning walls and Porches round about, we shall find our apprehension by and
by to be sufficiently averred, that they were extant under the first Temple,
(with their Gates opposite to the four Cardinal Winds) and all this shown by
Josephus, that they were even built by King Solomon himself, where he handles
that Kings Fabrics of set purpose.

Besides, the words following, as well as those preceding in this present Text
of our Jewish Historian, do also argue, that Josephus meant by this phra^e of
the Temples nakedness, its being destitute of such stately Porches on each
side, at its first Erection except on the East-Quarter: For he tells us
afterward, that in ensuing Times, there was a Threefold Wall about the Temple,
and that the Foundations of the lowest parts of the Outward Wall were three
hundred Cubits high; in some places more: 1 King. 6.36.
and that the stones were forty Cubits large. Upon such Foundations (says he)
there were Buildings erected worthy of them; to wit, 1 King. 7.11.
double Porches sustained by Pillars of Twenty five Cubits high, that were
single stones of Marble: And moreover he relates, that those Porches were
Thirty Cubits broad, and the whole compass of them, together with the Tower
Antonia, was six Furlong^. Hence we may learn, that for such stately Fabrics
as Solomon's Eastern Porches, and those afterward added, there was necessity
of mighty strong Foundations. Of which vast Foundations, with their stately
Porches built upon them (...), the Temple was destitute, and lay open, in
comparison of the East Side, where Solomon himself had yet at first only built
them.

But that there was a Wall including the greatest part of the Mountain of the
House with several Gates, the same Author shall presently satisfy you, and
that fully. Wherefore, as to such vast additions of Earth, as some imagine, I
have this conception only to give in, viz. That where the Walls were raised
straight up out of the Valley, for to build these Porches upon, the Earth was
pared from rough and uneven places of the Hill, and conveyed by Laborers from
place to place, to fill up those hollow inequalities between the raised Walls,
and the sloping declivity of the Hill; for all that was thus labouriously
performed, was to this end, even to make the Temple ground rise by degrees
smoothly from the Eastgate of the Outward Wall up to the Temple it self. For
the Mountain it self was but little added to by all these industrious Labors,
as to its main parts, receiving no accession of Pelion's, or Ossa's Cast upon
it, or laid to it, as some fondly dream Concerning which, you may please to
read that Learned piece, (of the Temple, in our Savior's days) written by Dr.
Lightfoot, page 4 and 5.

But submitting the whole to sober and unbyassed persons, I shall now proceed
to prove that their Work were two Courts compassing the Temple, which I shall
divide into two Sections: First of all, that there were two, and that even by
Scripture it self. Secondly, that these two encompassed the Covered Temple. To
which purpose, we read in the Book of Kings, 1 King. 6.36.
That Solomon built the Inner-Court, with three Rows of hewn stone, 1 King.
7.11.
and a row of Cedar-beams. Again, we find in the same Book another passage,
relating to Posterity, that the great Court round about, was built with three
Rows of Hewen-stone, and a Row of Cedar-beams. Whence we may infer, by the Rule
of Relation, even from an Inner-Court, that there was an Outer; and from a
great Court, that there was a less. Besides, we read expressly of Courts in the
plural number; so says the Author of the Chronicles, That the Levites Office
was to wait on the Sons of Aaron in the Courts, and in the Chambers. 1 Chronicles.
23.28. 1 Chronicles. 28.6. Ver. 12.
In another place David tells his People, that God had said to him, That
Solomon his Son should build his House and his Courts. To whom, in the 12th
Verse, he gave the Pattern of the Courts of the House of the Lord. Hence
likewise we infer, that there were two for certain, if not more, in the very
days of Solomon.

That there were any more then two Courts in Solomon's days, it cannot be
clearly decided; but it is most probable, in the Negative, by some passages of
Scripture, which speak in so many terms, concerning the two Courts in the House
of the Lord, 2 King. 21.5. 2 Chronicles. 33.5. 2 King. 23.12.
in the which Manasses built his Altars, that were overthrown by godly Josiah.
If any should object, that these are to be understood of the two principal
Courts, whereas we read of a Middle-Court, and a New-Court, and a Court of the
Women in Scripture, before the days of Manasseh; let them remember, that those
three names were given only to one Court, which was laid out and built
possibly by Jehoshaphat, in whose days we first read of a new Court. 2 Chronicles.
20.5.
Though some conceive that the Outward Court was called by the name of
New-Court, as being in those times so famously repaired, as if it had been new
built, and might justly demerit that denomnaition.

The great Outer-Court then which we have gained from Scripture, which proceeds
from the mouth of Truth it self, whether it were an enclosed piece of ground
round about the Covered Temple, and the Priests Court, contained within its
circumference, I shall next endeavor to open. To this purpose, that this
Exterior Court, Isa. 2.2. Mi^. 3.12. and 4.1. Zech. 8.3.
contained within its Wall, the whole Area, or Plot of Sacred Ground taken out
of the Mountain of the House of the Lord, I hope, may be clearly evinced before
we conclude.

For, first, we read of no other Courts extant in the days of Solomon, then the
Priests Court; and the outer Court which is expressly laid down in the Book of
Chronicles. 2 Chronicles. 4.9.
Besides, it is generally confessed by the Learned, both Jews and Christians,
that there were never no more Courts then these four.

1. The Priests Court, with a small distinction in it for the people, (that
were clean) of three Cubits high.

2. The Women's Court, called the New-Court, as some conceive.

3. The Chel or Enclosure of Stone round about these Courts, which may be
valued at the reputation of a small Court.

4. The Court of the Mountain of the House.

Now, if neither the Women's Court, nor the Chell, were built in Solomon's time,
but in the Reign of after-Kings, then it remains, that the Court of the
Mountain of the House, must be the Outer-Court of King Solomon: for a large
proof whereof, I refer you to that excellent Tract of the second Temple, Dr.
Lightfoot, p. 101.
written by the fore-praised Author, a man most learned in all Rabbinical
Knowledge, and the ancient Customs and Histories of the Jewish Nation: who out
of L' Empereur in Middoth, fol. 67. and others, does manifest this more fully.
The which also I hope to make clearer in succeeding Lines, by the Gates at
which Solomon appointed the Levites to watch: which Gates were in the Walls of
this Outward Court. Besides, notwithstanding the Chel was not extant in
Solomon's days; yet under the first Temple it seems to be, Page 95.
which he endeavors to clear by an interpretation of that place, where it is
said (...) that the Rampart and Wall did lament. By the Wall, interpreting the
Court-wall: By the Rampart, or Chell, the space that encompassed it round
about, which were (as it seems by this Text) destroyed by the Chaldeans.

Moreover, that these two Courts which Solomon built are not to be understood
of the two parts of the Priests Court, distinguished by a little Partition,
(that the People might look over) it will appear more evident by and by from
the Gates and Watches of the Porters, which were placed in the Outward great
Court encompassing the Temple: For so we find them exactly distinct in the Book
of Chronicles, where read, 2 Chronicles 4.9.
That King Solomon made the Court of the Priests, and the Great Court: showing,
that a certain Court made by Solomon, distinct from the Priestly Court; and
being compared with that, was greater; and therefore a comparatis called so: as
also because there was no more Courts then this, except the Priests: It is
called, The Great Court, fitly expressing the demonstrative Article (...)
before the Hebrew word (...) in that Text. Whence it appears, that the Priests
Court was the lesser; Whereas, if that small forementioned separation in the
Priests Court (including a piece of ground by all descriptions less then the
place where the Priests did minister in their Office,) should give Title to
this great Court, then the great Court (so called in this Text) would not prove
so large as the lesser, in comparison with which it received its denomination
of greatness, and so there will arise a fine contradiction in very terms.

Moreover, that there must be laid out a very large Court without the Priests
Court in Solomon's days, 1 King. 8.14. 2 Chronicles. 6.12.
may appear from the vast multitudes of People which were at the dedication of
the Temple, called [All the Congregation of Israel] no doubt all the males of
all the Land, according to the command of God: for the Dedication was just in
the same month with the Feast of Tabernacles. How many hundred thousands were
then present, let men judge by Joab's Catalogue, brought in to David at the
numbering of the People; to wit, one million, and 300000. valiant men: 2 Samuel
24.9.
which none will be so absurd to think, that they could stand possibly within
many such Partitions, as were in the Priests Court, and into the Priests Court
it self they might not enter. But then seeing we must place them without, let us
observe after Solomon's prayer was ended, that when fire came down from Heaven
upon the Sacrifices, the Scripture says that all the Children of Israel, etc.
bowed themselves with their faces to the ground (and that is not all, but it is
added) upon the Pavement (...) not only the Natural Earth, but an Artificial
Pavement from -- (...) Stravit. The place then which contained these many
thousands of People was all paved with stone: which is one usual ingredient
into the making, and consequently the describing of a Court; that is, an open
place, walled in and paved; such as was this great and famous Court, wherein
these vast numbers of the males of Israel did now stand and worship falling
down upon its Marble Pavements, when they saw the Celestial fire descending
from Heaven upon the Sacrifices. As for the Gates and Walls about this Court,
we shall fetch them up by and by, whereby to determine this Courts encompassing
the Temple round about.

Secondly, In the second place I shall endeavor to manifest even from Josephus
himself (whose Authority has been hitherto so abused and wrested to
countenance a contrary Opinion) that there were two Courts compassing the Body
of the Covered Temple round about, and both built by King Solomon. Pray then be
pleased to turn to that place of Josephus his History, where according to the
proper series of Times, Joseph. Antiq. lib. 8. cap. 2. p. 262 F. Edit.
Graeco-Lat. Genevae, 1634. Fol.
discoursing of the Reign and Acts of King Solomon, he givs in a large and
ample account of the sumptuous building of the Temple in the eighth Book of his
Antiquities: and there (when handling these matters of set-purpose) you may
read expressly recorded these words (...) etc. Which words, and the following,
may be thus translated. [ But he compassed the Temple round about with a Wall,
called, (...), in our Country Language, by the Greeks (...), raising it to the
height of three Cubits to keep off the multitude from entering into the Holy
Court, and signifying admission to the Priests only. But without this Wall, he
built a Court in a apiece Plot of ground, raising great and broad Porches,
and opening with High-gates: Each whereof did look upon each of the Winds,
being shut with Golden Doors. Into this Court all the People might enter, that
were distinct from others in their purity, and observation of the Laws. But
this outward Court appeared unspeakably admirable: nay, beyond the belief of a
man's own eyes. For filling up deep Valleys (such as for their wonderful depth,
it was not easy to look down to their bottom) and raising them four hundred
Cubits high, he made the top equal to the height of the Mountain, on which the
Temple was built: and so the outward open Court became equal in height to the
Temple-Court. (that is, its inward Court: For (...) here is taken for the
Temple-building, and the inward Court about it, and (...) for that outward
Court.) Then he compassed that Court with a building of double Porches,
fastening the Pillars in the top of the natural Rock, and the covering of them
was adorned with a Roof of Cedar. The gates also of this Outward Court were all
made of silver] Here you have Josephus in the orderly course of his History,
particularly handling the Buildings of Solomon, and expressly relating, first,
the compassing of the Temple with an inward Court, The words are (...), He
compassed the Temple round about upon all Quarters with a Wall. For so the
force of the word (...) and (...) does undeniably import. He shall be counted a
person little tinctured with the knowledge of the Greek Language, and poorly
acquainted with Herodotus, Thucidydes, Polybius, Plutarch, or Strabo, or any of
the Greek Historians that shall attempt to deny it. But as if that were not
enough. Josephus to make sure work, adds (...) 1. Round about on all sides.
Only by the way let us be wary that we do not hence infer that the wall was
circular: for by (...) Josephus only expresses the force of the Hebrew word
(...) which any moderate Hebrician knows to be used in Scripture sometimes,
when the figure of a building is quadrangular, as I shall show below; cap. 5.
As when he speaks of the thirty side-chambers that were built by Solomon about
the Temple, he uses the word (...) page 239. G. This Wall then thus compassing
the Covered Temple, Ribera, page 45.
was but three Cubits high, as Josephus relates: for this end (says one) that
the people might look over and behold the Priests and their Sacrifices. For
according to the common acception of a Cubit, it answers well near to a yard,
and of our measure, giving admission to the eyes of ordinary cized men.

Secondly, in this Story of Josephus, you may observe an outward Court,
compassing the inward, which is cleared by this passage, that it had Gates
opening to the four Winds of Heaven. Whereas if this outward Court stood only
ab anteriori part, just before the inward Court toward the East, then it had
not any Gate properly belonging to it opening to the West: for that Gate on the
West of the Outward Court fancied to be of this anterior situation, was the
famous Eastgate of the Priests Court, and properly belonged to the
inner-Court: Whence it will follow, that the exterior Court, according to this
their conjectured Situation, will have no West-gate at all. But to let this
pass at present, the quantity and measure of the West-Wall of the outward
Court, together with the situation of its gates, puts all out of controversy:
For by what has past, and shall be cited, you may perceive that each side of
this outward apiece Court was a Furlong at least in length.

Thirdly, It Is famously known, that the outward Court, (or exterius Fanum, as
Gelenius renders those words (...)) had those rare Cloisters built by King
Solomon; which seems in some measure manifest, by Scripture it self. Because
we find, in the second Temple, John 10.23. Act. 3.11. and 5.12.
that our Lord and Savior conversed with his Apostles, and they with the
People, in Solomon's Porch: Which though ruined by the Chaldeans, was yet
afterward, upon Solomon's own foundations of 400 Cubits deep (that were not by
them destroyed, as shall be spoken to in succeeding pages) re-edified, and did
bear his name. Now these holy Persons, being not Priests, could not, by the
Law, be admitted into the inner Court. Wherefore it rests upon the proof of
that assumption, (that Solomon's Porches built on such rare and stupendous
foundations were on the East side of the outward Court in those ancient days)
I say, it follows that there was such an exterior Court extant in those times,
thus porched by that magnificent King: whose example, for the form, and the
express tract of Walls and Porches, was generally imitated by the Architects
of the second Temple, as I have often mentioned, according to the sense of
grave and serious Authors, not without good probability of truth. Now this
assertion, of Solomon's Porches being built in the outward Court, is expressly
recorded for truth by Josephus himself, in these words, (...), Joseph. Antiq.
lib. 20. cap. 8. page 699. G.
etc. or thus in English, [ The People persuaded the King (that is, Herod) to
repair the Eastern Porch: now this Porch was in the outward Court, and was
built upon Walls raised up out of a deep Valley, 400 Cubits, of pure white
foursquare stones. The length of each stone was 20 Cubits, the height six, the
work of King Solomon, who at first built the whole Temple.] Here you see his
mind fully, as to those admirable foundations, concerning which, Apparat. part.
1. lib. 2. cap. 8.
the learned Villalpandus has spent a whole Chapter, laboring to prove, that
Solomon's building of Millo, mentioned in the Book of Kings, is to be
interpreted of this stately Pile, which he raised out of the Valley, after he
had finished his own house of Lebanon, and the Queen's; so that he is clear in
the point, that all the immense Substructions or Foundations round about the
precipitious Verge of the Mountain, being the compass of the outward Court,
were built by King Solomon, with several Gates, and a Wall; but with Porches
at first, only on the East side: which he proves more at large. Explanat. in
Ezekiel. cap. 40. Tom. 2. Part. 2. lib. 2. Isagog. cap. 18.

There yet rests an other place of Josephus to be urged, Joseph. Antiq. lib.
15. cap. 14. page 543. G.
when treating of what Solomon performed very expressly, and with great
diligence, in these words. (...), etc. [The Brow of the Hill was rocky and
steep, gently arising from toward the East side of the City up to the highest
top.] This Brow ((...)) or rocky Verge of the Hill, Solomon our King, by the
direction of God, first of all, walled up to the top with mighty workmanship:
(...), round about the top of the Verge of the Mountain. He built also beneath,
beginning under the foot of the Hill, which is compassed with a deep Valley
toward the South. On the inside of the Wall, from top to bottom, the stones
were fastened to the rocks with Lead: so that it was wonderful to behold the
vastness and he^ghth of this foursquare structure. As to the greatness of the
stones, it was openly conspicuous to view: But inwardly their Joints were
fastened one to another with iron, unmovable against all the injuries of time.
Having wrought up this foundation, thus fastened together, to the top of the
Hill, and filled up the hollow places between the upright Wall, and the
declivity of the Hill: he made the Plot of ground eeven and smooth to
appearance, on the top of the Hill. Now all this did contain in compass, round
about, full four Furlongs, each Angle containing in length one furlong, (that
is, each side from Angle to Angle; where, by the way, take notice that Josephus
expounds himself, what he meant by those words before cited, (...): not
circular but quadrangular, as we before expounded him.) But within this, even
just upon the top, another stone Wall did compass the Hill about, upon whose
Eastern Ridge there was built a double Porch equal in length to the Wall,
(that is, a Furlong) the middle whereof looked toward the Doors of the Temple.]
Thus far Josephus. After which words, concerning the buildings of Solomon, he
tells you what other Kings, and, particularly, what Herod, performed. Though I
must here confess, the Latin Translation does not fairly represent it for
Solomon's, yet if we observe the Greek words narrowly, the Antithesis will
infer it. For speaking of that glorious King, he says, (...), He built above
round about the summity, or top: and adds (...): But beneath he built a far
more admirable work: which he prosecutes in the after-words, accordingly to
what he had spoken, lib. 8. cap. 2. expressly of Solomon's Walls of 400 Cubits
height raised out of the Valley, as is before cited, to be at the top a
foursquare work, and is here amplified, as to the measure of its quadrangular
Extent. Alas! it was not for Herod, one under the Romans, and vexed with
continual wars, and inconsiderable, as to Solomon's Territories or Riches, to
do such works as these. Wherefore several have justly suspected whether ever
he meddled with the Temple, unless as to Reparations and Ornaments. Which was
in these Substructions inviolable by time, and adorned by former Kings on the
East, which was a furlong long as well as the rest. Which Court thus foursquare,
and each side of a furlong extent, and built by Solomon, is also asserted by
Ludov. Cappellus in his Apostolical History page 15^. By what precedes, we may
perceive it more and more confirmed, out of the mouth of Josephus, that Solomon
built all the vast Foundations round about, together with the whole foursquare
Wall, at the top, on the Brow of the Hill, each side of the Square being one
Furlong in length, that is, 625 Roman feet, cap. 13. lib. 1. cap. 1. lib. 2.
cap. 23.
according to Censorinus in his Book De die Natali, or A. Gellius in his Noctes
Atticae, or Pliny in his Natural History. Now, though this Stadium of Josephus
be most properly to be accounted according to the Grecian measures, yet it
breaks no squares with us: for the Stadium of the Romans and the Grecians is
accurately noted by Lindebrogius, page 86. Edit. Lug. Bat. 1642. ^0
in his Notes upon that place of Censorinus, to be the same, if the Calculation
be carefully observed: where he cites Lucas Petus de Mensuris and Ponderibus,
and Hues de Globis, that although the Grecian be but 600 Foot, and the Roman
625 Foot: yet he gives this reason for their Parallelism: Nam pes Graecus
excedit pedem Romanum semiuncha: For a Greek foot is longer then a Roman by
half an inch. So that 600 half inches, at 12 inches in a foot, make up those 25
Feet in the Roman Stadium, beyond the number of feet in the Grecian.

Moreover, from the last cited place of Josephus, we may observe, that Solomon
is mentioned to have built Porches, at first, on the East end only: which
serves to expound the so much vexed, and misinterpreted Passage of Josephus,
which was in Controversy, viz. That the Temple was (...), that is, It was
destitute of Porches on any other side of the Temple, at least in the first
times of Solomon. For the Scripture seems to favor his porching of the Courts
of the Lord's house round about, at the twenty years end, when he had finished
the house of Lebanon, his Palace and Throne, together with the Queens house,
according to the order of its Relation 1 King. 7.12. Though, its certain,
Preoccupations are frequent in the sacred Leaves; as immediately about the
Utensils of the Temple, after all; and therefore we shall not rigidly press upon
it from Scripture, though Josephus in his 8th book is peremptory in this point,
as you have read above. So that if you will permit Josephus to be his own
Interpreter, as it is all the reason in the World he should, behold him now
joining hands with our exposition.

Thus much then may abundantly (I hope suffice, as to the two first Arguments,
out of Scripture, and out of Josephus, to prove two Courts round about the
Temple, especially out of the last, whose Authority was always brought to
contradict it.

The third Argument may turn upon the Hinges of the Temple Gates, in the
outward Court, opening of their own accord for a decision to this controversy:
which were placed to all the four winds, says Josephus. Evidently clearing,
that the great Court was round about the covered building. For he tells us
expressly in another place, concerning the inward Court of the second Temple
(according to very judicious Persons, it being correspondent in most things to
the first) that it had no Gate toward the West. These are his words, (...). If
then there were Gates to all the winds, De Bell. Judaic. lib. 6. cap. 6. p.
916. F.
and if there was none on the West in the inner Court, it follows, that the
Western Gates of the Temple must be placed in the outward Wall of this great
Court, compassing the Temple and the inner Court round about.

Fourthly, The Compass of the wall of the outward Court being four Furlongs,
according to Josephus his description of Solomon's buildings, each furlong
taking up a whole side of the Quadrangle: does clearly determine the Gates on
the West side to be in the wall of the outward Court, which by its largeness
must needs be supposed to compass the inner.

I will yet add two probabilities to this purpose, that the Court did compass
the Temple. The first may be taken from the dimensions and position of Moses
his Tabernacle. Wherein we read that the Court was set up round about [The
Tabernacle.] This might be fully demonstrated from the length and breadth of the
Court and Tabernacle. Exodus 40.8.
The Court is expressly declared to have been 100 Cubits long and 50 broad. The
covered Tabernacle, Torniellus and others do evince, Exodus 27.18.
from the measures of the Boards and Curtains, to have been but 30 Cubits long
and 10 broad within, Annal. ad ann. 2544. Number. 60.
and consequently to have been placed within the Court. Now, that the Temple
did in many things imitate Moses his Tabernacle, though generally double to its
dimensions, is clear to every one: being 60 long and 20 broad, as to inward
capacity, the Walls not being considered; whereas Moses was but 30 in length
and 10 in breadth, a^ abovesaid. Wherefore then, as Moses his covered Tabernacle
stood within its Court enclosing it round on every side: so it is somewhat
probable that in this particular the Imitation might sort; even that the
covered Temple stood within the Walls of its Courts.

The second probability may be deduced from Zorobabel's and Herod's Temple,
agreeing in most things with Solomon's, as very sober Authors, upon serious
deliberation, do hold forth; only the Fabric of the last covered house was
somewhat larger. But Herod's Courts, conceived by many to be praecisely wrought
up in the very vestigia or prints of Zorobabel's Walls, did compass the Temple
round about, as may be cleared out of the Jewish writers, and particularly out
of Codex Middoth and L'Emperour the learned Commentator upon it. Which probably
being erected, according to the pattern of the ancient Temple of Solomon, with
the consent of several judicious Writers, as I have often hinted, may in some
measure help to confirm the assertion of its compassing Courts, before largely
treated of, from the testimonies of the sacred Scriptures, and our often cited
Historian of the Jewish Nation. Montania. Abulensis. Villalpandus etc. page 91.
col. 1. lin. 14.


At length, to conclude, the consent of many very learned men, both Jews and
Christians, in this particular, is very considerable. Though indeed Montanus
does somewhat vary from others in the frame and form of the compassing Courts,
conceiving them to be largest at the East end, and narrowest at the West.

But of the Courts encompassing the Temple never did any doubt, (that I yet
read of) till Ribera, upon the misconstruction of Josephus, in that forecited
passage [(...)] had obtruded upon other oversequacious pens the same conceit:
whereof sufficiently, in foregoing lines.

Recapitulatio.
Thus much may then suffice, as to the number of Courts in Solomon's days.
First, that for certain there were two in number. Secondly, that most probably
there were two only. Thirdly, that for form they were quadrangular, and both
compassing the Temple. If you will adhere to Montanus, then you must not
conceive each Quadrangle to be aequi-lateral: but the East Wall to have been
far longer then the Western. Yet if you will follow the general opinion: Then
the Courts, wherein the covered Temple stood, were each of them of a square
aequi-laterall Figure, one within the other. Fourthly, it is most probable that
the new Court, or Women's Court, together with the Chel, or separate place, of
11 Cubits broad, enclosing both the Priests and the Women's Court, round about
with a Wall, were not extant in Solomon's days. But, that they were laid out
during the first Temple, and enclosed with walls, it is imagined by some to be
manifest in a good measure from Scripture it self, and the Testimony of Jewish
Writers. But because their last Erections were not digested by Solomon, nor
distinctly mentioned in Scripture, we have taken leave to dismiss them to the
descriptions of the Rabbis, and their Sectators, and the Commentators on the
visionary Temple of the Prophet Ezekiel.

Of the Quantities of the Courts.
SInce then we have found out two Courts encompassing the Temple, let us try if
Josephus will yet lend his hand any further, from the Records and Traditions of
the Jews, to determine their Quantities and Dimensions, who may well be
cre^ited, having with his own eyes beheld the admirable and vast foundations of
Solomon's, on the East side of the Temple, raised up out of the deep Valley, and
not destroyed in his time. Nay some or Solomon's civil buildings remained in
the days of Rabbi Benjamin, page 43. Edit. L'Empereur. 80 1633
if he may be credited in his Itinerarium, (...) speaking o^ what he saw at
Jerusalem, viz. Some remnants of the Stables of Solomon' s Court, which Solomon
(says he) built with very strong Buildings, and with great Stones, the like
whereof no where to be found. This Rabbi wrote his Travels in the common year
of our Lord 1173, as L'Empereur in his praevious dissertation does manifest. If
this be true, it is very probable, the vast foundations of the Temple might be
much more extant in Josephus his days: who has told us plainly, that each
side of the outward Court, even in Solomon's days, was a complete furlong. For
though that King should be supposed to have built the Eastern Porch only
(albeit Josephus says he porcht it round and that it was apiece lib. 8.
as above cited) yet if that eastern part were a furlong in length as he says
lib. 15. Antiq. l. 15.
And the whole work likewise was (...) in quadrangular form, and that the rest
of the sides were aequall to this, as the same Author asserts: it will then
prove 4 furlong in compass. Each furlong or stadium of Josephus being 600
Grecian feet, or 625 Roman, which is all one, as before I mentioned out of the
Commentator upon Censorinus. The story is, that Hercules running in his
greatest speed, as much as he could at one lusty breathing, finished the space
of 600 of his own measured feet, and there being out of breath made a stop or
station, and thence arose the measure of the Olympic Stadium: which the
Grecians afterward generally received. Now the Roman foot, as I said before,
being half an inch less then the Grecian, 625 of theirs (consequently) will be
commensurate to 600 of the Olympic feet, and make but the complete measure of
one and the same Stadium. So then from 625 Roman feet, 625 4 2500
De re rust. l. 5. Origin. l. 15. c. 15.
being quadrupled for the Walls of the four sides of the Outward Court, there
arises 2500 Roman feet for the compass of the Wall of the Outward Court: which
being divided by five (because five Roman feet make one of their Paces, as
Columella, and Isidorus, and many others truly relate) gives in the Quotient
five hundred Roman Paces; that is, just half a mile of their measure, for the
exact Circuit of the Wall of the outward Court of the Temple. But there was
more ground upon the Mountain of Moriah then this (which was thus sacred) by
two whole Stadiums; whereupon, afterward, the Tower Antonia was built: For
Josephus testifies, that the whole compass of the Temple, together with this
Tower was six Furlongs: and it is also clearly manifested, by that Learned Dr.
Lightfoot, in his Second Temple, De bello Judaico, lib. 6. cap. 6,
Page 4. out of an ancient Rabbin.

To reduce the compass of the Holy Ground to English measure, let us first
remember, that every Statute-mile is three hundred and twenty Perch in length
or eight Furlongs; each Furlong containing forty Perch; and every Perch
sixteen foot and.

Secondly, let every English foot be divided into twelve Inches, or one
thousand Parts; and each part into twelve Scruples: so that each Inch, or
twelfth part of those thousand, will contain 83 of those parts, and four
subdivided scruples.

Thirdly, according to this Division, let us remember, that the English foot
exceeds the Roman by 33 such 1000 parts; that is, the Roman foot contains in
length but 967 of those thousand, 33./1000.
whereinto the English foot is divided; as the Learned Mr. Greaves has fixed
it: which, 33/1000 parts of the Roman foot's deficiency, in respect to the
English, being subtracted from 83 parts, and 4 scruples (that are equal to one
English Inch, as abovesaid) leave fifty parts, and four scruples remaining of
one of our Inches: so that the Roman foot is somewhat above the third part of
our Inch deficient as to it is co-extension with our English foot. Consequently,
each English Pace (of five foot, or five thousand such Parts beforementioned,
to a Pace) will exceed the Roman Pace by 165 of the same parts; 164 12 1. Inch
83 4 81 8 that is, of our measure, one Inch, eighty one Parts, and eight
Scruples. Furthermore, five hundred English Paces arise to three Furlong,
thirty one Pole, eight Foot and six Inches, or five hundred Parts of a Foot of
English Measure: Furl. Pole. Feet. Inches. Part. Scrupl. 3 31 8 005 83 4 0 5 0
01 80 4 3 26 8 04 3 0 Which exceeds five hundred Roman or Italian Paces (or
their half mile, answering to the four Stadia beforementioned) by five Pole,
no Feet, one Inch eighty Parts, and four Scruples of our Measure: Which latter
being subtracted from the former sum of the five hundred English Paces, yields
a residue of three Furlongs, twenty six Pole, eight Feet, four Inches, three
Parts, and no Scruples: The exact extent of the Wall of the outmost Court,
according to our English Measure. So that this being the compass of the Wall of
the outward Court of the Temple, according to our Statute-measure, in
proportion to the Roman foot, whereof 625 make Josephus his Furlong equivalent
to the Grecian (as it is said above) we shall find it precisely to fall short of
an English half-mile, 13 Pole, 8 Feet, one Inch, 80 Parts, and four Scruples.

Furl. Pole. Feet. Inch. Part. Scrupl. 3 39 16 5 83 4 3 26 8 4 3 0 0 13 8 1 80
4

Middoth. c. 2. Edit. L'empereur. p. 35. Hist. Judaic. ex Hebr. in Lat. ver. a
Gentio, p, 359, etc.
Now upon the supposition of Josephus his fixing the length of the Wall exactly,
and that it did truly correspond with the length of four Stadiums, according to
his recital; we have with more nicety, then some perhaps will think requisite,
reduced the outward circuit of the holy ground, to a precise and determinate
portion of our English mile. However, those that please, may say, in general,
that it was almost half an English mile in compass.

But now seeing the Rabbis generally with open mouth, and one Vote, declare
this Court-Wall to have been 500 Cubits square, which seems to contradict
Josephus; let us try if we can by any means reconcile them. It Is true, these
Rabbis treat usually of the second Temple; and therefore no need may some
think of reconciling them to Josephus, whom we have cited in this particular
for the first Temple. To which may be answered, that Josephus lays down the
same measure for the External Court of both Temples: Upon which, and other
accounts, it is, that sober and learned persons have generally conceived the
form and quantity of the Outer-Court, to have been the same under both; and
therefore it will be pertinent enough to our work in hand, to make an inquiry
into the sense of the Rabbis, so far as my small acquaintance will give me
leave to trade with them, and to observe what communion there is droven betwixt
them and Josephus. To this end it will not be amiss to call to mind, that
Villalpandus, in many places, does quote Josephus, as averring, that the Wall
of this Outer-Court, was but 400 Cubits square; and, particularly, in his
Apparatus, Page 118.8. But he no where tells us in what place Josephus does so
declare himself, that I yet find, though upon diligent search: Neither have I
yet observed, though upon careful perusal of all his Books, that Josephus
himself does any where mention the Quantity, circumscribing the Outer-Court by
Cubits, but by Furlongs; as Antiq. l. 15. cap. 14. unless the printed Copy be
false in one place, which I vehemently suspect in his History of the Jewish
Wars. The words are these, [(...)] The Interpreter, probably, having used
another Copy, Lib. 6. cap. 14. Secundum Graecam, Edit. p. 916. E.
then that which we now have printed, has varied much, thus [ Spacium erat
usque ad murum CCC Cubitis planum] The space unto the Wall for 300 Cubits, was
plain or eeven; and therein also has probably committed a fault (or else the
Copy is corrupted) for CCCC. two C's being contracted into the first letter of
[Cubits] which gave me the Rise to suspect, that in some Vatican Manuscripts,
or of other ancient Libraries which Villalpandus might possibly have viewed: it
was written thus, (...). If the Original were so of old, then it would play
fair on Josephus his side, confirming his own Relation in a place before-cited;
where it is said, that each side of the square was a Stadium, or Furlong. Now
it is sufficiently known, that a Greek Stadium (with which, as the other
Measures also of capacity better known to the Jews, then the Roman quantities,
Josephus frequently compares his Hebrew Measures) was exactly 600 Grecian feet;
of which before: So says Censorinus; Stadium Olympicum est pedum, DC. Besides,
Cap. 13. de die natali.
Suidas professedly tells us in the word (...)] (...); That a whole Stadium is
400 Cubits, which agrees with the place of Josephus before corrected, and with
what we formerly said concerning a Cubit, that it was nearest about a foot and
a half. Here the Account falls in precisely with Grecian Measures: For 400
Cubits, 600 Grecian Feet, and one Stadium, you see, are now coincident.

Well then, as to the reconciliation intended; Josephus says, De Bell. Lib. 6.
c. 14. page 916. C. Antiq. l. 15. c. 14. p. 544. B. Page 27. l. 18.
that the whole compass of the sacred ground, together with the Antonian Tower,
was six Furlongs; which must be thus understood, That the Temple-ground
contained four Furlongs in compass: for so he says distinctly, that each side
was a Furlong; and that the Tower-Plot took up in compass two Furlongs, even as
Dr. Lightfoot has determined it in his Second Temple, and was apiece at
the North-West end of the Temple Porches. Each side of the Tower then was half
a Furlong; so that the North and West-sides took up but half of the whole, viz.
one Furlong: by which computation, Josephus will agree with the Rabbis exactly
enough. Though I fear both of them speak but at large, that their Measures may
fall into round numbers. But let it be here remembered, that this Tower being at
first used for the Mansion House, and laying up of the Garments of High Priest;
which standing upon a spare place of the Mountain of the House, is by them cast
into the Reckoning of Holy Ground: Not but that yet there was some portion of
ground remaining on the West, and on the North, for profane, and not at all
counted in any of their sums. So then taking the Circuits of the Temple, and
Antonia, distinctly and apart, we see that the Temple was four Furlongs about,
and Antonia but two; which being put into one sum, makes six. But if you join
the Circuit round about both of them, reckoning only the two Outsides of
Antonia, that are farthest from the Temple, there will result but five Furlongs
for the compass of the holy ground, commonly so reputed. To which, very clearly
and patly, agrees a passage of Eusebius, out of Aristaeus, concerning the
Pipes, laid under the Temple, for conveyance of Water, in these words, (...),
for five Furlongs round about the Foundations of the Temple: See Eusebius. Prapar.
Evang. Lib. 9. Cap. 38. The same, word for word, we read in Aristaeus his own
Greek Copy, Page 27. lin. 11. Edit. Basil. 80 1561. in Epistola ad Philocratem.
Wherefore, seeing the Greek Stadium of Josephus was six hundred feet, if you
multiply them by 5, (that is, five Furlongs) they will yield three thousand
feet for the Circuit round about. Moreover, Vitruv. l. 3, cap. 1. page 40. lin.
9. Edit. Lug. Bat. 1649.
four Palms (generally being the known parts of a Foot) being multiplied into
three thousand, will produce twelve thousand Palms, the Circuit of the Walled
Ground. Now the Rabbis say, that the Mountain of the House was five hundred
Cubits square: so that in the four sides added together, it is Circuit arises to
two thousand Cubits: which being multiplied by six Palms to a Cubit, that is a
foot and half (as is before said, and may more amply be manifested in another
place) there issues twelve thousand Palms equal to the measure of Josephus,
which makes him and the Rabbis not to fall out in the Building of the Temple.

Hence then it follows, that the Outward-Court, and its Wall is more exactly
determined by Josephus than by the Rabbis, who lived since him, and saw not
what he reports, as an ocular Witness; who tells us expressly, as is before
related, even concerning Solomon's Outward-Court, that it was apiece, each
side containing a Greek Furlong in length, and the Whole round about being
almost half an English mile; as is before computed.

Thus much then for the Compass of the Outward-Court.

Of the Inner-Court.
THis Inner-Court is sometimes called the Priests Court. The quantity whereof,
under Zorobabel's Temple, about three hundred and ten years before Christ our
Lord's Incarnation, Josephus relates out of the Writing of Hecataens Abderita,
Contra Apton, lib. 1. page 1049. D.
speaking of the Wall that encompassed the Temple and Altar, in these words;
(...). The Stone-Wall encompassing it, was for its length, five Jugera; and, in
breadth, one hundred Cubits. Now Suidas says, in the word (...), that it was
the sixth part of a Stadium, which before, we have mani^ested to have been six
hundred Grecian Feet; which is proper to Hecataeus, a Geeek Writer. Hence then
we learn, that in those days, the length of this Court, from East to West, was
five hundred Grecian feet, which is parallel to three hundred thirty and three
Cubits, and. If the Hebrew Cubit should prove nearer to a Grecian foot and
half, than to the Roman, (which being of an intricate Hisquisition, I leave to
another Discourse.) But these 333 Cubits excellently well concur with the
length of the Plot of the Inward Courts of Zorobabel's Temple, the Walls not
being admitted into Dimension. For the constant computation of them is thus: ^
The Priests Court 187 Cubits long: The Women's 135: And the Chel 11; which
produces the 333 Cubits of Hecataeus, wanting but 1/3 of a Cubit, to parallel
with his (...), or 5/6 of a Stadium, for the length of this Court. But as to
Roman Measure, five hundred Greek feet are equal to five hundred and twenty
feet, and ten Inches, which is equivalent to three hundred forty and seven
Cubits, and four Inches, if a Cubit be but a foot and of Roman measure: so that
this will yield above fourteen Cubits for the two outmost Walls; besides the
333 Cubits before spoken. Now as to the breadth, Hecataeus mentions one hundred
Cubits; which unless we accept, concerning the bare ground on the North and
South Side of the covered Temple, destitute of any building, it will not agree
with the Jewish Descriptions. But if it be so understood, then the breadth of
the covered Temple Walls and Chambers, being fifty Cubits, as is said before:
This being added, makes the sum agree in 150 Cubits for the whole breadth:
whereof more by and by.

But you will say; This whole story of Hecataeus is concerning the Second
Temple of Zorobabel's. To this I only, at present, answer; That if the Outward
Court Walls were raised in the same place under the second, wherein they stood
under the first Temple; then is this a good testimony of Hecataeus to our
purpose. For which we shall not very earnestly contend, though there be good
probabilities for that purpose. It is true, the length and breadth of neither
Court can be defined out of Scripture, unless you will join issue with
Villalpandus, as to his Visionary Temple in Ezekiel: which (^o nomine) because
related but in Vision, cannot be a sound Foundation for material
Temple-Buildings; especially seeing the Dimensions of the Wall, round about the
Outward Court are laid down by Ezekiel to be two thousand Reeds, each Reed
being six Cubits, and an hand breadth. Now seeing that two thousand Cubits are
five Furlongs at four hundred Cubits to the Furlong, as abovesaid; Then two
thousand Reeds will be six times five, that is, thirty Furlongs, besides two
thousand hand-breadths, which arises to 333 Cubits, and 2/6, or 1/3, that is,
almost another Furlong; whereas Aristaeus, an Eyewitness, (if his Copy he true
which we have, though the Authors work concerning the seventy Translation, is
warranted by Tertullian, page 31. in his Apology against the Christians, page
637. 80.) testifies in these words concerning the City Jerusalem it self,
(...), Its compass was forty Furlongs. Now, if according to Ezekiel, there
were about thirty one Furlongs in compass, expended upon the Temple-Buildings,
there will remain then but eleven for all the City besides; which is most
absurd, Nay, Josephus who knew it better, says the whole City was but thirty
three furlongs in compass, De bello Judaico, lib. 6. cap. 13. Graec. page 914.
B. which receives farther confirmation by his Testimony, concerning the
circumvallation of Titus, in his Siege against the City, which he relates to
take up but 39 stadia, in his 6th Book. De Bello Judaico, cap. 31. or 13 Lat.
Page 937. B. in these words, (...): Whence we must necessarily infer the
compass of the City it self to be less then the Line of the Besiegers, which
encompassed the City of thirty three Furlongs in circuit, as he had related
before. So that there will be left by Ezekiel's Measures of the Temple, but a
little above two Furlongs for the whole City. Insomuch, that we may justly
wonder at the costs and pains of Villalpandus, in his large Volumes, building a
Temple without any solid Foundation for its Dimensions, to be extended upon the
holy Mountain, which was incomparably less in its whole Circuit, then Ezekiel's
Temple-Courts. Well then, we must not be peremptory in this business: I shall
only present to consideration thus much concerning this inward Court of the
Priests in Solomon's days: That seeing the Temple it self, or the covered
Building was in its inward Dimensions, double to Moses his Tabernacle; why may
not the Court about it be double to Moses his Court? The holy Place and the
Oracle, with Moses, was 30 long; with Solomon, 60 long. The breadth in the
Tabernacle was 10, and in the Temple 20. Then seeing Moses his Court was one
hundred Cubits long and fifty broad, why may we not thence allow the Priests
Court round about Solomon's Temple, to be two hundred long, and one hundred
broad? This conjecture is somewhat fortified by the plain Ground-Plot, or Area,
of this Court under the second Temple: For we read expressly, Codex Middoth. p.
169. cap. 5. Sect. 1.
that it was one hundred eighty and seven long: so that our two hundred Cubits
yields six Cubits, and, for the thickness of the Walls, East and West, in that
Court, to make its Dimensions co-incident with the second Temple. But as to the
breadth, North and South, let us consider, that the Temple-Building, with its
appendant Chambers, in its inward Area, (not measuring the Walls; for in these
proportions, they are to be excluded) was triple to the inward Area of Moses
his Tabernacle, which was but ten Cubits broad within. Now in the Temple, the
Holy Place was twenty Cubits broad, and the Ground-Chambers, on each side, were
five Cubits a piece in Floor, that is ten for both, making thirty in all for the
inward A real capacity of the breadth of the covered Temple, neglecting the
Walls: So then, upon this suggestion, consequently, the breadth of the Priests
Court will fall out to be one hundred and fifty Cubits in all, which is in
triple proportion to the Court of Moses's Tabernacle, being but 50. Exodus
38.12, 13.


But some will say, as to this contrivance, the Porch was left out, as to the
length; for that made it 70 in all, which makes another proportion betwixt
them, as to length.

I answer; First, that the Porch was only for beauty, but the Side-Chambers
were for use. And, secondly, the mavelous co-incidency of this our
conjecture, with the Measures of the second Temple, does much allure us,
Middoth. Ibid.
to lay down these proportions. For therein we read, that this very Court was
135 broad in open Area, leaving 7 Cubits, and for the thickness of the two
Walls, on the North and South, that it may ly parallel with 150 Cubits of our
supposed breadth of this Inner-Court, in triple proportion to the Court of
Moses's Tabernacle.

These Courts then in some measure, (I hope) are fixed, as to their number and
fashion, including the Temple within two Squares; though as to their
Dimensions, I can say nothing peremptorily: only that the great Court (if
Josephus may be believed,) was four hundred Cubits square, and so completely
finished, as to the Foundations out of the Valleys, the Walls, the Gates, and
the famous Porch at the East end, and other ordinary Porches round about, even
by Solomon himself; as we have before manifested from that Author. The Priests
Court probably, fixed by proportion, taken from the Tabernacle to the Temple,
and concurring with the Dimensions of that Court under the second Temple.

2. Chron. 20.5.
There remains yet something to be said of the new Court, which we evidently
find erected before the destruction of Solomon's Temple, and was called the
Women's Court under the second: Not as if they alone did resort into that place,
but that they could go no further.

There was also the separate place, or the Enclosure, called Chel, which ran
round about both the Priests Court, and the Women's. But their quantity is
utterly undeterminable out of Holy Scripture, Lam. 2.8. King. 42.1.
what it was under the first Temple. Besides, they not being extant in
Solomon's days, pertain not necessarily to this Description. Neither shall we
need to give in the Plot of these Courts, unless any would imagine, that the
Jews did precisely raise the Walls of these Courts, in the very Tract of the
old Ruins, which possibly might be so; though we cannot prove it, as to all
the Courts: Yet Josephus is a clear Witness in this point, Lib. 15. c. 14. p.
544. B. p. 545. D.
as to the great outward Court, that it was walled in the same place under both
Temples: if we compare what he says concerning the Buildings of Solomon and
Herod, together. Wherefore, as to these last Courts, we are content to leave
their Measures in the same posture under the first, as they are punctually
described to have been under the second. We are sure the Walls of both Temples
were of like fashion, if we compare 1 King. 6.36. with Ezra 6.4. Moreover, Dr.
Lightfoot gives in his Verdict, that it is almost past peradventure, that Cyrus
gave his Commission for the second Temple, after the Pattern of Solomon's,
having learned it from the Jews about him, Temple, page 43. As to this point, I
suppose from good Authors (I am sure, from Scripture) it will be as hard to
contradict it, as for us to prove it. We shall then, at present, conclude upon
the Dimensions of these two Cubits briefly.

The Great Court square, 400 Cubits.

The Priests-Court, within the other; long, 200; broad, 150; Desiring the more
diligent Reader, and one better acquainted with these Antiquities, to touch
them charily and gently: For we have set them up only at present for a trial,
how they will suit with the conveniences of Temple-Worship, and more firm
consequences, either from Scripture, or approved ancient Authors, that may be
hereafter brought to light, either to approve, or disprove the Premises; and we
do accordingly promise, that with all care and speed we shall endeavor then to
fix them in their most exact places.

Of the Walls, Gates, Porches, Treasuries, Pavements, etc. in both these Courts.
IN the next place, we are to speak concerning the Walls, Gates, and Pavements,
Porches, Stairs, Treasuries, and Houses, of dedicate things within those
Courts, which Solomon built: for as to the New-Court, and the Chel, we shall
leave them to the Describers of the second Temple.

For the Walls then, how thick or high in the Outward Court, Scripture is
silent; and so is Josephus also: unless, as to the second Temple, which if
exactly like the first, we have nothing to do, but to refer the whole work to
its Describers. Aristaeus says, in his time, they were (...), Page 26.
above 70 Cubits high.

That the great Court; as also the inward, were both walled round about, 1
King. 7.12.
we have it recorded in Scripture; together with the manner or form of the
Walls viz. with three Rows of Hewen-stone, and a Row of Cedar-Beams, which we
find to be the very same for the second, Ezra 6.4.
in the Commission of Cyrus; which makes us fomewhat inclinable, to think, that
their very Position also was in the same place with the former. But I leave
that in bivio.

The Gates.
As for the Gates of the outward great Court, we read, that the Doors, or
Folding-leaves, were over-laid with Brass; 2 Chronicles. 4.9.
but their Situation we are to learn from the Discourse about the Porters of
the Temple, in 1 Chronicles. 26.13, etc. Where we find, as follows.

1. An Eastgate: For the Lot fell to Shelemiah Eastward, verse. 14. at which
Gate there were to watch six Levites, ver. 17. This, 6 Levites.
under the second Temple, was called Shushan Gate. Some think, it was called
the Kings Gate: Not that the King went in, that way, but because King Solomon
built it in a more sumptuous and extraordinary manner then the rest. 1 Chronicles.
9.18.
In some one of the Chambers, in this Gate of old, sat the Sanhedrim, and
sometimes also in the Eastgate of the inner or higher Court, as may be learned
out of Jeremy, by comparing these places together, Jerem. 35.4. and 36.10.

2. The North Gate. For the watching at which Gate, the lot fell to Zechariah,
a wise Counselor, the Son of Shelemiah, called also Meshelemaiah, See 1 Chronicles. 26 v. 2. and v. 14. 4 Levites.
Here there were four Levites placed in the daily watch v. 17.

3 The South Gate. For which the lot fell to Obed-Edom, v. 15. 4 Levites.
Here there were four Levites in constant watch, v. 17. Whether there were two
Gates in the South Wall, or not, is disputable. For though Josephus says (...)
In the plural: yet he speaks there of the second Temple. From hence some hold
there were two, and probably so, under the second. The Rabbis also agreeing to
it, and calling them the Gates of Huldah. But that there was but one under the
first Temple, I rather incline to think, because there are but four Porters
mentioned Southward. There being at the four main and principal Gates, four
always set to watch.

4 The West Gate called Shallecheth, from Casting up; the word being derived
from (...) to cast up, as being denominated from that famous Causey, which
Solomon made here, to pass on from his own house over the Valley into the
Mountain of the Temple. 1 Chronicles. 26.16. Esa. 6.13. page 17.
The Gate stood by the Causey of the going up, as we render it, whereof there
is famous mention. Each side of this Causey was planted with Oaks and Teyle
trees, as Dr. Lightfoot has well observed. There were also made stately Railes
of Algum trees, by transposition, called also Almug trees, which some take to
be Coral, Edit. Gentij. page 357. 2 Chronicles. 9.11. 2 Chronicles. 2.8. 2 Chronicles. 9.10.
and to be fecht out of the Sea near Tire; so, a Rabbi. But this is improbable,
because such a hard material was not proper or fit to make Harps, and
Psalteries, which were made of the same Algum trees. Besides they are expressly
said to be fetched from Lebanon, and from the golden land of Ophir. Others say,
they were the same wood that we now call by the name of Ebony; others, Brazil
wood: because they have fancied Ophir to be Peru. Others, with the learned
Buxtorf, explain it of the best sort of Cedars, to which we shall incline till
better light; being sure that Lebanon was very famous for Cedars. Possibly this
might be some more excellent sort then the ordinary which is commonly
mentioned. The 70 in Chron. render it (...), Wood of the Larch-tree, as some
interpret (...) which will not easily burn as Vitruvius says lib. 2. c. 9.
concerning a Castle near the Alps built of it, which Caesar could not destroy
by fire. The vulgar Latin calls them Thyma ligua: which Dodoneus expounds of
the wild Cypress. Well, what ever the Wood were, it was a rare and choice
sort, whereof the King made stays for the house of the Lord, we render it in
the Text, Pillars: in the Margin of our Bibles, Railes or props, The Word is
(...) Avenarius turns it thus, 1 King. 10.5. 2 Chronicles. 911.
Fultura quae scilicet utraque part gradus sustinet. The Seventy two render it
(...). In another place the same thing is rendered (...), we read in the Text
Terrises, in the Margin, Stays, and (that which suits best of all) Highways,
to the house of the Lord, by the Seventy (...), which is the proper meaning of
the word, as may be found in many places of Scripture, where it is so rendered,
and particularly, Esai. 33.8. and 49.11. This famous Causey, planted with trees
on both sides, for shade and pleasure, and railed with Railes of Cedar, or some
ocher choice and excellent wood, for safety, was that stately ascent to the
house of the Lord, which Solomon made for a passage from his own House into the
Temple, through the chief Western gate, called Shallecheth from this admirable
Causey, which the Queen of Sheba did not without cause behold with pleasing
wonder. 2 Chronicles. 9.4
This Gate was called Coponius his Gate, under the second Temple. Where for the
service of watching, there were placed also, as at the three other Cardinal
Gates, so so also here, 1 Chronicles. 26.18. 4 Levites.
four Levites. The lot fell to Shuppim and Hosah v. 16. Now because this Gate
was open only to the King and his Family, and because a great part of the City
lay on the West side of the Temple, we read of other Gates in this Western Wall.

As first of all, the Gates of Asuppim which were two little ones, being at the
Southermost end of the Western Wall, 1 Chronicles. 26.15. v. 18. 4 Levites.
together with a Treasury called the House of Assuppim, lying betwixt them. The
lot for the watch at these two little Gates fell to the Sons of Obed-Edom. To
each Gate two, v. 17. that is four Levites to these two Gates. Whereby it seems
they were but little ones. For the famous great Gates, that stood in the midst
of their Walls, had four a piece. That here were two Gates, the Text insinuates
by the division of the number of Porters, saying not four: But toward Assuppim
two and two, that is, two to each Gate.

Then lastly comes in Parbar-Gate, which is expressly fixed Westward, and two
Levites placed in their watch at that Gate. v. 18. 2 Levites.


We have then you see four Prime Gates, to the four Winds, and three lesser
ones, toward the West besides; that is seven in all: And twenty four Levites,
in their constant order, watching at every one of the Gates, according to the
lot of their Father's Houses, and their several Divisions.

Of the Gates of the Inward Court.
BEfore we come into the Priests Court, to view the Gates, we must ascend by
fifteen steps or degrees, which for form were semicircular, the whole were in
height seven Cubits and a half, each being half a Cubit in Rise. Where by the
way, take notice, if the Cubit were a whole yard, as some would fix it: it
would prove, Hic labor, hoc opus, to climb up those Stairs. The Ascent would
be neither graceful nor pleasant. These were the steps whereon the Levites
sang the fifteen Psalms of degrees. Which thing, together with the Conformity
of this Ascent to the second Temple, is the only motive why such a number is
delivered. Those Psalms (as is delivered by many grave Expositors) being
assigned by David to be sung upon this Ascent.

Being entered we can find but five Gates in this higher Court of the Lord's
House, if Scripture be consulted.

1 The Eastgate, called the higher Gate of the Lord's House, which was either
new-built or repaired by King Jotham, and is called, 2 King. 15.35. 2 Chronicles.
27.3.
as some think, The High Gate of the House of the Lord. Though there is one
place which seems to favor an apprehension that the high-Gate there mentioned
was the same with Shallecheth, or the West-Gate of the outward Court toward
the King's house. For if you observe 2 Chronicles. 23.20. The Scripture tells us
that Jehojaedah with the rest brought young King Joash, newly crowned in the
Temple, from the House of the Lord: that is, the inner Court, where he was
crowned and anointed near his royal pillar, as we have before observed, and
then being brought into the outward Court, they came with him through the
high-Gate into the Kings House, where the immediate connection of the Kings
House seems to imply, that the High-Gate, so called, of the Temple, was that
which was nearest to the Kings House. There are two probabilities to strengthen
this conceit. First, that it was called the high-Gate, because situate on the
highest ground of Moriah: which was at the West end of the Temple: so confessed
by all. Secondly, the Eastern Gate though pompous, yet it is observed by Dr.
Lightfoot that its Battlements were made low, Temple service, cap. 17.. 2.
that the Priest on the Expiation day, on Mount Olivet, might behold the Porch
of the Temple. Besides, probably, the Western Gate was built the more
magnificently, because of the royal entrance of the Kings. But to proceed;
This Eastern Gate of the inner Court, being thus (as is conceived by most, with
whom we will not fall out) magnificently rebuilt by Jotham, had, by reason of
its new Erection, the name of the Newgate of the Lords House. The Entry
whereof was kept by the Fathers of the Levites, who had there also a famous
Chamber, where of old time the High Court of Judicature, Jer. 36.10. Ezekiel. 8.7,
11.
called the Jewish Sanhedrim, did sit in counsel. This Gate was called by the
name of Nicanor under the second Temple. Concerning which, and the remaining
Gates, the diligent Reader may consult the forecited learned Author, in his
second Temple, for a clear guide in these particulars.

In the South-Wall of this inward Court, there were of old but two Gates, that
we yet find recorded in Scripture.

Jer. 20.2.
1. The High-Gate of Benjamin, because it stood on somewhat higher ground then
the other, and was called by the name of Benjamin, because it stood in the Lot
and Territory of that Tribe, as the Temple with the Altar fully did. This was
called the Gate of Kindling, under the second Temple.

2. The lower Gate of Benjamin, which stood in the South-Wall over against the
Altar, and was called the Watergate under the second Temple.

On the West Side of the Temple, and in the Western-Wall of this Inner-Court,
De bello Jud. lib. 6. cap. 6. p. 916. F.
there was no Gate at all: So Josephus, and all the Ancients, speaking of the
second Temple, do fully agree: Whence it clearly follows, that the Western
Gates must be placed, as before, in the wall of the Outward Court. If the
Supposition of the first Temple, its being an example in its most considerable
Buildings and Frame for the second to follow (wherein most agree) be built upon
solid Foundations.

On the North there were two Gates in their Position exactly correspondent to
the Southern.

1. The Upper North-Gate opened upon the Body of the Temple, and is called the
Gate of the Lords House toward the North, but termed the Gate Beth-Mokadh
under the second Temple: Ezekiel. 8.3, 5, 14.
In which place the Women sat weeping for Tammuz, as they are represented by
the Prophet Ezekiel.

2 The Gate of the Altar, because it was right against the Altar, and opposite
to the lower Gate of Benjamin. This is the lower North-Gate, and under the
second Temple was called Nitzotz, Ezech. 8.5.
or the Gate of the Song.

These are all the Gates of the Priests Court, that are mentioned in Scripture
under the first Temple, which proves not, that there were no more: But only
gives us to conclude, that no more are yet cleared up for our entrance into
this Court.

The Pavements.
The Pavement of both Courts, with what stones it was laid, is not clear. That
there was one in the great Court, 2 Chronicles. 7.3.
is very evident: For the Text says, All the People bowed themselves with
their faces to the ground upon the Pavement, and worshipped, who were not
admitted into the Inner-Court, whereby it is most probable, that the Priests
Court was also paved, because of their various services that did require it. It
appears also very probable, that the Priests Court was paved, by that Relation
of Ahaz his taking Sown the Brazen Sea from off the Oxen, and setting it upon
the Stone-Pavement, Most probably, in the same Court, where it stood in its
gallantry. De bello Jud. lib. 6. c. 14. p. 916. C.
2 King. 16.17. The second Temple had its Court laid with all manner of stones,
when as the Riches of the Nation was nothing comparable to what it was in the
days of Solomon: and therefore we may justly conceive, that the first was far
more transplendent in these Ornaments.

Each Court was made plain and even with ascents, by steps, out of the first
into the second, and out of that into the Temple Porch. Under the second Temple
there were 15 steps, Id. l. 6. c. 14. page 917. B.
as before is said, out of the great Court, at the Eastgate, entering into the
higher Court, or that of the Priests. Besides the advance out of that Court
into the Porch, was by 12 steps, as is commonly conceived of the first in
similitude and likeness to the second.

The Porches.
The Porches of each Court follow next to be spoken to: For which purpose,
let us see what may be the meaning of that place, where it says, 1 King. 6.36.
1 King. 7.12. ver. 10.
that the Inner-Court was built with three Rows of Hewen-stones, and a Row of
Cedar-Beams, seeing that in the same manner also the outward Court was built
according to the measure of Hewen-stones of ten Cubits, and of eight. Possibly
ten long and 8 broad; or, some ten long; some 8 long; or else cubical. Some
understand that Text, of Rows of stones in the thicknss of the walls, lying
plain and even one with another, parallel to the Horizon and Cedar-beames
within the Stones for the inside of the Courts and Porches; so Montanus. Others
understand it of three Rows of Stones on upon another in height, and Cedar
beams at top: So Ribera. Some by this expression understand the Cloisters round
about the Courts, (...), Joseph. Ant. l. 8. c. 2. page 266. G.
That they were built with three Rows of Stones, of ten Cubits high and eight
Cubits thick a piece. So that the out-wall of the Cloisters was eight Cubits
thick, and thirty Cubits high of solid stone, and then Cedar beams at top
lying cross upon Pillars within. The wall running East and West the beams
were laid at top North and South, with Pillars underneath, which made a walk
covered at top, and open on the insides, toward the open Pavements of the
Courts, the beams being supported with Pillars, like as the Royal Exchange or
the Piazzo in Covent Garden. If this be the truth, then it is clear by the Text,
that Solomon himself did Porch both the Courts; for they are both de^cribed to
be of the same form of Building in the forecited places: 2 King. 7.12.
the last whereof Villalpandus peremptorily interprets of the outward or great
Court of the Temple, Explanat. in Ezech. Tom. 2. Part. 2. Lib. 1. Isagog. Cap.
9. Page 22. Col. 2. D. and Part. 2. in cap. 40. Ezech. lib. 3. cap. 25. and
joins Tostatus with himself in the same Opinion. If so be this be truth, then
it is clear, that Solomon built a stately Wall at least, even round about the
outer or great Court, if he did not porch it round: But Josephus, when he
treats particularly of Solomon's Buildings, Antiq. lib. 8. c. 2. page 266. G.
speaks plainly, that Solomon did porch even the outward Court round about, as
well as the inward. His words are, (...), etc. Without this (meaning the inward
Court-Wall) He built the (...) (or outward Court) which was Holy Ground also,
but not equally to the inward. For he says presently, that no persons but such
as were clean, according to the Law, might enter into it) in quadrangular or
apiece form, erecting great and broad Porches: which seems to refer to the
very last words, even to all sides of the Quadrangle. But if you will not have
Josephus to quarrel with himself, you must interpret him of the Eastern Porches
only, which it is clear, from other places of his Works that Solomon built
them fully. But if the former expression, in Scripture, of the Hewen-stones,
and Cedar-Beams, be meant of Porches, then farewell any niggardly Expositors,
and let Solomon's Buildings be as large and sumptuous as his Heart: only at
the Eastern end, we will delineate double Porches. Now whereas before some
scrupled much of having but a Wall on the West side of the Temple, because of
the forecited expression, that Josephus says, the Temple was naked till
aftertimes: Let Us take the same Author's mind into counsel, and we shall find
he tells us, that Solomon himself did equal those Precipices, and made the
outward Court equal, i.e. In smoothness, to the Court of the Temple, and there
speakin^ of double Porches, says, they were round about. Antiq. l. 8. c. 2.
pa. 263. A.
His words are (...). He compassed that also with double Porches, (...)
referring to the (...), or the outward Court, whereof he is now treating. So
that Josephus acquainting us in his sixth Book, of the Jewish Wars, that in
Solomon's days the Temple was naked and open on all sides but the East; till
after-ages raised the praecipitious declivity, with accumulation of Earth:
(that so he may not appear contradictory to himself) we must explain him of
those vast Substructions of Stone-Walls, raised out of the deep Valleys, and
stately double Porches built upon them, as at the East end: Whereas, if he
means by (...), that it had no Wall, no Court-room, though uneven, and no
single porcht Buildings at all: but that the West End of the covered Temple
stood upon the Brink of the praecipitious Rock; we must make Josephus either a
Liar, or of a slippery-memory, or his present Book to be very corrupt. But, for
my part, I had rather excuse it by a slip of his Pen in this place of the
Jewish Wars, where this (...) is mentioned: Seeing in the Books of the
Antiquities, where he does of set-purpose, handle the famous Acts of the Kings
of his Nation, he plainly tells us, Solomon porcht the Temple-Courts round
about; which we have proved in the second Chapter at large, to have been in
Circuitu Templi, encompassing the covered Building. Now his Books of the Jewish
Antiquities were written after the other of their Wars; as he himself assures
us, Antiq. l. 1. cap. 22. p. 20. F. and lib. 13. cap. 9. p. 443. F. Wherefore
in this last written Book of his Antiquities, clearly describing of Porches
round about, even built by King Solomon, he does tacitly retract his former
error about the nakedness of the Temple in his Jewish Wars; Wherefore I cannot
but wonder at Ribera, and his Proselytes, in this particular, that they should
lay the stress of their opinion about the deformity of the Temple on these two
or three words; so often mentioned; especially seeing he himself gives Josephus
this deplorable Character [saye ita lubricus est, ut cum maxim? tenere eum
credas, elabatur] Riber. de Templ. l. 1. c. 28. He says, a little before, that
he was a grave Historian, and an Eyewitness, and yet presently that he is such
a slippery fellow, that when you do most confide, in having attained the true
sense of his mind, He slips like an Eele through your fingers: Almost as bad as
that Stigma impressed upon another Author, which I have heard of; He was a good
Historian, but that he wanted truth. To let pass then the modern Opinions of
some few that slip down the declivity after Ribera for want of Courts and
Walls, as having no plain Foundation for their own standing, we shall proceed
to a further view of this magnificent Temple; having, we hope, clearly
recovered its pristine luster in the circum-ambient Buildings, and gained most
beautiful Porches, with stately Pillars round about both the Courts: Only
where there were Gates with their Buildings, and Chambers with their Treasuries.

That there were Treasuries and Chambers round about in the Courts, is evident
by King David's Pattern given to Solomon, which no doubt he exactly followed,
or else God would not have declared himself well pleased with his Offerings. 1 Chronicles. 28.11, 12, 13.
The place, for the Pattern, is in the Book of Chronicles, wherein v. 11. we
read of the covered house, with its Porch, Houses, Treasuries. Upper-Chambers,
and Inner-Parlours; and then ver. 12. of the Courts of the House, and all the
Chambers round about, and the Treasuries.

In the Buildings of the Outward Court were the Chambers and Lodgings of the
Levites especially in those near the Gates, 1 Chronicles. 9.27.
where their Offices lay. Some places there were for the Ministerial Vessels,
and the Instruments of the Sanctuary: Other Rooms for fine Flower, Salt, Wine,
Oil, Frankincense, Spices, Ointment, etc. See Ver. 28, 29, 30.

Mattathiah (the firstborn of Shallum) with his Brethren, was Porter at the
Eastgate, and his Office pertained to things made in Pans. So that the
Pastry-Office, it should seem, was in some Rooms of the Eastgate of the
Inner-Court.

Others were appointed over the Shewbread. The place whereof, under the second
Temple, was in Beth-Mokadh, and so possibly under the first.

The Singers also, and Players on Instruments, had their fixed Chambers, which
was under the second, and probably so in the first-Temple, in Nitzotz, or the
Gate of the Song, which was before, called the Gate of the Altar.

But how to dispose all the Chambers and Treasuries exactly, as to the times of
the first Temple, is beyond any Inference from Scripture. If so be the second
was proportionable and conformable in these points to the first: then we need
to exhibit no other then a Transcript of L'Empereur in Middoth, and of the
Learned and excellent pains of Doctor Lightfoot, who has made great use of his
Rabbinical Learning, for the opening of Scripture.

To conclude, whether there were any small low separating, Wall in the higher,
or Priests Court, as we read of under the second, cannot be determined clearly
out of Scripture; and therefore we shall leave that sub judice; and now at
length remove our Camp to the next Chapter.

CHAP. IV. Concerning the Vessels, Vtensils, and other Ornaments of the Temple.
THat we may proceed in some orderly method; let us first place the Heavenly
Household Stuff, within the Covered Temple; and after that, the several Utensils
in their Courts.

Within the covered Building, there were two Ground-Rooms, and a Porch: In each
whereof, we shall find rare and magnificent Ornaments; for the glorious Majesty
of Heaven was pleased to keep house among the Children of Israel, having His
Presence Chamber in the Sanctuary, and His Privy-Chamber in the Oracle.

These glorious Chambers were adorned on all sides with Cherubims, and
Palm Trees, carved in Cedar, and over-laid with Gold, according to this ensuing
Figure. The Figure of the Cherubims, and Palm Trees.
depiction of Cherubim and palm trees which decorated the chambers of the Temple

IN the Oracle, or Holy of Holies, stood these following things:

1. The Ark of the Covenant of the Lord was set in this most Holy place under
the Wings of the Cherubims, the very same that Moses made in the Wilderness:
whereof you have the lively Icon, or Figure, in this ensuing Draught. The View
of the Ark of the Covenant.
depiction of the Ark of the Covenant

THE matter of the Ark read to be Shittim-wood, that grew plentifully in
Arabia, and especially in Abel-Shittim, in the Plains of Moab, Numb. 25.1. and
33.49.
possibly taking its name from that place, where was the 42d Mansion of the
Israelites. The quantity of the Ark was not large, being in length but 2
Cubits, and; in breadth and height equal, viz. One Cubit and a half: It was
over-laid with pure Gold within and without, and had a Crown of Gold round
about.

It had four Golden Rings, two on each side, close by the four corners, with
two staves made of Shittim-wood, Exodus 37.1-6. 1 King. 8.6, 7, 8.
and over-laid with Gold, for the Levites to carry it in the Wilderness: which
very staves were brought into the Temple, to remember the people, that if they
brake God's Covenant, the staves yet remained within the Rings of the Ark, even
in the fixed Temple, ready to bear away the Symbol of God's gracious presence
from them.

2 Chronicles. 5.10. Exodus 32.15, 16. Exo. 32.15. and 34.4. Deuteronomy. 10.3. Deuteronomy. 10.8.
1 Kin. 6.19. Exo. 34.28. 2 Chro. 6.11. 1 King. 8.9. 2 Chro. 5.10.
In this Ark there were the two Tables of Stone, which Moses put therein at
Horeb, whereon were engraven the Ten Commandments, not as they are usually
painted in Churches on two sides only, but on all the four sides of the
Stones. It was the Work of God. It seems they were not very ponderous and
large: because Moses carried them both in one hand. They were called the Tables
of the Covenant, (and the holy Ark wherein they lay, the Ark of the Covenant)
because they contained the Ten Commandments; which if they kept, God made a
Covenant with them to bless them. There was nothing else put within this Holy
Chest, as is expressly declared in two several places of Scripture.

The Mercy-Seat.
Over this Holy Chest, containing the Stone-Tables, there was laid a covering
of pure beaten Gold, called, the Mercy-Seat, equal in its measures of length
and breadth, Exodus 37.6.
to the Ark; and was placed betwixt the Stone-Tables, and the Cherubims:
between whose Wings, God's Majesty is said to sit. It signified Jesus Christ,
the Mediator betwixt God and Us, interposing between God's Wrath and our
Persons, who have broken the Commandments that lay within.

The Cherubims.
Exodus 37.7.
On the two ends of this Mercy-Seat, stood the two Cherubims of Moses, both of
Beaten Gold: Their Name is deduced from (...) to Ride, as some think; because
God is said to ride and to sit between the Cherubims, Psalm. 99.1. Their Form
or Figure was in the shape of young men; as some apprehend from that place of
Scripture, which mentions a young man sitting on the right side of the
Sepulcher of our Blessed Lord, in a long White Garment, Mark 16.5. The same
which the Holy Evangelist Matthew calls the Angel of the Lord, Math. 28.2. Such
also were the Apparitions of Angels, in the days of the Ancient Patriarchs, as
is generally received. [These Cherubims were made out of one Piece, even out of
the Mercy-Seat were they made: Exodus.37.8.
] So that by these words thus repeated, it should seem, that the Mercy-Seat,
and the Cherubims, were made out of one and the same Beaten-Piece of Gold:
which showed the constant attendancy of the Angels upon Jesus Christ. Heb. 2.7.
They stood upon it, 1. Noting, that our Lord, according to His Humane Nature,
was made a little lower then the Angels. Their faces are said to be opposite
one to the other, and made looking down upon the Mercy-Seat, noting their
desire of understanding the Mystery of Christ's Incarnation. 2. They stood upon
the Mercy-Seat, showing that Christ was the Basis, 1 Timothy 5.21. Jud. 6. v.
or Foundation, of the standing or confirmation of the Elect Angels, that
forsook not their first estate. They spread out their Wings on high, noting
their prepared alacrity to fly on the Messages of God; and they stood covered
with their Wings over the Mercy-Seat: Some think, and perhaps not improbably,
according to some of the Prophetical Visions, that these Cherubims had four
Wings: two whereof were lifted up on high, and two covered their feet, Isa. 6.2.
being a modest expression of the Holy Spirit. But it is clear out of that place
in Exodus, that their faces were one to the other; that is, one looked
Southward, Exodus 37.9.
the other Northward; and their Wings also stretched North and South, their
faces being inward. Whereas Solomon's Cherubims stood on the Ground, and their
fuces were toward the House; not inward, as our Translation reads it; but as
the Hebrew (...) and their faces were toward the house; 2 Chr. 3.13.
Both being taken for the Holy Place, and Debir for the Oracle: So that their,
Faces were toward the Holy Place, looking Eastward, downward out of the Oracle,
into the Sanctuary.

There were then, besides Moses his Cherubims standing up the Ark, 2 Chr. 3.13.
v. 10. 1 Kin. 6.23. v. 28. 2 Chronicles. 3.11, 12, 13.
two other Cherubims standing on the Ground, made (as we read it) of
Image-work. The material was of Olive Tree, and overlaid with Gold. Each Wing,
of each Cherubim, was five Cubits long. All four Wings being extended to the
length of Twenty Cubits, viz. the whole breadth of the Oracle. The two inward a
Wings touched each other; and the two ends of the outward Wings touched the
Wall of the House. The height of each of Solomon's was Ten Cubits a piece;
under whose two inward Wings, stood Moses his Ark and Cherubims: These four
Cherubims are likened, in Scripture, to a Chariot of four Wheels, whereon the
Divine Majesty did sit, and utter his infallible Oracles, 1 Chronicles. 28.18. Psalm.
99.1.
and are called therefore the Chariot of the Cherubims; though some think each
of these greater Cherubims stood upon a Chariot, and therefore called so: But
the Text does clearly speak out, that they stood on their feet, 2 Chronicles. 3.13.
which is conceived to be meant not only of their Erect Posture; 2 Chronicles. 5.7.
but also of their Situation upon the Golden-Floor; whereas the other two stood
on the Ark.

Besides the Ark, and these its Appurtenances, there seems (by the Epistle to
the Hebrews) that within this most Holy Place was laid the Pot of Manna, and
Aaron's Rod that budded. Heb. 9.4. Numb. 17.10.
For so (that there may be a clear Reconcilement of Scripture) we must
understand the Author of that Epistle, (by the Relative (...)) to make a
Reference to the Oracle, or Holiest of all, mentioned in the third Verse, and
not the Ark: which relation of a Pronoun, to a remote Antecedent, is not
altogether unusual amongst even some Learned Authors. There be some that think,
possibly, they were in the Ark till Solomon's time; and then, by Divine
Appointment, laid in some other place. For why should Scripture say expressly,
in two places, they were not in the Ark, seeming thereby to imply some change,
1 King. 8.9. 2 Chr. 5.10.
as to this particular: which if so, then the Epistle to the Hebrews, speaking
of Moses's Tabernacle, may consist more Grammatically with it self, and other
Scriptures, if this may be the true mind of the Spirit.

The Golden Censer of Aaron, also, was laid up in some place near the Ark, for
which the forecited Text is as clear as for the other. We read also of five
Golden Emerods, and five Golden Mice, dedicated by the Lords of the Philistims
unto God, when they were smitten for their sin; which were put up into a
Coffer, and sent with the Ark, as a Memorial of God's Vengeance, and of their
Deliverance. But whether they were conveyed into the Holiest Place, with the
Ark, and reserved unto Solomon's Temple, is one of the (...), and therefore we
must leave it for a clearer Discovery. In the time of Moses, there was also the
Book of the Law, called, by some, the Deuteronomion, laid on the side of the
Ark: But whether or no it was placed there in Solomon's days, we do not read:
yet we find in Josiah's Reign, when the Temple was purged, the Book of the Law
was found in the Temple by Hilkiah the Priest; though no express mention be
made of the Oracle.

Of the Vessels and Vtensils in the Sanctuary, or Holy Place.
WE shall dispose these in the same order, that the Scripture mentions them;
that is, First, the Altar of Incense; Then the Tables and the Candlesticks; as
may be seen, 1 King. 7.48, 49. and 2 Chronicles. 4.19, 20.

depiction of the altar of incense The Altar of Incense.


As to the Golden Altar of Incense, it is first requisite to clear it up, that
it was placed in the Sanctuary without the Oracle and its Vail. In Moses his
Tabernacle, it is clear, that it had stood without the Vail. For Moses having
placed the Ark, lets down the Vail, and then places the Table Northward, the
Candlestick Southward, and this Altar before the Vail; Exodus 40, 3, 21, 23, 26.
that is, at the upper end of this Room just in the middle before the Vail. But
a clear Inference we have out of Leviticus, where, upon the Expiation Day, the
High Priest was to take a Censer full of Burning-Coals of Fire from off the
Altar before the Lord, and his hands full of sweet Incense beaten small, and
bring it within the Vail. Lev. 16.12.


If the Altar stood within the Vail, then it were absurd to say thus, that
Aaron took a Censer of Coals from off the Altar within the Vail, and brought it
within the Vail. But when as its Position was without, it is properly said, that
with these prepared things he went from the Altar into the Oracle within the
Vail, to burn sweet Odours. Again the Text says, that after the High Priest had
done sprinkling the Mercy Seat, with the blood of the Bullock, and the Goat, 7
times, that he shall go out unto the Altar, that is before the Lord, and put
blood upon its Horns, and sprinkle it 7 times. If so be then Aaron must go one
of the most Holy Place, before he can come to this Altar: It Is evident, Lev.
16.18.
that the Altar did not stand within the Vail. Thus much I desired to add, to
that common and urgent Argument, of the daily burning of Incense by every
inferior Priest, in his course upon this Altar, who could not have admission
within the Oracle, being open only once a year, and to the High Priest only
on the solemn day of Expiation. For so we find the High Priest, and eighty
inferior Priests, with King Uzziah, at this Incense-Altar; who durst not go
into the Oracle, 2 Chronicles. 26.17. Now that Solomon's Altar was placed also in
the Holy Place, appears by the Text alleged, which says it was situate by the
Oracle, implying, that it was not within it, 1 King. 6.22.

There is nothing worth answering, that I know of, which can be opposed, but
that foresaid place of the Apostle, where it is said, Heb. 9.4.
concerning the Golden Censer, that it was in the most Holy Place. To which, I
say, either it is to be understood of that Censer, that was thus brought into
this Oracle within the Vail once a year by the High Priest, and so may be truly
said to be in the Oracle, though not constantly, yet at solemn times; or else
we must think of some other Interpretation. For whereas this may be conceived
by some but an evasion; because the Apostle seems by the word (...) not to note
a Temporary, but constant possession, not only ad usum, but ad situm: for that
the very same word, (...), in the same verse, is spoken of the Pot of Manna,
which, who knows not but continued many 100 years within the Pot. There be
some, therefore, would expound the word, (...), for the Altar of Incense it
self: But are forced to do violence to the word. For in all the Septuagint
Bible, I think they cannot manifest one place, where it is by them put for the
Altar, whose Greek it is known, that the New Testament Pen men chiefly follow.
Nay, in its native sense, it signifies Incense only, and, by a Metonomy, the
Censer wherein it was put. But to admit a double Trope to ride upon one word,
is as harsh, as rare. Wherefore, to reconcile this place to the Old Testament,
I take it to signify a Censer: For so the Epithete [Golden] challenges it from
its native signification of Incense: And I humbly conceive, that possibly we
may understand by it the Censer of Aaron, wherewith he burned Incense, when two
hundred and fifty men, with their Censers, were appointed, by God, to try with
him, Numb. 16.17.
who it was that God had appointed to that Office. After the two hundred and
fifty men were consumed by Fire, Ver. 25. Ver. 38.
their Censers were hallowed, and Plates made of them for the Altar, for a sign
to the Children of Israel. Now, though the Text in Numbers does not tell us
that Aaron's Censer was particularly laid up: yet, if we interpret this place
in the Hebrews of that Censer, it is no way repugnant to any Scripture, nor to
the Analogy of Faith: But helps exceedingly to inlighten and reconcile that
place. I am the more induced to incline to it, because it is joined with two
other things, viz. the Pot of Manna, and Aaron's Rod: both which were laid up
there, as a token of their Murmuring and Rebellion against the Lord, being two
miraculous Effects, which God produced presently, upon their murmuring, to
demonstrate the Omnipotent Presence of the Divine Majesty, against whom, and
His instituted Ministers, they had so grievously murmured. So then, after this
grand murmr of Korah, there being two Miracles produced; the one, the
swallowing up of many in the Earth; the other, the burning of two hundred and
fifty, by fire, from Heaven: for the remembrance of it, this Censer, possibly,
was added, as another Token, together with the Pot of Manna and Aaron's Rod, to
be laid up in the Oracle before the Lord. There is nothing to be objected
against this sense, but that because the Altar of Incense is omitted, ver. 2.
therefore it is brought in ver. 4. and to be understood to be within the second
Vail, quoad usum, only. To this I answer, That the Altar standing without the
Vail, Aaron might take this Golden Censer that lay within the Vail, and with it
taking Fire-Coals off the Altar, and Incense in his hands, come and perfume the
most Holy Place. I dare not be peremptory, in this point; although that a
certain Golden Censer lay in the Oracle, constantly within the Vail, according
to the express terms of the Apostle, is the mind of Learned Mr. Weemse, in his
Exposition of the Ceremonial Laws, page 48. However it be, I submit my
Conjecture to all sober and learned persons; having, I hope, before evinced the
true Position of the Altar of Incense, to be without, but near the Vail, which
we now proceed briefly to describe.

Exodus 30.1-10.
The Altar of Incense, which Moses made, was, for matter, of Shittim-Wood, and
over-laid with pure Gold round about. For form, apiece: For quantity or
measure, two Cubits high: And as for length and breadth, one Cubit in each. It
had a Crown of Gold round about, four Horns, two Rings, and two Staves. There
be some hold, that Solomon cased the ancient one of Moses with Cedar, and so
made a larger over it. A pretty fancy quickly vented: Whereas we shall find
expressly, that Solomon made one complete.

1 Chronicles. 18.28. 1 King. 8.4, 6. 2 Chronicles. 5.5, 7.
For, first, we read, that David prepared refined Gold, by weight, on purpose
for the Altar of Incense. Besides, when the Scripture says, that the Priests
brought up the Ark, and all the Holy Vessels of the Tabernacle; It mentions
only the carrying of the Ark into the Temple, though Negative Authority is not
absolutely Cogent; yet when as Solomon is written to have made another, and
this is not mentioned to have been brought into the Temple, but rather laid up
in some of the Chambers, I think we may safely shut Moses his Altar out of this
pregnant Belly of Solomon's. That Solomon made one, is expressly mentioned in two
distinct places; and in a 3d place, 1 King. 7.48. 2 Chronicles. 4.19. 1 King. 6.20,
22.
that the inward material was of Cedar, and over-laid with Gold. How large it
was, we read not, if we may double the quantity of Moses his Altar, it may be
we may not transcend the limits of Truth: but it is best of all to be silent
with Scripture.

depiction of the table of shewbread The Tables of Shewbread.


IN the next place succeed the Golden Tables of Shewbread: as to which, 1 Chronicles. 48.16. 1 King. 7.48. 2 Chro. 4.8.
we find Gold prepared for them by King David; as also Silver; for the Tables
of Silver, whose use of situation we ye^ read not. In the Kings we read but of
one Table: But, in the Chronicles, we find expressly ten in number; together
with their Situation, five on the right, and five on the left side of the
Sanctuary. The Description of Moses his one Table may be seen at large in the
Book of Exodus But the Dimensions of Solomon's we have not; though possibly
double to his, Exodus 25.23-29.
accordingly as the place wherein they were set was double to his in capacity.
Some think that Moses his Golden Table was one, and the nine rest were
according to that cize, wherein we shall be utterly silent. 2 Chronicles. 4.19. Dr.
Lightfoot, c. 14.. 5. Lev. 24.7. Exodus 25.29.
The use (we read) was to set the Shewbread upon them. On each Table, there
were set twelve Cakes, six in a Row, one upon another. They were square, and
not round, as usually figured, with a Golden Dish of Frankincense, on the
highest Cake, with Spoons, Covers, and Bowls of Gold. The Form of this Table,
exhibited in the Draught, is according to Arias Montanus, the difference
therein being only, as to the length of the Cakes, which lay overthwart,
exceeding the breadth of the Table, as some conceive. We have added a little
Coronet only to the Brim of the Table; as we read, Exodus 25.25.

depiction of one of the ten golden candlesticks The Golden-Candlesticks, ten
in number, the same with this in view.


The last things to be mentioned, are the Candlesticks. 1 King. 7.49. Exodus
25.31. 1 Chronicles. 28.15. 2 Chronicles. 4.8. 1 Chronicles. 8.15.
Their matter was of pure Gold prepared by King David. Their fashion, probably,
like that of Moses. Their number was expressly ten. Their situation was five on
the right side, and five on the left side of the House, that is, of the
Sanctuary, even as in Moses Tabernacle; the Lamps are said to shine without the
Vail of the Testimony, Lev. 24.3. In their height, and the extension of their
Branches, Scripture is silent; Besides these, there is mention made of Silver
Candlesticks designed by David, but how large, and where placed, or used, the
sacred Leaves do not inform us.

The Figure of the Candlestick here presented, is according to Learned Montanus
his Conjecture upon the Mosaical Description. We have varied in the Foot only,
taking our pattern from the Figure of that Candlestick, which the Roman
Emperor brought from Jerusalem in triumph; the fashion whereof, in some good
measure, pourtrayed on Stone, is, as I remember, yet remaining, or very lately,
at Rome; and drawn forth to the life by Villalpundus, in that noble Book of
his, concerning Ezechiel's Temple.

Besides all this, for the services of the Golden Altar, the Tables and the
Candlesticks, there were many excellent Vessels of pure Gold, made by Solomon,
which were appointed by his Father: as an 100 Basins of Gold, Bowls, Ce^sers,
Cups, Flowers, Lamps for the Candlesticks, Snuffers, Spoons, Tongs, and all of
pure Gold, besides some Basins of Silver; as may appear to them that will
examine these ensuing places, 1 King. 7.49, 50. 1 Chronicles. 28.13.17. and 2 Chronicles.
4.8, 20, 21, 22.

depiction of the two pillars on the porch of the Temple The two Pillars
standing in the Porch of the Temple.


1 King. 7.15. Jer. 52.21. 1 King. 7.19
NExt, in view, come the two famous Pillars which stood in the Porch of the
Temple; and were, for Matter, Brass; for Form, Cylinders; for Height, 18 Cubits
a piece; for Compass, twelve Cubits; for Diameter, about four Cubits, which is
conceived to be the meaning of that expression, That they were four Cubits in
the Porch, that is, the Chapiters were four Cubits Diameter, and so the Brass
Cylinder under them, taking up so much ground-room in the Porch. But some there
be, who would have the meaning to be this, that the Lilly-Work, which hung over
the Pillars, was four Cubits deep round about the Chapiters. Indeed, the
Chapiters seem to be of an Oval Form, for, their Diameter, in their middle, was
four Cubits, and their Height five, if we compare the 1 King. 7.1.6. with the
19. ver. For having declared the measures of the Pillars, ver. 15. He proceeds
to describe the Measures and Ornaments of the Chapiters, and tells us v. 16.
that the height of each was five Cubits; and then mentioning some of their
Ornaments, goes on to tell us, that the top of the Pillars (where they were
placed) was of Lilly-Work, and that the Chapiters thus situated on the top of
the Pillars, which had a compass of Lilly-Work at their upper edge, were four
Cubits, that is, in their middle Dimetient Line, and so were about twelve
Cubits round, like unto the Pillar beneath. So that we may read and point the
19th verse thus, [And the Chapiters which were on the head of the Pillars of
Lilly-work, were in the Porch four Cubits] that is, did comprehend in the Line
measuring their Belly, as much as would take up four Cubits on the Floor of the
Porch. So that (...) Opus Lilli, is by apposition to be construed with (...)
Caput Columnarum; and the other words. [Four Cubits in the Porch] are to
delineate the quantity of these Chapiters that stood on the Lilly-wrought head
of the Pillars. The Accounts for this Construction may be twofold.

First, because this Verse aims not, at the mention of the Lilly-work on the
Pillars: for if it did, then were it superfluous to mention it again, as a
particular work by it self, v. 22. Wherefore it seems, that this verse aims
rather at the Description of the Chapiters set upon that Lilly-work, which are
the principal things, and so more nicely described, the Lilly work being but an
Ornament. But,

Secondly, if the hole of the Chapter resting on the Pillar with this
Lilly-work sustaining it, were as large as the Pillar it self, as is affirmed
by some, to let in the top of the Pillar; and that this Lilly-work on the top
of the Pillar, in a circling Border, stood out four Cubits in the Porch, at the
bottom of the Chapter, fastened to the top of the Pillar, then will there
arise twelve Cubits Diameter, that is, four of the Pillar, and four on each
side of this Lilly-work, and so the pillars will be shut out of the Porch,
which was but ten Cubits broad, 1 King. 6.3.

On the top of the Pillars then were two Chapiters, of five Cubits higher then
the Pillars with Nets of Checker-work; and each Pillar had seven Wreaths of
Chain-work, with two Rows of Pomegranates; in each Row, 2 Chr. 4.12. 1 King.
7.16. 1 Kin. 7.41. Jer. 52.23. 2 Chr. 4.13. 2 Chr. 3.16. 1 Kin. 7.42. 2 Chr.
3.15.
one hundred; but ninety six only could be seen by those that stood upon the
Pavement of the Porch. So that there were on both Chapiters four hundred goodly
Pomegranates in all, which were put upon Chains in two Rows. Both Pillars,
joined together in their measure, were but thirty five Cubits high, that is,
twice eighteen, bating one Cubit, because each Chapter did sink half a Cubit
within the Socket of the Cylinder for their fastening. So that each Pillar, with
its Chapter, was twenty two Cubits, and high. The Pillars seventeen, and, and
the Chapter five: Whereas it is said, each Chapter was but three Cubits high,
2 Kin. 25.17. Dr. Lightfoot. page 61. etc.
it is to be understood of the stately Embroidery, and Ornaments of Network,
Chains, and Pomegranates, which were at the beginning of the third Cubit. Thus
being fitted and prepared, they were placed within the Porch; the Pillar on the
right side that is, the South was called Jachin, being the future Hiphil from
(...) stabilire, He shall establish: noting the fixedness of this pillar upon
its Foundation, 1 King. 6.21.
and that on the left hand, or on the North side, was called Boaz, in Hebr. --
(...). 1 King. 7.21. 2 King. 25.13. Rev. 3.12.
being compounded of (...) in it, and (...) strong, or potent, from (...) to
strengthen, or fortify: Denoting the strength and firmitude of that stately
piece of Brass. These famous Pillars, though never so strong, were broken in
pieces, and conveyed to the City of Babylon; but Saints, that are Spiritual
Pillars in the House of God, shall go no more out of that Heavenly Temple.

depiction of the altar of brass The Altar of Brass.

Of the Vessels in the Priest's Court.
THe most useful of all the Spectacles in this Court, and which fell under 2
Chro. 4.1. 2 Chro. 8.12. Joel 2.17. 1 Chr. 28.17. 2. Chr. 4.11. 1 King. 7.45.
Exodus 20.25. Deuteronomy. 27.5. Exodus 20.26.
which was twenty Cubits long, twenty broad, and ten in height. Its Situation
was before the Porch, that is, full East of it, whereon the Sacrifices were
offered to God. The place of it is confirmed by that passage of the Priest's
weeping between the Porch and the Altar. As to the Sacrifices, we read of many
Instruments that were made for them; as Flesh-hooks of Gold: also Pots,
Shovels, and Basins of bright Brass. Two things I would add; First, that
probably, this Altar was made within of Stone, but unhewen, according to God's
command, and placed over with Brass. Secondly, That whereas God had commanded
the Priest should not ascend by steps to his Altar, and seeing this of ten
Cubits was so high, as far exceeded the stature of the call High Priest:
some think it was but three Cubits high, as the Altar of Moses was (where, by
the way take notice, the ordinary statute of man being but six foot, as
Vitruvius, and others, have of old written, that is, about two yards of our
measure; and this Altar being but a yard and half, we learn something of the
quantity of a Cubit; whereof otherwhere) Now that it is said to be ten Cubits
high, it is to be understood, say some, in respect to the Court of the people,
which was seven Cubits lower then this of the Priests. But I rather incline to
think, there was, as under the second Temple, an easy ascent by a declivity on
the South side, though not by steps.

The Brazen Scaffold.
Next succeeds the Brazen Scaffold, whereof we have given no Icon, 2 Chr. 6.13.
Exodus 27.1. and 38.1.
but only served the King in his Temple-approaches unto God, As to its
Description then it was five Cubits long, five broad, and three high, being
exactly, according to the proportion of Moses his Brazen Altar, I cannot say,
'twas the same, because the Text speaks expressly, that Solomon made it for to
stand upon, and kneel in prayer at the solemn Dedication of the Temple. Neither
will I be peremptory, that it stood in this Court of the Priests: though these
passages of Scripture seem to favor it.

First, the Author of the Book of Chronicles acquaints us, that it stood in the
midst of the Court, and that Solomon being upon it, 2 Chr. 6.13. v. 12.
is said to stand before the Altar of the Lord: which Altar, together with the
Court and Temple, he was now about to hallow with his prayers and sacrifices.
So that, as the Altar of Incense is said to be before the Oracle: and the Altar
of Brass before the Porch, that is, East of them, and nigh to them: so this,
before the Altar, stood East of it, but nigh unto it.

Secondly, The Scripture says, that after prayer (which was made upon this
Scaffold) He arose from before the Altar, which implies, his nearness to it,
according to the usual Hebraism of that phrase. 1 King. 8.54.
Now whereas it may be here objected, that the King being no Priest, might not
enter into that Court.

I answer, though ordinarily he might not, as some conceive; yet upon
extraordinary service, it is probable Solomon might and did. Nay, being at the
Dedication, to offer Sacrifices, (that is, by mediation of the Priests service)
why might not he draw nigh to his Sacrifices, as well as any private man in his
particular time of offering up any Sacrifice to God. 2 Chro. 7.7. Dr.
Light-foot, second Temple, page 283.
However, in the placing of this Utensil, I freely submit to the censure of the
Learned, in Jewish Antiquities: as also whether Adrichomius, in his Holy Land,
placing it in this Court. page 161. annexing a citation of Hierom to that
purpose, is to be trusted in this particular; an Author, I confess, ordinarily
too magisteriall in his assertions.

To conclude, It is supposed, that the King's Pillar, mentioned in the Sacred
Story, was annexed to this Scaffold, whereon the King did sit or stand, or
kneel as occasion was, before the Altar. Of which you may read in the life of
Joash, and Josiah, Kings of Judah, 2 King. 23.3. In the life of Joash, it is
particularly written, that the King stood at his Pillar, in the en^ring in, 2 Chronicles. 23.13. that is, near the entering into the Priests Court. For if we
carefully observe the 10th verse we read, that the people, with their Weapons,
were placed along by the Temple and the Altar, round about the King: and where
should this be, but in the Priests Court, where the Covered Temple, and the
Altar stood. Besides, to remove one Objection these people, verse 10. are
called the Levites, with their Weapons compassing the King, verse 7. Besides,
after this, when Athaliah was come into the House of the Lord, that is, the
first Court, verse 12. She looked, and saw the King standing at His Pillar near
the Entry of the second Court, v. 13. and cried, I reason, Treason. Then
Jehojadah brought the Captains of the Host, v. 14. that were about the King in
the Inner-Court, out into the other Court, and pursued Athaliah, and slew her.
But I freely resign up this Conjecture, to the Learned and diligent Inquirer.

depiction of the brazen basin The Brazen-Sea


THe third Utensil to be mentioned, is the brazen Sea, sometimes called the
molten Sea of Brass, a most rare and admirable piece: cast in the clay ground
between Succoth and Zarthan, in the plains of Jordan. For the matter; 1 King.
7.46.
it was of pure bright Brass: For form, Villalpandus following Josephus
apprehends it to have been hemispericall: In 1 King. c. 7. p. 158 edit. Meur. 1
King. 7.23.
so does Procopius Gazeus in his notes upon the Kings, (...). To this agrees
Torniellus in his annals, etc. which conjecture they conceive to be favored
and countenanced by that expression of Scripture which tells us that it was
round all about. But some more properly expound that expression of the brim
only, whereas beneath it might be foursquare: because we read of twelve Oxen
on which it rested: Every 3 Oxen faceing each of the four winds, and having
their hinder parts inward, under each square of the bottom of this great
Vessel, and thence do conjecture, that for three Cubits high it was
foursquare, and for the 2 highest Cubits it was round. Petrus Commestor in his
Hist. Scholastica, has yet another conjecture about the external form of this
Vessel in Reg. l. 3. c. 18. viz. That in its descent from the brim, it was
continually narrower by degrees to the very bottom: So that in its fundus a
line of ten Cubits would compass it about. Whence he learnt it, or how he can
prove it, he does not mention.

If either of these opinions should prove true, then Villalpandus his
inference, of the measure of the Hebrew Cubit, deduced from the comparison of
the cubitall dimensions of this Vessel with, and proportion to the number of
Hebrew Baths contained within, it will be greatly weakened.

We will not yet at present bid an utter farewell to Villalpandus his Cubit,
raised from his apprehension of the figure and shape of this Vessel as
sphaericall: Although it does not consist with the Quantity of a Cubit or a
Bath, deduced from other foundations: On which, as a more certain ground, we
may build the Extent of the cubitall measure, and the capacity of this Vessel,
according to the method proposed by Agricola, in his Tract De restituendis
Ponderibus and Mensuris, and by learned Mr. Greaves, at the end of his Roman
Foot, which is this, that from the external measure of some cubed Vessel of
the Hebrews, we may find the quantity of the Cubit, and consequently of the
Bath, and thereby at length prove that this Vessel was not (...) but rather
(...), or like a cone cut off in the midst. But this I leave to another
disquisition.

Besides, as to Villalpandus, it seems that according to his own hypothesis of
a hemisphaericall figure, he commits a gross paralogism in multiplying half
the circumference, 30 Semicubits. 10 Semicubits. 300 The Area of Semicubits. 15
Cubits. 5 Cubits. 75 Area.
thirty, by half the Diameter, ten, to find the Area: And then the Area, so
found, he multiplies by the third part of the Diameter, all which he performs
by semi-cubits, which I shall manifest only as to the Area at present. For if
multiplication be made by semi-cubits, then the Area will prove to be 300
semi-cubits, and consequently 150 Cubits, whereas if you work it by entire
Cubits, there issues but 75 Cubits of the Area of the great circle, whose
circumference is 30, and Diameter ten, 1 Kin. 7.23.
as this Brazen Sea is described to be, which is only laid down in round
numbers, and not according to exact geometrical proportion. But to leave this
at present. 1 Kin. 7.26.
The capacity of this Vessel in one place is set out at two thousand Baths, 2 Chronicles. 4.5.
in another at three thousand. Which is thus solved by some learned men, that
the ordinary filling was only with two thousand Baths, but if you would fill
it up to the very brim, it would then contain three thousand, which solution
the Hebrew phrase in the Chronicles seems to import clearly (...), Fortificans,
Batos ter mill continebat; If you strengthen or fill up its measure it
contained 3 thousand Baths. Indeed Villalpandus labors to untye the difficulty
by a double Bath, the one being in proportion sesquialtera to the other. Some
think to untiddle it by dry and liquid measures: which might easily be refuted
in a proper place: the whole discourse we shall at present referr unto the
Treatise of the Hebrew Measures. The Quantities of this brazen Vessel in
Scripture are as follows, 1 Kin. 7.23. 1 Kin. 7.26.
its Diameter ten Cubits its Semidiameter five Cubits, its Circumference
thirty, its Crassitude a hand-breadth. Now it is known that the circumference of
a Circle, is more then triple to the Diameter by such a proportion, as is
greater then 10/^1 and less then 7/1 of the same. As you may read in
Archimedes his acute Tract called, (...), in these words, (...). Together with
Rivaltus his Comment set forth at Paris 1615 in folio, page 139. But the
nearest rational proportion between them is as 7 to 22 and accordingly, if 10
be the Diameter (as here in this brazen sea) then the Circumference will prove
to be thirty one Cubits and 3/7, which will again exceedingly disturb the
exactnes of Villalpandus his Cubit: who though he do grant the Scripture not to
speak geometrically in this point: yet, to raise the fabric of his Cubit he
proceeds by these round and vulgar numbers to the stating of his Cubit for
Temple Measures: which being built on such an unsound Basis can give little
hope of satisfaction to any curious enquirer.

But to proceed. 1 Kin. 7.26.
The Brim was wrought like the Brim of a cup with flowers of Lillies. Under the
Brim of this Vessel there were brazen knops about ten in a Cubit compassing
the Sea round about, 1 Kin. 7.24. 2 Chro. 4.3. 2 Chro. 4.4.
in the similitude of Oxen, these were cast together with the Vessel, for its
beauty and ornament.

It stood upon 12 brazen Oxen, three whereof, with their faces together toward
the East, beheld the glorious Sun, when he gilded the Temple with his orient
beams: the rest, mean while, with their loud bellowings, flaming out of their
brazen lungs, made an ecchoing thunder to leap about the Pavements, Walls, and
marble Porches, awakening the careful Priests and hastening them to the morning
services.

As to the situation of this famous Sea: It was set, says our English
translation, on the right side of the House Eastward, over against the South, 1
Kin. 7.39. 2 Chr. 4.10.
or as it is described in the Chronicles, On the right side of the East end
over against the South, where we rendering the Hebrew (...) over against, have
given occasion to some to place it on the North side of the Priests Court,
toward the North-East corner, whereas it is clear out of many Authors that the
Hebrews took the right hand for the South, and therefore it is that the same
Hebrew word (...) signifies the right hand and the South, Psalm. 89.12. The
North and South thou have created them, it is in the Hebrew The North and the
right hand, i. e. The South. So 1 Samuel 23.19. and 2 Samuel 24.^5. Besides, there
is a clear place that may decide this point in hand, in the Prophecy of
Ezechiel, where the Prophet says, Ezekiel. 47.1.
the Waters came down from the right side of the House, at the South side of
the Altar. So in Ezekiel 16.46. Samaria (being North) is said to be on the
left, and Sodom (Southerly) is said to be on the right hand of Jerusalem.
Josephus also makes sure work speaking of the placeing the ten Lavers, and this
Sea. Antiq. lib. 8. cap. 2. p. 271. G.
in Solomon's days: (...), He placed five Lavers on the left side of the
Temple: But this (i. e. the left side) was toward the North wind, and as many
on the right hand Southward, looking toward the East. Ribera joins with us in
this account, saying, The South Wall is called the right side; as Bede, Chap.
8. and others have noted, because he that looks toward the East, has the
South on his right hand, the North on his left. Wherefore the 70. in this
place, have rendered it, (...). and the Vulgar Translation, ad meridiem. Those
that please may read Buxtorf, Pagnine, Mercer, Schindler in Pentaglott, majori,
Avenarius, and other Learned Lexicographers, in the word Jamin: who all agree,
that the right side, among the Jews, is to be interpreted by the South. Seeing
also that Mimmul, the word in the Text, is frequently used for coram, 1 Kin.
7.39.
versus: I hope it will be accounted no immodesty if we, with the general
consent of the most Learned in the Hebrew Tongue, declaring the right side,
both in Scripture, and Jewish Authors, to be the South: I say, if we translate
that place thus, [on the right side of the house Eastward, toward the South,]
and so accordingly place it in the South-East corner of the Court of the
Priests. 2 Chr. 4.6.
The use of which Vessel is expressly declared to be for the Priests to wash in,
which we may crave leave to expound by that expression of Moses concerning his
Laver, that the Priests were to wash (...) ex illa, out of it, that is, as the
Vulgar Translation very well glosses it, Missa aqua lavabant, putting or
pouring out water, they washed, Exodus 30.19. and therefore we have exhibited
the Picture of it with a Siphon and Cock, to let out water into any Vessel at
liberty, to wash the hands and feet of the Priests, according to Torniellus,
and others. That the Priests did wash their Bodies within this vast Vessel,
seems very improbable.

First, from the great height of it above the Pavement, it being five Cubits
higher, besides the thickness of the Brass, above the backs of the Oxen.

2. From its Sphaeroidical Figure, according to the common apprehension, there
being no place but the Center, for a Priest to stand in; and a hundred to one
but his heels tript up, as he went in to such a decliving Vessel.

Thirdly, from the depth of the Water, which according to any of the imagined
Figures of either exactly Sphaerical, or Sphaeroidical, or conical, or halt
square toward the bottom, and half of it round upward toward the brim: It
will fall out, according to the usual quantity of a Bath, that such a Vessel,
that has two thousand, (much more, if three thousand Baths) and has also but
such a Diameter, as ten Cubits at the brim, will serve to swim, rather then to
stand in, and wash the body: so that unless the Priests had skill in that Art,
for ought I see, they must be drowned, or dive to the bottom, to seek some
Rabbinical Treasure. But herein, as in all other things, I shall freely submit
to the Judgment of sober and learned persons; resting rather, at present, on
this Conception, that the Priests did wash their bodies at, or in some moderate
Vessels, which received the Water from Spouts, or Cocks, running at pleasure,
and derived from this stately Sea of Brass. Now whereas the Figure expresses a
short Column of Brass, with a broad Foot resting upon the Oxen, we have done
it in connivence to Torniellus, rather then my apprehension, conceiving rather,
that the Fundus, or bottom of the Vessel, rested immediately upon the Oxen.

Of the ten Lavers, with their Appurtenances, standing in the Priests Court.
IN the fourth place, we are to speak of the ten Lavers, which we find standing
in this Court likewise. The matter whereof was Brass: the capacity of each was
forty Baths. Every one was four Cubits in its measure, that is, as some
interpret it, four Cubits square, according to the Bases, whereon they stood.
Each Base being four Cubits long, as many broad, and three in height. They
stood upon four Brazen Wheels: one Wheel being fixed on each square side of the
Basis. The outside of these Bases were carved with the Similitudes of Oxen,
Cherubims, Lions, and Palm Trees. Their more ample Description (running for the
most part parallel, with the Learned Pen of Dr. Lightfoot, Pap. 229, etc.
in his Paraphrase upon the forecited place) I shall here subjoyn in these
following Sections; for seeing the Holy Spirit is pleased to enlarge very amply
in their Descriptions, I hope all Religious and Devout Readers will not think a
miss of the expense of a little time for the arriving in some good measure, at
the meaning of that Blessed Spirit, in the intricate Description (as to our
Translation) of that rare material of this sacred Temple, in this method
following, accordingly as the ensuing Pages will more evidently demonstrate.

The Figure of one of the Lavers.
depiction of a Temple laver 1. The Water in the Laver. 2. Its Lilly-like Lip.
3. The Upper-Border. 4. The Upper-Base. 5. The lower Border. 6. The Railes. 7.
The sloping Shelves. 8. The underpropping Pillars. 9. The Wheels. 10. The
Ground-plate.




A Description of the Figure and Composition of the ten Bases, with their
Lavers.
HEre let it be premised, that seeing every one of the ten Bases, and their
Lavers, were of the same External Form, and internal matter, we may view the
Faces of all of them in the Glass of one and the same particular Description
exhibited in these following Sections, or Paragraphs; wherein, for the main, we
shall follow Learned Dr. Lightfoot, as near as may be in the same footsteps*
Second Temple, p, 229.
craving leave to vary somewhat from him in our method and form of words; and
in some other, though not a very sensible or grand difference.

1. A Flat Piece of Brass.
1. In the first place then, there were stately pieces of Brass provided for
this use, taking up, in their Dimensions, four Cubits in breadth, 1 King. 7.27.
and the same in length, being styled in the Hebrew Text (...) Machina, the
Machinations of Brass, if we may have leave so to term them, in respect to the
rare vastness of their Bodies. The thickness of them is not so sufficiently
mentioned in the Text, as to take away the Foundation of Conjectures. Wherefore
some have apprehended the height mentioned in the same verse, to hint out and
imply the Crassitude inquired after. But the greatness of such a weight, and
the conceived uselessness of such a thickness, as three Cubits recited in that
Text, inclines others to give in a different construction of these words, as
if the height there mentioned should not respect the main body it self of the
Base, but relate rather to the distance of the Earth beneath, from the summity
or e^ge of its upper Surface. From which Conjecture as being most probable,
and, in some measure, deducible out of the Altitude of the Wheels, to be
treated of in their place and order: The thickness of these huge flat pieces of
Brass will be evinced to consist but of one Cubit and half, which will prove
vast and considerable enough to our purpose.

2. The Borders.
2. In the next place, upon consultation with the forementioned Text, we find
in our Translation mention made of certain Borders, Ver. 28.
termed in the Original (...) and turned by Montanus, Clausurae, or Shuts of
Brass, from (...) to include, or enclose. The 70. use the words (...) and
(...), to express the force of the Hebrew much to the same purpose. But Junius
fancies an elegant Vitruvian term, whereby to express the mind of the Holy
Spirit, according to his Conception, and calls them Zophori (...), by reason of
the Sculptures of the Similitudes of Lions, Oxen etc. in a most lively manner
upon the outside of these Brazen Borders. To proceed to their Description:
There were provided certain pieces of Brass of an oblong square the length of
each of their 4 sides, extended almost to 4. Cubits, being joined near to the
outmost edge of the Horizontal Plain of the great Base, according (well near)
with the length of that great Inferior Base: Ver. 28.
their breadth was but of half a Cubit, or thereabouts, standing upright, or
perpendicular to the flat Base, making a right Angle at the bottom with the
Base, in a perfect square Figure on all the four sides round about. Ver. 29.
and 36.
This Brazen Border, for its more curious Ornament and Beauty, was engraven
with Lions, Oxen, Cherubims, and Palm Trees, which are not fully expressed in
the Figure foregoing, by reason of its small quantity.

3. The Ledges.
Ver. 28.
3. On both sides of this upright Brazen Border, insisting perpendicularly upon
the plane of the flat Base beneath, both the inside and outside of the Border
thus curiously wrought with Image-Work, there stood in orderly Rows, little
upright Brazen Columns, or Bars; which in our Translation are termed [Ledges]
but in the Hebrew Text they are styled. (...) or Scaling Degrees, much like the
Rounds of a Ladder: The same word almost, being used by Moses in Exodus 26.
ver. 17. and turned by Pagnine [the degrees of a Ladder] where the Holy Penman
is sedulously describing the Tenons of the Boards of the Tabernacle, as set in
order one against another, according to the words of our last Translation in
that place. The 70. in this present Text (which we have in hand) renders the
Hebrew word by, (...), the Out-settings, or Prominencies of Brass: By some they
are called Gradus and Scalae; by Junius, Tori Denticulati, that is, Bars
standing upright like Teeth. We may perhaps fitly express their Fashion to
ordinary Conceptions, by the round-turned Rails of a Balcony: which, if we
imagine to be double-railed with a thin upright Board let down betwixt them,
may possibly give in a true apprehension of the form of these Ledges with their
Borders, as they are called in our Translation. The height of which Ledges, or,
more properly, Bars of Brass, standing upright in two Rows, and receiving
betwixt the inner and outward Row, a Border, or apiece upright piece of
Brass wrought with Images, and being much of the same height with the Bars, we
read to have been about half a Cubit erected above the even Surface of the vast
Basis beneath.

4. The Vpper-Base.
Ver. 35.
4. Upon the Top of these Ledges, or Bars, standing thus upright, and enclosing
the Brazen Border, both within and without, there was another flat piece of
Brass provided; and being laid Horizontally, rested upon these Ledges and
Borders. It is called in Hebrew (...), By the 70. (...) only; by Junius,
Fulcrum Superne, and, by our Translators, [the Base above] and was lesser by
much in all its Dimensions, than the inferior grand Base beforementioned,
over which it lay fixed upon the Brazen Pillars, parallel to it at the distance
of half a Cubit.

5 The Additions.
5. At the bottom of the little Brazen Bars, Ver. 29.
and the Borders betwixt them, before described, beneath the Lions and Oxen,
insculped upon those Borders, that is, even just where the Borders had their
Commissurae, or Connexions with the great Base, on which they stood erect:
There were certain Additions of thin work fixed, as our Translators render the
original word (...): which Montanus is pleased to turn by [Copulationes] seeing
it is derived from the Radix (...) adhaerere, to cleave, or to be joined to any
other Workmanship, as an Appendix. The 70. in their Version, are taken with
these words, (...), the Works of Descension, or the Descending Workmanship.
Junius turns it by Adjectiones, or Additions, viz. of Beaten-Work, that is,
declining, sloping, or shelving Plates of Brass, like those Pend-houses, which
we use to fasten with Brackets, or otherwise, over Doors and Windows, or
Drapers shops, to shoot off Rain and stormy Weather from the former, or to
falsify Lights, for the better vending of their spurious Commodities. These
Plates of Brass, in this manner, fastened to the upper edge of the great Base
(covering the superior part of the Wheels, which stood under their inward
declivity) were contrived into this declining posture, for that end to which
they were designed, that is, to cast off the filth, when the Priests washed the
several parts of the Sacrifices upon them with Water, taken either in Vessels
for that purpose, or derived through Cocks and Spouts, out of the Laver it
self, upon these thin Additions, Appendixes, or Pend-houses of Brass, if we may
have leave so to name them: which, for their Ornament, and Beautification, were
engraven likewise with the same Figures, wherewith the Borders,
abovementioned, were adorned.

6 The Wheels.
6. Under these shelving Plates of Brass, thus described, Ver. 30.
stood the four Brazen Wheels of the great Base: For the thin Additions did not
make their own inward Angle over-acute, least the outward decliving Plane
should be too stoping to keep the parts of the Sacrifice upon them, and so
create great molestation to the Priests in their continual trouble, to preserve
them from falling down to the ground; but yet sufficiently steep to cast off
the Water from them, and also so conveniently situated, that the Tops of the
Wheels might admit of motion upon occasion, without grating upon the inside of
these thin Additions. Now these Wheels did not stand two on a side, as those of
our Chariots and Coaches do: But every of the four sides of the Base had one
Wheel annexed to it. Their Axle-Trees are described to have been joined to the
inferior part of the body of the Base, and that the height of each Wheel was a
Cubit and half, that is, the Axis, or middle of the Wheel, was of such a
height: So that the whole Wheel, in the highest part of its Ring, or
Circumference, did equal the Top of the great solid Base, or nearly thereabouts
so high, only consideration being had to the moderate declining of the
side-additions, even now mentioned: which height of theirs, must needs prove
true, if the lower edge of the great Base, be granted to have been a Cubit and
half above the ground, as was said above. For then the fastening of the
Axle-Tree, upon which the Wheel turns, being conceived to be at the bottom,
and so to run under the Base, will plead an inference, that the Diameter of the
Wheels Periphery, will prove to be about 3 Cubits in extent, though not
altogether so much, because the Center of the Axis, was somewhat inferior to
the Bottom of the Base, by reason of the supposition of its running under the
Base in a good massy Body of a Cylindrical Form, for the sustentation of the
great weight of the Base and Laver. So that hence will arise this Corollary,
that the superior part or Semicircle of the Wheel, under the thin Additions,
was not all out a Cubit and half high, but did admit some Diminution of its
stature, for the sake of their Declivity, as abovesaid. These Wheels being
each of them applied to each of the four sides of the Base, were each of them,
as to their exterior Form or Fashion, much like the Wheel of a Chariot; only
we must conceive them to be of more then ordinary thickness, in respect to
their burden, though possibly very curiously wrought; as Torniellus,
Villalpandus, and others, have fancied them, their Axle-Trees, Naves, Felloes,
and Spokes, being all molten. Ver. 33.


7 The Plates.
Ver. 30.
7. These Wheels thus described, stood not upon the plain ground, or Pavement,
of the Priests Court: But every Base (says the Text) had four Brazen Wheels,
and Plates of Brass, that is, flat pieces of Brass, of a competent Crassitude,
that lay in a apiece Form upon the Ground lowest of all, and supported the
Wheels, and the Under-Setters, or great massy Pillars that stood upright,
under the four corners of the main Base; together with all its Ornaments, and
the famous Laver it self, which contained the Holy Water for the service of the
Temple.

8 The Pillars.
Ver. 30.
8. Upon this Foundation of Brass, if I may so term it, there were four Brazen
Pillars fixed, of a convenient substantial magnitude, underneath every Base, at
its four corners, for assistances to the Wheels, in the great Work of support
for the Base, and its super-imposed Laver. These Pillars, by our Reverend
Translators, are called [Under-Setters] in stead of the Hebrew word (...)
rendered by the 70. (...); by Junius Scapulae, Humeri, Shoulders, or shouldering
Pillars of Brass, standing upright on the inside of each of the thin depending
Shelves of Brass. They were molten together with the Base in one mould, in the
Clay ground of Zartan, and were conjoined to it, at the four several Corners,
insisting or standing upon the same Plate of Brass, that lay flat upon the
Ground, under the four Wheels beforementioned. The position of these four
Pillars, being under the several Corners of the great and main Base; their use
and end was for the support of that ponderous Utensil. For I cannot yet
perceive any evincing Reason to conclude, that they did exceed the Top of the
Base, and so did under-prop the Lip of the Laver it self, to keep it firm and
steady: Because, for that end, the Laver bad an upper Base of its own, fixed
upon the Rows of Brazen Pillars, wherein it was set, and was in a good measure
less then the breadth of the great Base beneath; and was, undoubtedly, for that
very end, even for the sides of the Cauldron, to sit down in, as in a fixed
Seat, while the Fundus or Bottom of the Cauldron reached down to the Top or
Surface of the great Base, whereupon its great weight lay. For the Center of
the Water's Gravity was in the middle of the Cycloidical Bottom of that Vessel,
the lower sides of it being compassed with the Rails, and carved Borders of
Brass, that yielded a most lovely show to all Spectators. Besides, these Brazen
Shoulders, or Pillars, could not be joined both to the massy Base beneath, as
being moulten together with it in one piece, according to the insinuation of
the Text; Ver. 34.
and yet ascend also in an upright perpendicular posture, on the outside of
the shelving Plates, that were made for the washing and cleansing of the
Sacrifices, seeing that these thin Additions, or sloping Plates, joined
together in a long shelving Angle at each corner of the Base. So then, there
seems to be no need of such Pillars, to run so high, because of an upper Base,
sufficient enough for that purpose, even to keep the Vessel from tottering.
Moreover, inasmuch as we may observe the common Angles of the depending
Shelves, to obstruct the erect Stature of the Pillars, unless we should fancy
them piercing through the several corners of the Shelves, a thing not mentioned
or heeded by themselves, or others, seeing the Additions are expressed to be
round about. Besides, Ver. 36.
there is great need of help underneath, seeing the Wheels gave no great supply
of strength for the support of the Base, because their annexion to the four
sides of the Base, would produce the meeting of their Axle-Trees underneath the
Base, in one common place in the middle; unless we should conceive round pieces
of Brass to have been moulten together with the Base, and to have stood out
like round knops at the bottom, or lowermost edge of the sides of the Base, to
be in stead of Axle-Trees, which will yield, ^s strength then the former, for
sustaining of the Base and Laver above. Wherefore I should rather imagine these
shouldering Pillars, to have stood under the main Base, and to have been fixed
in that posture, as an Auxiliary to the Wheels, in the great work of supporting
the imposed Utensils. Moreover, we suppose, that they were placed on the in
side of the shelving Plates, or Benches, that so their standing under the
Laver, might be understood and interpreted concerning their support of that
Vessel, by mediation, or interposition of the grand Base.

9 The Chapter.
9 Thus having finished all the inferior parts of this pompous Utensil, Ver.
31.
let us proceed to finish the upper part: as to which we may remember in the
fourth Section of this present discourse, that there was mention made of an
upper Base (that rested upon the Rows of brazen Pillars) which we find on the
inside of it to have been round, as if a large circular piece of Brass had
been cut out of its middle part: which inward round, or circular Verge, is
called in the Hebrew (...) by the Seventy (...); by Montanus, Coronamentum; by
Junius, Ambitus Coronarius; by us The Chapter.

10 The Vpper-Border.
10 Upon this Chapter, so called coronall or circular limb or round inside,
there was fixed another border of Brass, standing upright in a foursquare form
or figure, the round compass of the inner Coronet of the upper Base lying upon
the foursqare upright border of Brass, even at its foot or bottom, just as a
circle may be imagined to be inscribed within a square. This square border
which we are now mentioning was of an erect situation, of the full height of a
Cubit above the upper Base fore spoken of in the fourth Section. But the
dimetient line, which passed crosse-wise through the inward circular Ambitus or
compass of the upper Base, and which reached from one side to the other of the
highest square brazen border, was of the length of a Cubit and half. So that
the mouth of the Laver, most probably round, had its circular Lips turning
down, (like the Lilly-work of the great Brazen Sea, mentioned in former lines)
and resting upon the four corners of this upper apiece Border, which was
most artificially and cunningly engraven, and probably with the same Figures of
Lions, Oxen, Cherubims, and Palm Trees, wherewith the inferior Borderings were
adorned, that stood upright, upon the great Base, between its little Brazen
Columns before recited. So that in the frame of this brave Work, there were two
Bases, and two Borders, each higher and less then the inferior. At the Top of
the higher most of these two Borders, was the mouth, or very near the mouth of
the Laver, which in its body, or inward capacity, from the Top of this supreme
Border, descended a Cubit and half; and at its Fundus, or Bottom, probably,
rested upon the great Base it self. But how high it ascended above the Border,
is not so easy, in an exact manner, to determine: which we shall leave to
another opportunity, and descend to the 11th and last Section of this Discourse.

11 The Laver it self.
Ver. 38.
11. In the last place, the Laver, or Cauldron it self, now craves to be fixed
and settled within this upper Border of Brass, last described, while the Fundus,
or Bottom of the Vessel, rested upon the great massy Base underneath, within
the inferior Border, that we have so often mentioned, to have been raised in
with Columnets of Brass. Now this Vessel containing the Water for use, ^^ording
to the degrees of its ascending height, did gradually amplify and expatiate
its internal capacity; as may probably be conjectured, by comparing the
Diameter of the Upper Base, at half a Cubits height, (which was recited before
to have been a Cubit and half over) with the measure of its Top or Mouth, which
our English Translation seems to intimate to have been of four Cubits
Dimension. The words of the Text, in the Hebrew, run thus (...), which some
translate in this manner, Quatuor in cubito concha una, each Laver was four in
a Cubit. Junius thus, Quaternum cubitorum er at labrum unum quodque; every
Laver was of four Cubits. Which expression does not clearly define the Figure
of each Laver at the mouth thereof, to have been circular; and so, according to
somes apprehensions, to have been co-extended with a Line of four Cubits length
in the circum-ambient compass at the Mouth or Lip thereof, which was repandous
or turning down like the White Lilly. Neither can it be manifestly evinced from
the words of the Text, or the supporting Borders about it to have been
apiece at the Top; and consequently, that the meaning of the Text should
be, as if each side of the square Figure at Top should contain one Cubit in
length, and four together, in all the four (imagined) square sides. For there
be some Geometrical Reasons (which might be suggested, arising from the
Description of its inward capacity or content of forty Bathes, united together
with the forementioned measure of four Cubits (in this present Verse we are
now upon) being supposed generally to have been the Dimensions of this Vessel
at its summity, or highest top or brink, where the bending of its Lip began to
incline downward, and not to admit of any further filling, without running
over, such Reasons, (I say) do much incline me to believe, that the Form of
this Vessel, was rather round in the whole body of it, then any where square at
all. Moreover, I am sometimes moved to think, that its roundness at the bottom
did increase upward, though moderately; yet by continual proportion in its
Diameter, till it arose up to its uttermost brim, being in general, (as far as
I have yet learned) but an Icon of the Sea of Brass in a lesser Form, which we
have formerly mentioned. Though I must needs confess, that I perceive by the
Writings of some sober persons, and such as are inquisitive in this particular,
that the usual apprehension, concerning the Figure of this Vessel, is this,
that it should be round every where, but belly out in a greater largeness about
the middle, and then indent again about the neck, and above that expiate into
its repandous, or turn-down Ethiopian Lip, something like the Figure exhibited
in the present Scheme prefixed to this Discourse, which does indifferently well
accord with the largeness of the inferior upright Border of Brass before
described, for the entertainment of the capacity of its belly: the neck of the
Vessel being contracted by the inward Circular Verge of the Upper-Base, and the
great turning Mouth supported by, and over-laid upon the Upper-Border of a
Cubits height, before described. So that hence it seems, that the large belly
of the Vessel should prove somewhat less then half a Cubit in height, because
it was included within the first Border, and its Columns, so often mentioned,
and (that part, which for distinctions sake we call) the Neck was a Cubit
higher; and, lastly, that the reverting Lip was of such a height and breadth,
(as the infused quantity of forty Bathes, mentioned in the Scripture will
permit) which will appear preciser, upon a more exact examination, then can (at
present) be insisted upon. We have therefore, at this time, according to the
most generally-received Opinion, pitched upon this Conchous Form (if we may
presume, without distaste, so to term it) as most generally agreeing with the
Descriptions of both Ancient and Modern Authors, leaving the more full
demonstration of the truth thereof to another and more proper opportunity, if
the Lord see good: Seeing this Treatise is written in our own Language, and
designs not such precise and accurate determination of these particulars; which
I would most gladly see performed by a Learned Pen, and should acknowledge my
self greatly beholding for a Supersedeas in these points, hoping that this my
slender Essay may so far prevail, as to invigorate the Genius of some
nobly-disposed person; who might with ingenuous Candor, and more elevated
Abilities, hold forth to the World the exact Historical Descriptions of
Scriptural Things, and Persons in a more complete and learned Method. Till
which much-long'd for time, I shall beg a courteous interpretation, of my poor
unworthy Travels in these Curiosities. Wherein, I humbly conceive, it would
prove very impertinent, at present, to interlard this Discourse with any
farther tedious Disquisition about the Form or outward Figure of this Vessel
now in our hands; reserving its amplification to another Season and Treatise
about Measures, if the Lord permit the use of this Temporal Life, and
convenient Providence, to finish some Thoughts upon these Subjects: which I
should very willingly resign into the hands of persons of greater Ability and
Leisure, rejoicing to see my self prevented by such a Tract, that might bring
forth something to the World, de novo, and might tend to the satisfaction of
diligent Inquirers, and to the improvement of the Commonwealth of Learning.
Let it suffice then at present, that the inward capacity of every Laver, is
distinctly expressed to have contained forty Bathes of liquid matter, and that
every one of them had a distinct Basis of its own, whereon it was fixed and
placed in its proper order.

The Situation of these so famous Utensils, consisting mainly of those two
parts, the Base and its Laver, or that great massy piece of Brass, of a
apiece Form, resting upon Wheels, and Under-Setters, and bearing those
stately Ponds upon their proud Backs, were ordered, by God Himself, in His
Directions to Solomon, to be on this wise. On the North side of the Priests
Court, there were five of them settled in a Row, and as many more upon the
South, they being ten in number.

The end or designed use of these Sacred Vessels was very constant, even for
Daily Service, in the Administration of Water to the Priests of that Splendid
Temple, who were to wash the several parts of the Burnt-Offerings, and other
the enjoined Sacrifices, upon the decliving Shelves of Brass, before described,
whereupon the several Spouts of the Lavers did run at pleasure with clear and
pure Water, according to the various occasions of the Sanctuary. Having thus
finished the delineation of this Piece, in some measure, which we find so amply
and fully; and yet, as to our Translation, so intricately laid down in
Scripture, we shall now wave any further treating upon this Point, and proceed
to the other Utensils in their proper place and order.

But as for these lesser Vessels, Utensils, Ornaments, standing in, or laid up
within the compass of this, or the other Court, and the several Chambers of the
Temple, as the Desks and Music Books of the Singers, the King's Pillar, all
the Vestments of the Priests, the 120 Trumpets, the Slaughter-Knives, and all
other Utensils about the Sacrifices; the Instruments of Music, the Standards
of all Measures, the Armory of all Weapons; as Spears, Bucklers and Shields,
etc. The Repositories for Wood, Salt, Tithes, Offerings; the Treasury Chambers;
the Water, or Well-Rooms; the Lodgings of the Priests and Levites, that
attended on the Holy Service in the Temple; their Description cannot be
manifested out of Scripture. Were we to describe the Second Temple, we might be
supplied by the learned industry of many Forreiners, both Jews and Christians;
but especially of those two learned Levites of our own Nation, Dr. Lightfoot,
and Mr. Fuller; to whose great pains, the Commonwealth of Learning is deeply
obliged: having given us better Descriptions of the Temple, then any
High Priest of the Jews ever did. But seeing we mainly insist upon the
Delineation of Solomon's Temple, let it at present suffice, that the
forementioned things were extant, and most exactly disposed, though it has
not pleased the Holy Spirit to transmit their accurate Descriptions to
Posterity; while we, in the mean time, remain content, not to be wise above
what is written.

The Figure of the High Priest in his holy Vestments and ornaments; together
with the inferior Priests, their apparel, the Sacrifices, and Utensils of the
Sacerdotall function in the Temple.
By Arias Montanus.
depiction of the High Priest and his accoutrements A. Singing books B. Skins
of beasts C. Trumpets D. Incense cups E. Slaughter knives F. Cauldrons, Spoones
and pots G. Flesh hooks H. Wine and Oil Vessels I. Bellows K. Wood L. M. N.
O. Creatures for Sacrifice P. The High Priest in his Pontific all habit
described in ye close of ye 4th Chapter. Q. Ordinary priests R. The Incense
Altar S. The Incense cup T. The Censer.




Observe in the Highpriests Figure.
A Singing-Books. B Skins of Beasts. C Trumpets. D Incense-Cup. E
Slaughter-Knives. F Cauldrons, Spoons, and Pots. G Flesh-Hooks. H Vessels of
Wine, or Oil. I Bellows. L, M, N, O, Creatures for Sacrifice. P The High Priest
himself in His Pontifical Habit. Q Ordinary Priests. R The Golden-Altar of
Incense. S The Incense Cup. T The Censer.
1 The Broidered Coat. 2 Robe next under the Ephod, whereto the Pomegranates;
and Bells of Gold were appendant. 3 Curious Ephod. 4 Girdle. 5 Mitre. 6. 6.
Onyx Stones. 7. 7 Hooks. 8. 8. Golden Chains. 9. Breast-Blate of Judgment. 10
Uppermost Rings. 11 Nethermost Rings. 12 Silk-Laces. 13 Hinder-Ring. 14 The
Plate of Gold upon the Mitre. 15 Bells of Gold. 16 Pomegranates.


Of the Priests, and Highpriests Vestments.
THus having finished the Discourse about the Temple, its Parts, Courts, and
Utensils; we shall now, as a Coronis to the whole Work, present the High Priest
in his Pontificalibus, ready to go into the Temple to perform his duty.

Exodus 28.41.
First of all, He wore all the Garments that ordinary Priests did wear: We shall
put them on in their order.

1 Next the flesh, the ordinary Priests had Linen Breeches to cover their
Nakedness from the Loins, Exodus 28.42, 43.
even to the Thighs, of fine twined Linen, Cap. 39.

2 They put on a close Linnen-Coat, that reached from the Neck down to the
Ankles with sleeves for their Arms. Ver. 40.


3 This Coat was fastened with a Girdle that went round about their middle of
fine twined Linen of Blue, Ver. 40. Cap. 39. v. 29. Cap. 39.28.
and Purple, Scarlet, and Needle Work. Here, once for all, let it suffice to
mention, that this Girdle, and other Vestments, were made with these various
Threads. One was of Hyacinch, Violet or Blew Color. Another of Purple Color,
tinctured with the blood of the Tyrian Shellfish. The Scarlet was died with
the Grains of a Shrub growing in Galatia, a Province of Asia the Less, in
Africa, and other Countries; as Pliny has it, lib. 16. cap. 8. The last is of
fine Linen from Egypt, and the Blew and Purple were Commodities brought to
Tire, from the Isles of Elishah, i. e. of the Aegean Sea, Ezekiel. 27.7.

4 On their Heads were fastened goodly Bonnets of fine Linen. These were all
Vestments of the ordinary Priests.

The High Priest had Vestments in this order; as mentioned, Lev. 8.7, 8, 9. and
Exodus 29.
1 His Coat, which was embroidered, Exodus 28.39. and 28.4. 2 His Girdle was of
Needle Work of fine twined Linen, and Blue, and Purple, and Scarlet, Exodus
39.29. Lev. 8.7.

These two were (I suppose) the same for substance with the other Priests; but
a little more curious for work.

3 The Robe, Lev. 8.7. called, the Robe of the Ephod, all of Blue Woven Work.
Exodus 28.31. and. and 39.22, etc.
There was a hole in the top of it, in the midst, with a binding of Woven Work
round about the hole, like the hole of an Habergeon, that it be not rent.
Beneath, at the hem of this Garment, there were made to hang Pomegranates and
Bells; the Pomegranates were made of Blue, and Purple, and Scarlet, and twined
Linen. The Bells were of pure Gold, between the Pomegranates, round about. As
to their number, Ribera out of Jerome says, there were 72 Pomegranates, and as
many Bells, p. 139 But Scripture, in this, rests silent. 4 Then the Ephod was
put on, Levit. 8.7. which was made of Gold, and Blue, Purple, and Scarlet, and
fine twined Linen. The Gold was beaten into thin Plates, and cut in Wires, to
work it into the Blue, etc. with cunning-Work. This had two Shoulder-pieces
joined to its edges, whereon were placed two Ouches of Gold, having two Onyx
Stones enclosed in them, and therein graven, after the manner of a Signet, all
the names of the Children of Israel, according to their Birth. To the two
Golden Ouches, were fastened two Wreathen Chains of pure Gold. 5 This Ephod was
girded close to him, with the curious Girdle of the Ephod, Lev. 8.7. of Gold,
Blue and Purple, of Scarlet, and fine twined Linen. 6 The next thing is the
Breast Plate of Judgment, made of cunning-Work, just like the Ephod, It was
apiece, being a span each side of the square; and it was doubled, that is,
the cunning-work of Gold, and Blue, and Purple, and Scarlet, and fine twined
Linen, was double, that it might be the stronger to bear the stones, Exodus
39.9. In it were set four Rows of Stones. In the first Row was a Sardius, a
Topaz, and a Carbuncle. In the second, an Emerald, a Sapphire, and a Diamond.
Exodus 39.13.
In the third a Ligure, an Agate, and an Amethyst. In the fourth, a Beryl, an
Onyx, and a Jasper, 13 in all; each engraven in order, with the names of the 12
Tribes of Israel, and each was enclosed in Ouches of Gold. In the four Corners,
were Gold Rings. The uppermost Corners had two Ouches of Gold, two Gold Rings,
and in them fastened two Golden Chains of Wreathen-Work, one at each end: which
Chains reached up to, and were fastened in the two Golden Ouches of the
Shoulder-pieces of the Ephod. At the two lower corners, were two Rings of Gold
also, which had a Lace of Blue running through them, to fasten the Breast Plate
therewith to two other Rings that were set in the Ephod beneath. 7 After this,
there was placed in this Breast Plate of Judgment, Exodus 28.30.
the Vrim and Thummim, that they might be upon the High Priests Heart, when He
went in before the Lord, to bear the Judgment of the Children of Israel upon
his Heart before the Lord continually. Some think those words were written:
Some think there was either two other Stones, or pieces of Gold; and, indeed,
they knew not what. Others think there was nothing added, only it signified
the meaning of the 12 Stones; that when the Children of Israel, or any
particular Tribe, or the King, or any other, should enquire the Mind of God,
then they should receive an Answer from the High Priest, in the Name of God;
which Answer, as to future things, should be as Vrim, that is, as Light, clear
and perspicuous; and, either concerning past, present, or future, should be
Thummim, that is, perfect, and full of all Integrity and Truth. As to which, it
is conceived, that when the Lord did answer Positively, and Affirmatively, the
Stones did shine most radiantly; but continued in their common hue, upon the
Negative. There is this Reason urged by some; Why they did not note any new
material added to the Breast Plate, because when Moses relates the making of
things, according to the given Pattern, we read of no such thing made; Exodus
39.32. Lev. 8.8.
though the Text says expressly, that all was done, that the Lord commanded
Moses: yet, in Leviticus, it says, He did: which I leave to mature
consideration. 8 The Mitre, lastly, was put upon his head; and, upon the Mitre,
a Holy Crown of Gold; and, on the Forefront of the Crown, a Plate of Gold,
which was fastened to the Mitre with a Blue Lace; and on that Plate was
engraven, as on a Signet, these words, HOLINESS TO THE LORD.

The inferior Priests in their order, and the High Priest according to His
Superior Dignity, being thus set forth in their goodly Array, were afterward
anointed with Holy Oil, consecrated and sanctified by the blood of some
Sacrifices, and so were prepared for the Services of the Temple, in the next
Chapter.




CHAP. V. Concerning the Solemn Worship, and Service of GOD, in the Temple.
THis Chapter might be distinctly methodized, and accordingly handled; either
as the Worship has respect to the various Persons or Officers employed in
several Sacred Functions: Or, secondly, as to the different Solemn Times of
Service and Worship, in their Mysterious Solemnities: Or, thirdly, as to the
various Sacrifices and Offerings, commanded by God, to smoke upon His Holy
Altar. All which Particulars, we shall crave leave, in as brief a manner as
possible, to exhibit in their due order and method, in three distinct Sections
following.

SECT. I. Of the Temple Officers, their Names and Employments.
IN the first place, we shall speak of the different sorts of Officers about
the Temple, which are particularized under five several Names in Scripture,
viz. Priests, Levites, Singers, Porters, Nethinims. The Priests are
distinguished into the chief Priests, and the other interior Priests of the 24
Courses.

Of the chief Priests. Ezra 7.24.

The chief Priests, were two; the High Priest, and his Second; the High Priest
was, by the Appointment of God, that Person, who was the Lineall Heir, in
Aaron's Posterity, the eldest living that descended in the most direct Line
from his Loins. His Office was mainly upon the Expiation Day, (being the 10th
of the 7th Month) to perform the Solemn Rites of that Service, in entering the
Holy of Holies, not without blood, and to persume the Oracle with fragrant
Incense, Exodus 30.10. Lev. 16.34. Heb. 9.7. Unto which Josephus adds, that He
assisted in the Work on every Sabbath, De Bell. Judaic. l. 6. c. 6. p. 9 18. F.
in every New Mood, and every Solemn Festival; as may appear out of the 1 Chronicles. 6.49.

The second Priest was the most eminent among the rest; who, in case of
Sickness, Pollution, or other Emergency, befalling the High Priest, did supply
that Office. Therefore is it, that some think Moses of old to have be^n a
substitute to Aaron: seeing Scripture does expressly call both of them the
Priests of the Lord, Ps. 99.6. We read moreover that Moses did officiate in the
Priests office at the consecration of Aaron his Brother, Levit. 8. Howexer it
be, we find for cerain Eleazar and Ithamar, etc. usually put together in the
Days of Moses. Hophni and Phinehas, in the old Age and blindness of Eli. Zadock
and Ahimelech, in the days of David; 2 Samuel 8.17. Chap. 15.35. 2 King. 25.18.
Luke 3.2.
and afterward Zadeck and Abiathar* Serajah, the chief Priest, and (expressly
in so many terms) Zephaniah, the second Priest, in the time of Judah's
Captivation by Nebuchadnezzar.

And lastly, in the days of our Savior, Annas and Caiphas are called the High
Priests; not that there were two in that great Office at once, as some have
conceited, through the Jewish Corruption of the Commandments of God at that
time; but that the one was a present help, and constant substitute to the
other, in case of necessary detention from his actual service.

Of the Ordinary Priests.
The ordinary Priests were such as sprang from the Loins of Aaron, and were in
a Collateral Line of Kindred, allied to the High Priest, which were all
Levites, as flowing from Levi, who was the Abavus, or Great Grandfather of
Aaron: But being separated from the rest of the Levites, for some more
immediate service unto God, are generally termed Priests; whereas the term of
Levite is restrained to all others of the Posterity of Levi, besides the Line
of Aaron.

These Priests, for the more easy carrying on of the Temple-Work, were divided
into 24 Courses by Lot, according to this ensuing Table in the days of David,
by his Appointment. But these Orders, as to their Genealogicall Succession,
having been much confounded since that time, especially under the Captivity:
possibly, the Priests of Nehemiah's List might receive new Names, according to
a new Lot, for their several Stations; and therefore it is, perhaps, that we
find the ancient Names somewaat varied, and some of the new Courses not to be
found Registered, according to all the Names of David's Division. Howsoever, so
far as they can be without many Transpositions of Letters clearly set down, we
may read, as follows.

1 Jehojarib, 1 Chronicles. 24.7 called Jojarib, in Nehem. 12.6, 19. 2 Jedajah, 1 Chronicles. 24.7. Neh. 12.7, 19. 3 Harim, 8 Neh. 10.5. and 12.15. Or, Rehum, Chap.
12.3. 4 Seorim, 8 Perhaps Serajah, Nehem. 10.2.12.1.12. 5 Malchijah, 9 Nehem.
10.3. Or, Malluch, Neh. 12.2. Or, Melicu. v. 14. 6 Mijamin, 9 Nehem. 10.7. Or,
Miamin, Neh. 12.5. Or Minjamin, Neh. 12.17. 7 Hakkez, 10 Perhaps Hatiush, Neh.
10.4. and 12.2. 8 Abijah, 10 Neh. 10.8. and 12.4 17. Luke 1.5. 9 Jeshuah, 11.
10 Shecaniah, 11 Neh. 12.3. Or, Shebaniah, Nehem. 10.4. and 12.14. 11 Eliashib,
12. 12 Jakim, 12. 13 Huppak, 1 Chronicles. 24.13. 14 Jeshebeab, 13. 15 Bilgah, 14.
Nehem. 12.5, 18. Or, Bilgai, Neh. 10.8. 16 Immer, 14. Perhaps Merim^th, Neh.
10.5. 17 Hezir, 15. Called Ezra, Neh. 12.1, 13. Or, Azariah, Nehem. 10.2. 18.
Aphses., 15. 19. Pethahiah, 16. 20. Jehezekel, 16. 21. Jachin, 17. 22. Gamul,
17. 23. Delaiah, 18. 24. Maaziah, 18. Neh. 10.^. or Madiah, Neh. 12, 5. Moadiah
ver. 17.
Of ^hese twenty four courses, The first course entering upon the first Sabbath
after the Temple's dedication, continued so in the devolution of the work unto
each succeeding course, from Jehojarib the first until the captivity, and,
being afterward fixed in the best order they could, did so endure till the
days of our Lord's Incarnation, Luke 1.5.
near which time we read of Zachariah's Ministration at the Altar of Incense,
being (...), (or as we translate it) Of the Course of Abiah, which was
originally the eighth in number: it being called (...), as some think from this
hebdomadicall or weekly entrance into the service. Which word (if critically
insisted upon,) though it may not yield sufficient ground to build the
assertion of this constant revolution of courses at such a set time as a week
(and if so, yet is it not safe to lay stresse upon words, the argument, from
Etymology, being very sandy, since the fall of the Tower of Babel, upon the
tongues of our Ancestors) yet notwithstanding there are two places of Scripture
that help us in this point (that we may dismiss verbal niceties to their
tongues, to whom they do movere Salivam) The former place acquaints us of the
Priests entering in upon the Sabbath, and the latter, 2 Chr. 23.4. 2 Kin. 11.7.
of their going forth upon the same day, which is sufficient enough at present
to our purpose: especially, Joseph. Anti. l. 7. c. 11. p. 248. G. mihi.
since confirmed by Josephus (being himself a Priest) in these words: (...).
And he ordained (speaking of David) that one Family, or course, should minister
unto God for eight days together, from Sabbath to Sabbath. Of these twenty
four Tribes or courses, 1 Chr. 24.4.
sixteen were of the line of Eleazar, and eight of the race of Ithamar.

The work impendent upon their shoulders, since the Tabernacle-Vessels were
taken off, after the settlement of the Ark, in the fixed place of the Temple,
was various and excellent, consisting principally in these following
particulars.

1 The work of sacrificing, with all its rites, did lie upon them in all
Offerings on the Altar of burnt offering, nay, 1 Chr. 6.49. 2 Chapter 29.22.
the whole service of the most Holy place.

2 The Government of the Sanctuary and of the House of God was impendent on
their shoulders. 1 Chr. 24.5.


3 They set the new-prepared shewbread on the golden Tables within the
Sanctuary every Sabbath, and removed the old.

4 They ordered the Lamps of the golden Candlesticks every Morning.

5 They kindled the daily Incense to make a sweet perfume in the Temple, at the
time of the dressing of the Lamps, 1 Chr. 6.49.
that the stench of that work might not be offensive.

6 They were the unappealeable Judges of Leprosy: Lev. 13.2, 3.
and Jealousy betwixt man and wife.

7 They blew the Trumpets to the solemn feasts: Joel. 2.15. 1 Chapter 15.24. and
16.6. Number. 10.8. and 31.6.
and also before the Ark at its solemn removals, and also to accompany the
Captains of the Battle in War, with their silver Trumpets before the Battle, as
may be perspicuous^y evident out of several places of the holy Scripture.

2 Chapter 13.12. Lev. 6.12, 13. Exo. 30.23. 1 Chr. 9.30. Mal. 2.7.
8 They were to look to the burning of wood continually upon the brazen Altar,
that the fire once kindled from heaven might never be extinguished.

9 They were to make the holy Ointment with the appointed Spices.

10 They instructed the People in the Law of God.

Of the Levites.
The Levites, distinctly so called, were not Priests, but such as came from the
stem or root of Levi, excepting the Children of Aaron. These persons were
appointed to wait upon the Sons of Aaron, in the Courts and in the Chambers, 1 Chronicles. 23.28, 29. etc.
in the purifying of all the holy things, and the work of the service of the
house of God: Both for the Shewbread, and for the fine flower, for
Meat Offerings, and the unleavened Cakes, and for things baked in Pans or
fried, and for all manner of Measure and Cize, (a good president, to learn us
of what sacred estimation we should account, and what diligent care we should
take in the conservation of the standard Vessels; for the administration of
commutative Justice) they were also to stand every Morning to thank and praise
the Lord, and likewise at Evening. Yea, and to offer all burnt sacrifices unto
the Lord, (that is, to assist the Priests in case of multitude of Offerings,
such as were extraordinary) in the Sabbaths, new Moons, and Set-Feasts, by
number, according to the order commanded them, continually before the Lord. And
that they should keep the charge of the Tabernacle of the Congregation, and of
the holy place, and of the Sons of Aaron their brethren, in the Service of the
house of the Lord. For which end they were at first numbered at the age of
thirty years, 1 Chronicles. 23.26, 27. 1 Chro. 23.3. etc.
but after the days of David always at twenty: Because then they did no more
carry the burden of the Tabernacle-implements and Vessels. Their number in the
latter end of King David's reign was computed at thirty eight thousand; whereof
twenty four thousand were set off for the work and business of the holy House:
Six thousand to be Officers and Judges: four thousand were Porters, and four
thousand were Singers and Players upon Instruments. So that the work of the
Levites was mainly Templar, which lay within the precincts of the Temple: and
partly provincial, as the devout Sr. H. Spelman ranks them. Tithe. p. 36. etc.
2 Chr. 8.14. 1 Chr. 16.4. Number. 18.3.
But their capital business, was to praise and minister before the Priests,
and before the Ark, to record sacred affairs, to thank and praise the Lord God
of Israel. They were not in any case to approach near the Vessels of the
Sanctuary, no nor of the Altar, in any way of Ministration after the Nature of
Priests, unless in case of necessity, when the number of the Priests was not
sufficient for the greatness of some festival solemnity, then we have an
instance of the Levites helping them to flay the burnt Offerings, 2 Chapter 29.34.
till the work was ended: Else they might not. In so much, that when the Ark of
the Covenant was ambulatory in the Wilderness, and unfixed before the Temple's
erection; though the Levites might bear it upon their shoulders, when it was
wrapped up in the Vail; yet they might not either touch it, Number. 4.15.
or (as some think) look upon it, when uncovered. Wherefore in David's time
there seems to have been a double error committed about the Ark. The first was
in carting that most holy and mysterious piece. For although the Philistines
did send it home upon a new Cart toward Bethshemesh without ensuing danger; yet
the Israelites might not dare to deal so irreverently with that rare symbol of
the divine presence, 1 Samuel 6.11.
as to set it on a homely Cart, if they diligently consulted the Law of Moses.
1 Chr. 15.12, 13, 14, 15. Ant. l. 7. c. 4.
As to which very point David humbly confesses his and the Peoples
miscarriage. The second Error is conceived by some (out of Josephus) to have
been this, even that Vzza the Son of Abinadab, being but an ordinary Levite,
and no Priest, might not presume to touch the holy Ark, according to the strict
inhibition of Moses, who therefore was so immediately and miraculously smitten
down before God in the very place of his transgression. So tender and jealous
is the Lord of Hosts of every point of his instituted Worship, which might make
us extreme wary and watchful how we draw nigh to God under Ordinances, even in
the Gospell-daies, wherein though the ceremoniality of Worship is not so
strict, yet the spirituality is far more advanced, and we are to draw near
with hearts more heavenly and abstracted from the impurities of the world, and
it is dangerous dallying with his divine Majesty, in using any traditionall
rites, or ceremonial inventions of man in his solemn service, being never so
fairly colored and varnished over with the specious pretenses of decorum,
unity, order, Church discipline, and peace. For certainly, God is not wanting
in giving forth a platform for Gospel Worship in all points necessary for
evangelical Churches, as to which God expects of us the same that he did of
Moses, that we look to it, that we do all, Exo. 25.40. Mat. 15.9.
according to the pattern shown to us by Christ in the Mount. For in vain do we
worship, if we teach the Commandments of men for the Doctrines of God: either
to gratify the carnal Humors of Persons wedded to and soaked in the poisonous
Cup of Romish superstitions: or to carry on a magisteriall design of being
Lords of our Brethrens Faith and Practices, by imposing Dictator-like upon
others consciences in punctilio's of externalls and extraessentialls to
Salvation: When as probably enough their opinions in those niceties have no
more solid reasons grounded upon Scripture (the sole rule of Faith, Worship,
and Manners) to evince their practice to be sober and judicious; than the Pope
of Rome has of title to his Patrimony, or universal Head-ship, from the
Donation of Constantine, or the cruel Phocas of the Eastern Empire. But craving
pardon for this small digression, upon the remembrance of the sad providence
upon Uzza; let us proceed to rank these Temple-Officers, the Levites, in a
foursold series. Whereto we shall speak awhile, 1 Concerning the Singers among
them, 2 Of the Porters, 3 Of the Treasurers, and 4 Of the Judges.

Of the Singers.
We read in the sacred lines, that this was one great part of the work
incumbent on a proportioned number of Levites for that purpose: Whom David set
apart for Temple-Musick, which was either vocal or isntrumental. The
isntrumental either pneumaticall or manual: All which is expressed in that
verse, 1 Chr. 15.16.
wherein the chief of the Levites are commanded to appoint some of their
Brethren, to be Singers with instruments of Music, Psalteries, Harps, and
Cymbals sounding, by lifting up the voice with Joy.

So that now these instruments mixed in consort with the Trumpets of the
Priests made a lovely noise in the Court of the Altar.

It were worth our pains (if it were a thing feazible to give any
satisfaction) to treat awhile concerning the exact form of their Instruments
and the method of their musical notes, and the manner of pricking their Psalms.
But despairing of that at present I shall only speak a little about the
various Instruments, which are mentioned in the holy Scriptures, and then of
their 24 Courses.

We read of these three sorts of Instruments, wherewith they praised God: and
made a solemn sound therewith, to refresh the ears of those Israelites who came
to wership God at the Temple.

1 Cymbals.
Ver. 19.
1 Cymbals of Brass, whereon the chief masters of Music played and are related
to have made a sound (...) the 70 render it (...), which some imagine to be
round Balls, others, flat pieces of Brass like Drums, to manage the Bassus or
Base-part in the Music.

Ver. 20.
2 Psalteries.
2 Others are said to make a sound or joyful noise upon Psalteries, in the
Hebr. (...), in the 70, (...). The word comes from (...) cecidi^, and is
usually applied to leaves falling off Trees in Autumn: as if so be the
Instruments were to be so choicely and gently touched, as if a leaf only had
fallen upon them. Therefore is it added on Alometh, that is the silent or hidden
Music. For the curious gentle sound and most sweet Lute-like melody, which it
gave forth. (...) the greek word, which some translate it by, is according to
the great Etymologist derived (...) from the touching of it with the fingers.
But others think it was played upon with a Bow, or Quill, or the like, and that
it was an Instrument with a hollow belly like our Lutes, Viols, Gitternes, and
the rest, because the Hebr. word Nebel is in one signification used sometimes
for a Bottle or Bag of Skin, Psa. 144.9.
hollow within. Whatever the fashion was, it seems to have been an Instrument
with ten strings. On a Nebel with ten strings will I sing says David; yea, it
is called a ten-stringed Instrument, by apposition distinctly from a Harp,
Psalm. 33.2. and 92.3.

1 Chapter 15.21.
3 Harps.
3 Others are mentioned to have played (...) which is rendered by the 70, (...),
with Harps on Sheminith, to excel. This Harp or Kinnor, one of the ancient
Fathers resembles to the Greek letter L being an Instrument of wood, whose
strings ran along from the Basis of the Triangle and from one of the sides
also, Genesis 4.21.
to the other: much like those of Wales or Ireland, which we call Harps at this
day. That they were played upon with the band is implied by the story of Jubal
before the flood, Pro. 30.28.
when he is called the Father of all that do (...) handle the Harp, which word
is expressly joined with the actions of the hands, metaphorically ascribed to
the Spider by Solomon. Wherefore it pleases Avenarius well, to derive the (...)
from (...) by transmutation of n into th. It seems this Instrument (whatever
the form were) was composed but with eight strings in David's time. For it is
termed in this place of the Chronicles (...) super octochordis, on the
Kinnoroth Hasheminith, on Sheminith (as we translate it) that is, on Harps
being eight stringed.

I know there be several, who upon the citation of Josephus, do conceive,
Antiq. l. 7. c. 10. p. 243. A. mihi.
that the Kinnors had ten Strings, and were touched with a Plectrum, or Bow,
and that the Nablia had twelve Strings, and were played on with hands. It is not
for me to endeavor to put Josephus his words out of Tune in this his Lesson,
(which others have learned from him) by my scraping any longer upon these
Instruments: though sometimes the Ear of a stander-by may tolerably air the
Lesson which is played, as well as the Musician himself. I do not suspect
Josephus his Skill in Music: yet finding the strings of his Historical Harp
cracked in many places, and in some things dissonant to himself, I am afraid his
Copy is corrupt in this place, (upon the probabilities out of the Hebrew Texts
before mentioned, and confirmed by some Learned Authors) as it is in many other
places: which might be evidenced at large. But I shall herein submit my self to
the Doctors in that Science, and put a pause or stop to this particular, and
leaving our singing Levites in their Harmonious Consort, let us observe, how the
rest of the Levites, Priests, and Porters, stood in their several Stations, and
Watches, harkening, wondering at, and praising their great Skill in that
Celestial and Spherical Mystery.

The Instruments which they used, were some of them made of Fur; 2 Samuel 6.5.
1 King. 10.12.
others, of Algum-Trees: Of which Wood, we have treated more largely in another
place of this Temple-History.

The Times wherein this melodious Service was performed, were in the Morning
and Evening, and generally in the time of sacrificing, noting how acceptable
their Sacrifices were to God; and also that our prayers must be mixed with
praises. That it was done in time of Sacrifice, appears by the Relation of the
Work of Dedication in Solomon's days. 2 Chronicles. 7.3, 6.
For when as Solomon offered, the Levites waited with their Instruments of
Music; and the time is expressly declared, when they saw the fire come down
from Heaven, then they worshipped and praised the Lord, saying. For He is good;
for His Mercy endures for ever. Which Verse was the same that the Priests
answered to by their Trumpets, and the Levites arrayed in White Linen, 2 Chronicles. 5.12, 13.
having Cymbals, Psalteries, and Harps, did sing unto most melodiously.

The place where they stood officiating in this Musical Employment, was at the
East End of the Altar. To which purpose, it is observable, Ver. 13.
that some of the Psalms, are called Songs of Degrees, upon the account of that
place where they were sung and played to, which some do think to be upon the 15
steps arising out of the great Court, into the Priests Court, at the Eastern
Gate thereof.

But now as to the ancient Hebrew Songs, we may even hang up our Harps upon the
Willows, not being able to tune them aright in a Land so strange, and in an Age
so remote from that of the flourishing state of the people of Israel in the
Holy Country. Only give us leave to remember Zion, while we do account their
Antique, yet no doubt excellent Songs, as to the Metrical Composition, among
the Deperdita, or things-lost, as to our knowledge. Although a Learned man, Dr.
Gomarus by name, in his Lyra Davidis, has endeavored, in some measure, to
revive the knowledge of their Meters comparing David's Psalms with the Poems of
Pindar, and other Lyricks; yet we must confess, that what has been yet spoken,
as to the composing part, or fitting of their Songs to Instruments, makes no
more melody in the Ears of these latter Ages of the World, then dumb Music.

But as to their several Officers and Courses, for this Solemn and excellent
Service, the Scripture has left upon Record these following Intimations.

In the first place we read, that they had three prime Officers, Asaph, Heman,
and Jeduthun; for whom many of David's Psalms were penned, probably for this
end, that they might skilfully fit them to the various Notes of their Vocal and
Instrumental Music; and therefore are styled and directed; some to the chief
Musician; some to the Sons of Korah; some to Jeduthun, and the like.

The Sons of these principal Musicians, with their Brethren, and near Kinsmen,
1 Chronicles. 25.6, 7.
were disposed in a most exact and harmonious method, containing 24 Courses in
all, of men that were cunning and well instructed in the Songs of the Lord.
Each Course had 12 chief men, and all the 24 Courses made up 288. and the whole
number of all that belonged to the Song, 1 Chronicles. 23.5.
under the chief Masters of all the Courses, set in order by David, were 4000:

2 Chronicles. 25.8, 9.
The 24 Courses, had each their chief Officer, and 11 more with him, according
to this Order by Lot, Ward against Ward.

1 Joseph, the Son of Asaph, 1 Chronicles. 25.2, 9. 2 Gedaliah, Son of Jeduthun, v.
3, 9. 3 Zaccur, of Asaph, v. 2, 10. 4 Izri, or Zeri, of Jeduthun, v. 3, 11. 5
Nethaniah, of Asaph, v. 2, 12. 6 Bukkiah, of Heman, v. 4, 13. 7 Jesharelah, or
Asarelah, of Asaph, v. 2, 14. 8 Jeshajah, of Jeduthun, v. 3, 15. 9 Mattaniah,
of Heman, v. 4, 16. 10 Shimei, v. 17. He was the Son of Jeduthun. For though
his name be omitted, v. 3. where mention is made of Jeduthun's Sons: yet that
very verse tells us, there were six of his Sons. So that though but five Names
are there recited, yet his name is to be supplied out of the 17th verse. 11
Azariel, or Uzziel, of Heman, v. 4, 18. 12 Hashabiah, of Jeduthun, v. 3, 19. 13
Shubael, or Shebuel, of Heman, v. 4, 20. 14 Mattithiah, of Jeduthun, v. 3, 21.
15 Jerimoth, v. 4, 22. Being all the Sons of Heman. 16 Hananiah v. 4, 23. Being
all the Sons of Heman. 17 Joshbekashah, v. 4, 24. Being all the Sons of Heman.
18 Hanani, v. 4, 25. Being all the Sons of Heman. 19 Mallothi, v. 4.26. Being
all the Sons of Heman. 20 Eliathah, v. 4, 27. Being all the Sons of Heman. 21
Hothir, v. 4, 28. Being all the Sons of Heman. 22 Giddalti, v. 4, 29. Being all
the Sons of Heman. 23 Mahazioth, v. 4, 13. Being all the Sons of Heman. 24
Romamti-Ezer, v. 4, 31. Being all the Sons of Heman.
These persons thus appointed to the Work of the Songs of Zion were freed from
any other Service, being employed in that Work only, 1 Chronicles. 9.33.
Night and Day.

Now for the farther knowledge of the deduction of the Levites, from the Loins
of Levi, together with the succession of Moses and Aaron, the Children of the
former, viz. Moses, being the Lord High Treasurers of the Temple, of the other
being Highpriests; let us present this Genealogicall Stem before your Eyes,
being deduced out of the 6th Chapter of the first of Chronicles, and other
places of Scripture.

Jacob or Israel. Levi. 1 Gershon Exodus 6.17. 2 Libni, or Laadan, 1 Chr. 23.7 3
Jahath 1 Chr. 6.20 and 23.10. 4 Zimmah, 1 Chr. 6.20. Or Zinah, 1 Chro. 23.10. 5
Ethan, or Joah. 6 Adajah, or Iddo, 1 Chr. 6.21. 7 Zerah 8 Ethni 9 Melohiah 10
Baasiah 11 Michael 12 Shimea 13 Beraehiah 14 Asaph, the chief Singer.






2 Shimel, or Shimi. 3

1 Kohath, who lived 133 y. Exodus 6.18. 2 Amram Aaron 4 Ithamar. 5 Eli 6
Phinees 7 Abiezer 8 Buzi 9 Ozi 10 Eli, that brake his neck. 11 Ahitub 12
Ahimelech. 13 Ahijah 14 Abiathar Put from the High Priesthood, by Solomon.










4 Eleazar. 5 Phinehas 6 Abishua 7 Bukki 8 Vzzi 9 Zechariah 10 Merajoth 11
Amariah. 12 Ahitub 13 Zadock, who was High Priest, in the time of K. Solomon in
the room of Abiathar, 1 King. 2.2.35.









3 Moses Rehabiah Jeshajah Joram Zicheri Shelomith, The great Lord Treasurer of
the Temple, 2 Chronicles. 26.25, 26.





2 Izhar 3 Korah. 4 Ebiasaph, Exodus 6.24. Or, Asaph, 2 Chr. 26.1. 5 Assir. 6
Tahath 7 Zephaniah 8 Azariah. 9 Joel 10 Elkanah 11 Amasai 12 Mahath. 13 Eskanah
14 Zuph 15 Toah 16 Eliel 17 Jeroham 18 E^kanah 19 Shemuel, or Samuel the
Prophet. 20 Joel, 1 Samuel 8.2. 21 Heman the Singer.




















1 Merari 2 Mahli. Numb. 3.20. Exodus 6.19. 1 Chronicles. 24.26.
Mushi, 3 Mahli, 1 Chronicles. 23.23. 4 Shamer, 1 Chronicles. 6.46. 5 Bani 6 Anezi 7
Hilkiah 8 Amaziah 9 Hashabiah 10 Malluch 11 Abdi 12 Kishi, or Kushajah, 1 Chronicles. 15.17. Or, Kish, 2 Chronicles. 29.12. 13 Ethan, probably the same with
Jeduthun, one of three Masters of Song. If we compare these places, 1 Chronicles.
15.19. and 25.1. and 2 Chronicles. 5.12. Obed-Edom. 1 Chronicles. 16.3.8

















Hitherto suffices it to have discoursed of the melodious Singers of the
Temple; with the Scheme of their Contemporaries, to illustrate the History. Let
us now walk forth out of the Priests Court, toward the Gates and Treasuries,
and take notice of the great diligence adhibited by these sacred Porters, in
their several Wards and Watches.

Of the Porters.
THE next Officers to be spoken to, are the Porters, who did watch at the Gates
of the Temple day and night. The Psalmist calls upon them that stand by night
in the House of the Lord, to bless His Name; and, Psalm. 134.1.
in a Psalm indicted for the Sons of Korah to tune, he tells them, He had rather
be a Doorkeeper in the House of God, then to dwell in the Tents of Wickedness;
Psalm. 84.10.
or the Curtains of Alienation from the presence of him that dwelt between the
sacred Cherubims.

The number of these Porters, in a gross and full sum, 1 Chronicles. 23.6.
are remembered to have been four thousand, by the Appointment of King David,
and seem to have been divided into 24 Courses, like as the Priests and Singers
were. For one Text relates, 2 Chronicles. 8.14.
that Solomon did appoint the Porters by their Courses at every Gate, according
to the Order of David his Father. According to which, if we examine the account
so far, as it is brought in by Holy Scripture, we shall read of 24 chief
persons, whose Sons and Brethren seem to come by course, after 7 days, from
time to time, out of their Villages, 1 Chronicles. 9.25. to that Service, at the
several Gates of the Temple: To which they were designed by Lot; as may appear
more particularly by this Draught annexed, taken out of 1 Chronicles. 26. THE GATES.
1 On the East. The keeping whereof, by Lot, fell to Shelemiah, ver. 14. called
also, Meshelemiah, the son of Kore, of the sons of Asaph, that is, Abiasaph,
the Great Grandchild of Kohath; and under him, of these Levitical Porters, came
in by course constantly 6 persons to watch there, v. 17. probably, the same
person, who is called Shallum, the chief Porter, because his Lot fell out to be
at the chiefest Gate; which appears by the very same account of His Lineage, 1 Chronicles. 9.19. 6. 2 On the North. The Lot hit upon Zechariah, a wife Counselor,
being the son of Shelemiah; and under Him, at the North-Gate, there were
appointed 4 to watch by course. 4. 3 On the South. The Lot came forth to
Obed-Edom; and those under his Rule, Southward, verse 17. 4. 4. On the West.
Toward Asuppim, or the Treasury-House, which stood at the South-End of the
Western-Wall, and had two little Gates at each end of the Treasury, whereof we
have spoken before. They were committed to the custody of the Sons of
Obed-Edom, at each Gate two; as it is expressed, v. 17. two and two. 2. 2. At
Shallecheth, or at the Causey of the King, 4 Porters, v. 16, 18. 4. At
Parbar-Gate, two Porters, v. 18. and both these Gates were under the custody of
Shuppim, and Hosah, v. 16. 2. 24

So that hence we may observe, that there were 24 Porters constantly fixed by
their Courses in their stations for the Watch, at the Gates of the Outward
Court of the Temple. They are recited to have been placed in the four Quarters
of the House of God, even toward the East, West, North and South; and that
they lodged round about the House, that is, in the Chambers of the Outward
Court, having the oversight of the Gates, and had the charge lay upon them of
opening them every morning.

Their exact Genealogy, in a direct Line from their Ancestors, is not
precisely and determinately recorded in a methodical manner, that I have yet
observed. Only the Scripture is pleased thus far to insinuate, that the
Porters were of the Line of Korah and Merari. Of Korah, the Grandson of
Kohath, descended Meshelemiah, the principal Porter of the Temple, being settled
at the Eastgate, who is related to have been of the Sons of Asaph; otherwise,
called Ebiasaph, the Son of Korah, Exodus 6.24. and 1 Chronicles. 26.1.

The Sons of Meshelemiah were these,
Zechariah, He was a Porter of the Door of the Tabernacle in David's time, 1
Chr. 9.21. 1 Chronicles. 26.2, 3. Jediael, 1 Chr. 9.21. 1 Chronicles. 26.2, 3. Zebadiah,
1 Chr. 9.21. 1 Chronicles. 26.2, 3. Jathniel, 1 Chr. 9.21. 1 Chronicles. 26.2, 3. Elam, 1
Chr. 9.21. 1 Chronicles. 26.2, 3. Jehohanan, 1 Chr. 9.21. 1 Chronicles. 26.2, 3. 1 Chr.
9.17, 19, etc.
Elioenai. 1 Chr. 9.21. 1 Chronicles. 26.2, 3.
This Meshelemiah is called otherwhere Shallum, the Son of Kore, the son of
Ebiasaph, the son of Korah; who, with his Brethren, kept the Gates, and the
Entry into the House of the Lord. Shallum was chief, and with him were reckoned
Akkub, Talmon, and Ahiman, as Assistants.

Of the Family of Merari, 1 Chronicles. 26.4, etc.
Obed-Edom, with his Sons following,
Shemajah, The Sons of Shemajah.
Othni, Rephael, Obed, Elizabad, Elihu, Semachiah.
Jehozabad, Joah, Sacar, Nethaneel, Ammiel, Issachar, Peulthai.
There seems to be another of this name also, in this Office, brought in and
annexed to the other, with an ALSO in the same Verse, and is called the Son of
Jeduthun, 1 Chronicles. 16.38.

Of this same Family of Merari, was Hosah, with his Children, Simri, Hilkiah,
Tebaliah, Zechariah, etc. who waited upon the Temple-Watches, 1 Chronicles. 20.10,
11.
at the Western-End of the Sanctuary.

Of the Treasurers.
WE have heard that some of the Levites were Singers; others, Porters, or
Watchmen: Now we come, in a word, to speak of an Appointment of some of the
Levites to be Treasurers, whereof there was one Supreme, or Head-Officer, whose
name, in the days of David and Solomon, is mentioned to have been Ahijah, 1 Chronicles. 26.20.
and that He was set over the Treasurers of the House of God, and of the
Dedicate Things. Under him there were two other sorts of Officers: the first
whereof kept the Treasures of the House of the Lord, that is, such as were
constantly enjoined for the maintenance of the Temple; and they are recited by
name to have been two Brethren, Zetham and Joel, the sons of Jehieli; and
Shebuel, the son of Gershom, Ver. 22.
of the Posterity of Moses, seems to have been the chief, being called the
Ruler of these Treasures. The second sort was entrusted with the Treasures of
the Dedicate Things, that is, the Gifts, or Free Will Offerings of the Princes,
Ver. 24.
Captains, Priests, or any other of the people, which were voluntarily
presented unto God, out of spoils won in Battles, or any other way, whereby
their substance was augmented. Such as Samuel, Saul, Abner, Joab, David the
King, with the chief Fathers and Captains over thousands, or hundreds, in the
Host of Israel, had freely bestowed on the Temple-Service. Ver. 26, 27, 28.
Over which we read, that Shelomith was the great Lord-Treasurer; whose Lineage,
according to all the Names of the Persons, between Him and Moses, that we yet
find mentioned, was on this wise.

Levi Gershon 1 Chronicles. 17.20. 1 Chronicles. 23.7.
Laadan, or Libni intermediate Sons not known 1 Chronicles. 23.8.
Jehiel, or Jehieli. Zetham. Joeli.



Kohath Amram Moses Zipporah
Jethro Exodus 2.22.
Gershom. Intermediate sons not known. Shebuel, over the Treasures of the House
of the Lord, verse 24. and 1 Chronicles. 23.16.


Eliezer. Exodus 18.4. 1 Chr. 26.25.
Rehabiah Jeshajah Joram Zichri Shelomith, Over the Treasures of the Dedicate
Things, v. 28.





By this short Scheme, though imperfect, for want of Scripture Light, we may
perceive how highly God was pleased to honor the Posterity of Moses, in
bestowing upon them mainly, the chief Trust of the Treasures of his House. Let
us here remember, that these Overseers, and Guardees of the Treasuries, were
reckoned among the Porters, as having the distinct charge of the Chambers,
Doors, and Chests of the Treasures. For it is expressly recorded, that the four
chief Porters had the oversight of the Chambers, or Storehouses, and the
Treasuries of the House of God, entrusted with them. Moreover, 1 Chr. 9.26. 1 Chronicles. 26.15, 17. 2 Chronicles. 25.24.
we may observe, that the Sons of Obed-Edom, (known Porters) had the house of
Asuppim, or the Gatherings, as well as of the little Gates, at each end of the
House, committed to them, being the same Treasures that were robbed by the King
of Israel, in the days of Amaziah, King of Judah. Lastly, it appears by that
passage in the time of King Hezekiah's famous Reformation, which acquaints us,
that Core, the son of Imnah the Levite (the Porter toward the East) was over
the Free Will Offering of God, 2 Chronicles. 31.14.
to distribute the Oblations of the Lord, and the most Holy Things.

So that it appears, that the Treasurers and Overseers of the Dedicate Things,
are to be computed among the Porters, but of a higher Rank, then the ordinary
Ones, that came in and out by turns to wait at the Gates, to open and shut, and
watch at them day and night. For some we find employed in taking the charge of
the ministering Vessels, and bringing them in and out by Tale, according to the
Appointment of the Priests. 1 Chronicles. 9.28, 29, etc. 1 Chronicles. 23.28.
Some were set to the oversight of the Vessels, and all the Instruments of the
Sanctuary, and the fine Flour, and the Wine, the Oil, the Frankincense and the
Spices. One had his Office over things made in Pans; others, over the
Shewbread, to prepare it for the Sabbath; and others, in other diverse and
various Employments of this nature. But enough of these: let us proceed to the
Judges of the Nation, that were of this Levitical Tribe.

Of the Judges.
BEsides the Singers, Porters, and Treasurers, there were also Judges of this
Tribe of Levi. Some whereof had their constant residence in the Country for
this Service, and their number (distinct from the 24 thousand that set forward
the work of the house) is reported to have been six thousand, as Officers and
Judges. To cut this Discourse short, 1 Chronicles. 23.4.
we shall only speak to two things, their Lineage, and their Office.

As to their Lineage, its known out of many passages of Scripture, that Kohath,
the son of Levi, had four sons, Amram, Izhar, Hebron, and Vzziel. The Posterity
or Issue of which four persons, 1 Chronicles. 23.12. 1 Chronicles. 26.23.
were styled by the Names of their Fathers.

The Children of Izhar and Hebron were set apart for this work of Judgment
principally, as to the set stations. Though probably many hundreds of their
Children might be also taken up in the immediate service of the Temple, as
appears by the Singers of Hemans Company, that were the Iffue of Izhar, as may
be seen in the Genealogical Scheme of the Singers in preceding pages. Neither
is it improbable, but that those 24000 who were employed more immediately in the
Temple-Worship, (when they departed in their Courses from their service) did
also perform this great and solemn work of Judgment among the people. For they
coming in, and going out by set-numbers every week in 24 Courses, did appear
but once in 24 weeks at the Temple, unless at the three grand Solemnities; and
so had leisure sufficient in their several Cities and Villages to teach the
people the Laws of God, to expound the Letter of the Moral, Ceremonial, and
Judicial Parts thereof, and to judge finally in all matters of Controversy
about those Laws, and of their living according to, or the disobeying of them.

Of the Izharites, Chenaniah and his sons were for the outward business over
Israel, for Officers and Judges, Ver. 29.
says the Text in the Book of Chronicles; and moreover, that Hashabiah and his
Brethren, Ver. 30.
men of valor among the Hebronites, 1700 were Officers among them of Israel,
on this side Jordan Westward, in all businesses of the Lord, and in the service
of the King. On the other side of Jordan, Eastward, was Jerijah, chief among
the Hebronites, according to the Generation of his Fathers, Ver. 31.
in the 40th year of the Reign of King David, who were found among the mighty
men of Valor, at Jazer of Gilead, which was a City of the Levites in the Tribe
of Gad. 1 Chronicles. 6.81.
Of the Brethren of Jerijah, men of valor, there were 2700 chief Fathers, whom
King David made Rulers over the Reubenites, Gadites, and the half Tribe of
Manasseh, for every matter pertaining to God, and affairs of the King. So that
we find by Record 1700 of the Lineage of Hebron, 1 Chronicles. 26.32.
on the West of Jordan, and 2700 on the East side of the same Line and
Extraction; whence may probably follow, that the 1600 Judges yet remaining, of
the number of 6000 mentioned at first, that they were of the Posterity of
Izhar, and were employed on the West side of Jordan, which was the greatest
part of the Land of Canaan, and, according to the proportion of nine Tribes and
a half in that Region, had not so many as the two Tribes and half on the East
of Jordan, possibly because of its nearer vicinity to the Court, and the Royal
Residence, and so needed not so many, because of the convenience of their
Appeals unto Jerusalem it self. As to their Office, the comparing of two places
of Scripture will manifest the great Dignity of their Employment, and the large
extent of their power. In the first whereof God himself commands, that in
matters of difficulty, if any strong Emergency did arise in Judgment between
Blood and Blood, Plea and Plea, Stroke and Stroke, being matters of
controversy, within their Gates, they were appointed to go to the place which
God should choose, that is, Jerusalem principally, Deuteronomy. 17.8. etc.
and any of the Levitical Cities ordinarily, where the Judges had their fixed
residence, and should come to the Priests, the Levites, who should determine in
a Sentence of Judgment, and the people were to stand to their Decisions; which
if any man presumptuously dared to decline, that man was to be put to death,
and evil to be put away from Israel.

2 Chronicles. 19.8. Ver. 10.
Besides, we read in the History of King Jehoshaphat, that He did institute in
Jerusalem Levites and Priests, to hear and determine Causes for the Judgment of
the Lord, and for Controversies, and charged them, that what Cause soever did
come before them, between Blood and Blood, Law and Commandment, Statutes and
Judgments, that they should judicially admonish them not to trespass against
the Lord.

So that from these and other places, it is easy to collect, that the Levites
were Judges over Israel, in the highest matters concerning Life or Estate, or
any other Controversy between man and man: It being observed by sundry learned
Writers, that there was but one Court of Judicature among the Jews, whereof the
Levites were the Judges, and the written Law of Moses was their Rule: not
according to the corrupt Innovations of the Church of Rome, in erecting their
Curia Christianitatis, for the securing of Churchmen in all their outrages
from secular power, in this and in other Nations, and digesting of those
Dung-Carts, full of Canonical Books (distinct from the Civil Law, or the
Municipals of each Country) enough, by their burden, to sink a thousand Asses
into the River of Tyber. But to proceed. To these Levites did appertain the
Records and Genealogies: For of this Tribe were the Judges, Lawyers, Scribes,
Recorders, Genealogists, in all matters pertaining to the Administration of
Justice, Exposition of the Laws, Writing out of the Copies of the Holy Books,
to be read in the Countrey-Synagogues, the preservation of the Lineage of their
Tribes, the determination of Cases, and laying up the Rolls of the Records, in
relation to things Sacred and Civil, either belonging to the King, or any of
the people. Insomuch, that the persons of the greatest rank and quality, either
for dignity of Office, or Nobility of Person age, excepting the Royal Race of
the Tribe of Judah, were of these. For we find them to be Highpriests, and
chief Judges of the Land, 1 Kin. 2.35. 1 Chronicles. 27.5. 1 Chronicles. 26.14.
Generals of the Army, such was Benajah, the son of Jehojadah, in the days of
Solomon, expressly called a chief Priest in the Book of Chronicles, Lord High
Treasurers of the Temple, and Councillors of State to the King: such was
Zechariah, one of the Porters of the Temple. Nay, to conclude, they were the
only persons that preserved Learning and Knowledge, in all the Arts and
Sciences, wherein those Ages were versed, the Schools of the Prophets being
under their Cognizance and Institution; and particularly, the College at
Jerusalem, mentioned in the days of Josiah. Insomuch, that the wisdom of our
Saxon and Norman Ancestors, is highly to be honored: in that they first
admitted the Bishops of the Province, as skilled in the Laws of God, to sit
with the Earls of the Counties in their Tribunals, to assist them in decision
of Causes, according to the Word, (especially such as were co-incident with the
Laws of God; even as Holy Ambrose, in his 32d Epistle, tells Valentinian the
Emperor, concerning Blessed Constantine, Qui nullas leges ante pramisit, sed
liberum dedit Judicium Sacerdotibus) which appears by Sir H. Spelman, in his
Glossary, and his Treatise of Tithes, and in the first Tome of his Counsels, in
Seldens Janus Anglorum, and other his Pieces, in Mr. Sadler's late notable
piece of the Rights and Privileges of the Kingdom, and in many other, both
Antiquaries and Historians, that touch the Saxon days.

The latter, I mean the Norman Kings, in giving the presidency of the Court of
Chancery usually to a Bishop, as being presumed to be a man of such Conscience
and Knowledge in the Laws of God, the Rules of Christian Piety and Policy, the
Laws of Nature, and of Nations, that matters appea^able from the ordinary
Courts of Justice, might find there a speedy, safe, and righteous Issue. It
being a Sanctuary to persons sweating under the rigor of the Law, the cunning
of perverse Pleaders, the corruption of Juries and Judges in any of the other
Courts. But hitherto let it suffice to have spoken of all the sacred Officers,
which were genuinely extracted from the Root of Levi. A word of the Nethinims,
and we shall end.

Of the Nethinims.
THese were the most inferior persons, that were conversant in any
Temple-Work, being of the Race of the Idolatrous Canaanites, and were the
first fruits of any whole Cities or Societies of men that were proselyted unto
God, presaging of old, the future admission of the whole Harvest of the
Gentiles within the Pale of the Church.

The Story is sufficiently known, how the people of Gibeon, Chephirah, Beeroth,
and Kiriath-Jearim, by a wily collusion imposed upon Joshuah, Josh. 9.17.
and the Princes of Israel, whereby they obtained an exemption of their persons
from the common calamity of Canaan. But, upon discovery of their craft, they
were solemnly adjudged unto Bondage; yet such as was very honou^able, (if any
servitude may be so styled) in that they were appointed for servants to the
House of God, under the Priests and Levites, Ver. 23.
and so might esteem it some accession of excellency to be placed rather in the
Van of Bondmen, then in the Rear, and to be made the Lags of Freemen. What
ever estimation they put upon it, certain it is, such sacred service was a
great mercy to them, who having their lives spared, because of the Oaths of the
Princes, might have been banished; but were now received unto the Knowledge and
Service of the true God, and like to be set in the true path of Eternal
Salvation: so that whereas others are said to take the Kingdom of Heaven by
violence in another sense, Math. 11.12.
here the Gibeonites may be said to have taken it by craft, and outwitted
themselves into true happiness. The work which they were appointed to by
Joshuah, was hewing of Wood, and drawing of Water for the Sanctuary, and for
the Congregation (that is, for the service of the Congregation in their
Sacrifices) and for the Altar of the Lord. Our Translation reads it thus, Josh.
9.23. Ver. 21, 27. Ver. 27.
that [Joshuah made them such that day] But in the Hebrew the word is (...) and
dedit eos; and he gave them from (...) Nathan, to give or deliver over. Whence
it is, that they were styled the (...) Nethinims, or the persons given and
delivered over for such a service; and therefore the Text says, they were
cursed, that is, dedicated to God, as the first-fruit of the slaves of Canaan.
Ver. 23.
Even as the City Jericho, Josh. 6.19. and 7.1.
with all the goods, was cursed, as being the first-fruit of Cities, taken in
the Land; therefore was all the Treasure of it consecrated to the Lord; and
Achan herein sinned, by meddling with the accursed, or dedicated spoils every
person being cursed and condemned that durst touch any Dedications, to diminish
from, or take them away. But as to these Nethinims (which we have in hand) that
were thus accursed and dedicated to the Sanctuary, the sons of Saul found is by
sad experience, to be a dangerous point to meddle with consecrated persons as
well as things. Concerning whose Name, 2 Samuel 21.9.
the Paronomasia is more clear and evident in the Book of Ezra; where the Holy
Penman creating of these persons, in the Register of the Returns from Babylon,
has these words in the Hebrew Text, [(...)] And of the Nethinims, Ezra 8.20.
Shenathan David, which David gave, or as we read in our English Version [had
appointed for the service of the Levites] that is, whom David had, de novo,
constituted in their several set-courses, as He had done all the Officers of
the Temple, in their several Stations, a little before his death; not that now
they were at this time first employed in these Services, but had been ever,
since the days of Josuah conversant in that labor: but were now methodized for
Temple-service, according to the Incense of their Generations, since the days
of their Primitive Admission, to be the Ministers or Servants of God in the
lowest Works of the Sanctuary. Ezra 7.24.


The Habitation of these Nethinims, or Gibeonites, was in Ophel, when the
Temple was built, Neh. 3.26. and 11.21.
that is, either in the Tower it self, as some conceive, or else in houses near
to that Tower, or the Wall (so called) of Ophel, in a capacious place, or
street possibly running near the Wall, and adjacent to the Tower of Ophel. On
which stately Building, there was much expended by King Jotham, and it was
afterward magnificently raised to a very great height by King Manasseh. 2 Chronicles. 27.3. 2 Chronicles. 33.14.
Now the reason why they lodged in or near Ophel, was, because of its
proximity, or nearness to the Eastgate of the Temple, the ordinary stately
entrance into that sacred place: For they being not of the Tribe of Levi, might
not lodge within the Courts of the Temple. But those that were in course, to
attend upon the Wood and Water for the Sacrifices, and other sacred uses,
lodged close by, till their Week was finished, and then probably they went out
to their Cities and Villages abroad in the Country, as the Priests and the
Levites did: For we have express mention of Cities abroad, wherein these
Nethinims, as well as the other Officers of the Temple dwelt. Ezra 2.70.
But so much let it suffice, to have spoken, concerning the sacred Officers
attendant upon Divine Worship in the House of God at Jerusalem.

SECT. II. The second Paragraph of this Chapter, according to the Division of
it in the beginning, shall contain the several Seasons, Quantities, Numbers,
and Measures, of things sacrificed unto God under the Jewish Paedagogie.
IN the first place let us remember, that the Divisions of this Section, ratione
temporum, will, out of Scripture, produce some short Discourse about, 1 The
Daily Service. 2 The Weekly. 3 The Monthly. And fourthly, the Annual
Festivities, which were to be punctually observed, and solemnly performed in
their due time and method, (according to the Divine Injunctions) in this Holy
Place.

Here, before I proceed, it is somewhat requisite that I briefly speak a little
to the dry and liquid Measures of the Hebrews, so far, and of so many only, as
we shall use in this Discourse of the Sacrifices.

As to dry Measures, there are three only that we shall use: The Omer, Ephah,
and Homer. Concerning which, we find in Scripture, Exodus 16.36. Ezekiel. 45.11.
Antiq. l. 3. c. 7.
that ten Omers make an Ephah, and ten Ephahs produce an Homer. By a tenth deal
of Flour, so often mentioned in the Levitical Sacrifices, we understand an
Omer, which in the Hebrew Text of Leviticus, is called (...) and is retained by
Josephus, who calls this Quantity and Measure (...) and tells us, that one of
these Measures was equal to 7 Attick cotyla's. Each Cotyla containing 9 Ounces,
according to the Learned Agricola. This being multiplied by 7. produces 63
Ounces; De ponderibus and mensuris, lib. 2. page 85.
and that being reduced to pounds of 12 ounces, according to the Medicinal
Measures of the Greeks, leaves in the Quotient 5 li. and 3 ounces of Attick
Measures, or 5 pints, (give us leave so to speak) and 3^/12, or, for one Omer,
or 10th deal of Flour for a meat offering to every Lamb. Consequently, ten
times as much, that is an Ephah, is 52 li. and, which being reduced to English
measure, makes six Gallons, one Pottle, and half a pint. So that one Omer was
one Pottle, one Pint, and three Ounces of our Measure, or very near the matter,
though we cannot now spend time in reducing the Attick pound to our English
Troy Weight of 12 ounces, 8 pounds whereof makes an English Gallon, according
to the Statute of the 12 H. 7. cap. 5.

Secondly, As to liquid Measures, there are three only that we have need to
meddle with; the Log, Hin, and Bath: of which, one Log contained six Eggs, that
is, as much Water as ran out of a Vessel whereinto 6 Eggs were put, after it
was filled unto the brim: Schindler.
or, as others, the content of 6 Egg-shells. Secondly, a Hin contained 72 Eggs,
or 12 Logs: Buxtorf.
so that in Sacrifice-measures mentioned in Scripture, (importing, that there
were Vessels of such a content as follows) The fourth part of a Hin is three
Logs. The third part is four Logs; half a Hin, six Logs; and three quarters,
nine Logs.

Moreover, lastly, six Hins fill up a Bath. Now for Reduction to our Measures,
as in the dry Measures, we pitch upon the Assaron, or tenth deal, because most
used in this present Sacrifice Story: so we will now pitch upon the Hin, which
with its parts is the measure frequently mentioned in this business. As to
this, Josephus (I will not say how truly and punctually) comparing the Hin with
Attick Measures, tells us, Antiq. l. 3. cap. 9. p. 88. D.
it was equal to two of those Measures, which the Athenians termed (...), which
by the Commentator upon Nicander, at the end of his Alexipharmaca is thus
explained (...), and afterward (...). A Chus is six Sextaties, and a Sextary
contains one li. and, whence we lea^n, that one Chus is 9 li. and one Hin is 18
li. of Attick, Measure. Consequently, there are 108 pounds in one Bath: and one
Log, being the seventy second part of a Bath, will contain a pint and half,
even three times as much as will be produced by such as converse with
Egge-shels. But, indeed, I vehemently suspect Josephus, because (in reason) the
quantity of Oil, according to this reckoning, for the daily Sacrifice, Exodus
29.40.
being the fourth part of a Hin, or three Logs, comes to one Pottle, and a pint
of Oil, to be mingled with one tenth deal of Flour, which was before stated out
of Josephus his Attick Cotyla, to be one pottle, one pint, and three ounces of
Flour, which is incomparably too much for the wetting of Flour to make a Cake,
if I do not grossly mistake in good Housewifery. For as sure as can be,
Josephus, though a Priest, his Office lay not among the Baking-Pans, or else he
was poorly acquainted with Attick measures. Wherefore, that we may not mar
the Cake in the making, we had better take the measure of those that have put
the Eggs in the Cakes, and measured the Oil with the shells, and they will tell
us, that one Log is but half a pint; and so the fourth part of a Hin, or a pint
and half of Oil, will serve a little better to mix with the Flour.

But this way of dealing with Eggs in measures, I doubt will make nine measures
of ten prove addle.

For, first, they tell us not, whether we are to use the Eggs of Wrens,
Sparrows, Hens, Eagles, or Ostriches, in this profound Design.

Secondly, they suppose all Eggs of a kind to be of one bigness.

And thirdly, they never heed that the Water of the Vessel, wherein they put
their Eggs, will variously rise into a tumor on the surface, to preserve from
a solution of continuity, and that variously, more or less, according as the
Eggs be gently or rashly put in, and so yield Water, more or less, for your
measure: they should have done well to have informed us of the proportion of
motion in this action. If Physicians should have no more care, as to medicinal
measures: then the Priests had in their services toward God, (if this be true)
they might quickly send Hundreds of Patients out of this World, before they
would go. But one thing more I have to say of Josephus, and that is, I am
afraid he trades a little too deep, and goes too much on the score with the
Septuagint. For though he tells us other-where, that a Bath is equal to 72
Sextaries; and here, that a Hin is two of the (...). i.e. 12 Sextaries, and so
agrees with himself, because 6 Hins are 12 Attick Sextaries; each whereof
contains one pound, six ounces: so that 72 Sextaries, arise to 108 pound for
the Bath, as was said before: Yet here lies the point to be proved, Whether a
Bath be so much, or not. For shall I mind you, that Josephus observing the 70.
to translate a Bath by (...), as they have done in several places, and then
taking notice, that an Athenian (...), Nicandri-Scholiast ad calcem.
was 72 Sextaries: He tells us, without any more ado, that a Bath was so also.
Whereas the Septuagint, whether wilfully, or ignorantly; or as a matter not
worthy of such exactness and curiosity, (if we have their true Copy) do
translate the Hebrew word Bath, and Batim, by (...) and (...): and the Log also
they translate by (...). Kircher Concordantia.
So that if you will heedlesly follow them, a Bath and a Log shall be all one
measure, according to the last mentioned Version of a Cotyla. Wherefore, at
present, we shall take this course. First, let us remember, that a Bath, and an
Ephab, are stated to be of equal measure, as to capacity: Ezekiel. 45.14.
though the matters contained (the one being liquid, the other dry) differ
greatly in weight; which is neither the sense of that place, nor our present
inquiry. But seeing that Josephus (as it is above-written) upon his own account,
not meddling with the Septuagint, has framed a word of his own for an Omer, or
the tenth part of an Ephah, viz. (...), not used by them; and that it seems
also upon other accounts, that quantity comes nigh the truth, as may be shown
(God willing) hereafter. We will accordingly, state the Bath according to God's
Command, equal in capacity to the Ephah; which is 52 pints, and, or 6 Gallons,
one Pottle, and a pint for a whole Bath: and then the sixth part of a Bath, i.
e. a Hin will be one Gallon, and three Quarters of a pint; and the twelfth part
of an Hin, or one Log, will be of a Pint, and of an Ounce, that is, three
quarters of a pint, wanting but the fourth part of an ounce, or eight ounces,
and three fourths of an ounce. Two Logs are equal to one pint, 5 ounces, and:
three Logs to one quart, two ounces, and of an ounce: four Logs to one quart,
and 11 ounces: six Logs to one Pottle, four ounces, and an ounce.

And lastly, the proportion of Oil for to mingle with the Flour, for the Cake
of the Daily Sacrifice, being the fourth part of a Hin, or three Logs, Exodus
29.40.
will prove (you see) to be one quart, two ounces, and a quarter of Oil, i. e.
almost a quarter of a pint.

Thus have I done with this particular of Measures, as far as we have use of it
at present; only I beg of the courteous and ingenuous Reader, to use one
Caution, that in the reduction of Attick, or Roman pounds, to ours, they would
not strictly interpret me: which as to an exact and accurate proportion, is the
business of another Treatise.

Now then to recount the service of the Priests in the Temple, we read that
David gave to his Son a perfect List of all the parts of their Duty: 1 Chronicles.
28.13.
which Account being not extant in any one single place of Scripture, we must
have recourse to the various places where they be scattered up and down in the
sacred leaves.

To proceed then, we shall observe,

First, That the constant service, without intermission, was that of the
Porters, who were appointed to watch at the Temple-Gates, 1 Chronicles. 23.5.
day and night, by courses; and their number we find to be four thousand.

Secondly, the daily service was spent in the sacrificing of a Lamb, morning
and evening, with a meat offering, that is, a Cake made of the tenth part of an
Ephah, that is, an Omer of Flour, Exodus 29.38, etc. Numb. 28.4, 5, etc.
mingled with the fourth part of a Hin, that is, three Logs of Oil, together
with a Drink Offering, which was the fourth part of a Hin, or three Logs of
Wine. This was done in the Court of the Priests. But within the Temple, the
Lamps of the Golden Candlesticks were to be dressed and supplied with Oil,
morning and evening; and, at both those times, sweet Incense was to be burnt
upon the Golden Altar, to cause a fragrant odor throughout the Temple. Though
I know that an eminently learned man of our Nation, I mean Dr. Reynolds, in his
Conference with Heart, Page 492, and 495. is of the mind, that the Lamps did not
burn all day long, but were lighted at Evening only, and kept light all, or
the greatest part of the night: yet is it conceived by others, upon the account
of the narrowness of the Windows admitting but little light, that the Lamps did
burn continually, Exodus 30.7, 8.
especially since there is express mention made of the dressing the Lamps every
morning, Exodus 30.7. But we shall submit in this to the more Learned, in these
ancient Rites of the Temple: only observing, that the Songs of the Temple were
solemnized at the time of the burning of Incense; as is hinted, Rev. 5.8, 9.
and that at this time of Incense, the people used to pray without, Luke 1.9,
10. Moreover, that this Musical Harmony was celebrated at the time of
Sacrifice, as we have other where observed.

Thirdly, the Weekly Service was performed on every Sabbath, Numb. 28.9, 10.
which was double to the Daily; besides the Daily in every forementioned
particular.

Fourthly the Monthly Service was celebrated on every New Moon, or first day
of every Month; Numb. 28.11-16.
and had for a Burnt-Offering two young Bullocks, one Ram, seven Lambs, and one
Kid of the Goats, for a Sin-Offering. The Meat Offering was three Omers of
Flour, mingled with Oil proportionable; as in the Daily Service, three Logs to
an Omer, that is, three quarters of a Hin for every Bullock, and two Omers of
Flour, and half an Hin for the Ram. The Drink Offering was half a Hin of Wine
for each Bullock, and the third part of a Hin, or four Logs for the Ram; and
for every Lamb a Meat Offering, and Drink Offering of the same quantities, as
usually in the Daily Sacrifice.

All this was offered on the New Mood, besides the continual Burnt-Offerings of
two Lambs with their Cakes and Wine.

In the fifth place, let us treat of the Annual Festivities, which were
principally three whereof in their distinct order.

First, The Passover, which sell out upon the 14th day of the first month,
wherein every Household eat a Lamb, Exodus 12.4, etc.
unless it were too small a Family, then they might join with their Neighbors.
But these Offerings being particular, according to the multitude of Persons and
Families, we cannot bring them unto a certain account. The next day (after the
solemn slaying of the Paschal Lamb, on the Evening of the 14th day,) being the
15th of the first month, Numb. 28.16-26.
began the Temple-Sacrifices for 7 days together, every day alike; each day
having as many Sacrifices, as the New Moon had; whereof before.

Ver. 27-31. Lev. 23.12, 13.
Secondly, The Feast of First Fruits, answering to our Pentecost, had the very
same Offerings with the New Mood. Besides, one He-Lamb, and two Omers of Flour
and Oil accordingly; and but the fourth part of a Hin of Wine being the morrow
after the Sabbath of First Fruits.

Thirdly, The Feasts of the 7th Month, on the first day of which Month were
offered one Bullock, one Ram, 7 Lambs, and one Kid, with their meat offerings,
Numb. 29.2-7.
and drink offerings proportionably, as before; besides the usual offerings of
an ordinary New Mood, and of the Daily Service. Moreover, on the 10th day of
the 7th month, just as much as on the first day, was presented to God upon his
Altar. Ver. 7-12.


On the first day of the 7th month, there were Offerings for 7 days together,
on this wise following.

On the 15th of these 7 days, 13 young Bullocks, two Rams, 14 Lambs, and one
Kid for a Sin-Offering, with their meat offerings, and drink offerings, as
before; besides the daily offerings.

On the second day but 12 Bullocks, all the rest alike. On the third day ^^. On
the 4th 10. On the 5th 9. On the 6th 8. On the 7th, 7 Bullocks. On the 8th,
Numb. 29.39.
just as much as on the New Moon; and all these constantly every year; besides
the Vows, the Free Will Offerings, and Peace Offerings, which were great
expenses in Worship; besides the Red-Cow, and all the Passover Lambs, and all
the Frankincense Salt and Firing, etc.

To conclude, I will now give you in a Catalogue of all the ordinary constant
Offerings in one Year: in which Year I shall count 365 days, 52 Sabbaths, and
13 New Mons: though I know the Julian Year differs from the Judaical Calendar;
yet by reason of the Jewish Intercalations, and regulating their years thereby,
there will be no great difference, when several years be compared together. A
Scheme of the Temple-offerings in one year.
Kids Bullocks Rams Lambs. Flour. Oil. Wine. Ephahs. Omers. Baths, Hins, Logs.
B. H. L. The daily Sacrifice for 365 days, 2 Lamb a day. 0 0 0 730 73 0 30 2 6
30 2 6 52 Sabbaths. 0 0 0 104 10 4 4 2 0 4 2 0 13 New Moon 13 26 13 91 19 5 8 0
9 6 3 0 Passover 7 days. 7 14 7 49 8 5 4 1 3 3 1 3 First Fruits. 1 2 1 2 Lev.
23 19.
1 5 0 3 9 0 3 0 7 Numb. 28.27 etc.
0 2 0 0 6 0 0 3 1 Lev. 23.12, 13.
Fir st day of 7th month. 1 1 1 7 1 2 0 3 0 0 2 6 Tenth day of 7th month. 1 1
1 7 1 2 0 3, 0 0 2 6 The 8 days of Tabernacles. 8 71 15 105 34 8 15 2 6 10 5 6
The sum total 31 115 38 1103 150 3 64 1 0 56 4 0

Here I have exhibited in a Table at one view, the several stated offerings
throughout the Year constantly, given up to God at the Temple: I will not
undertake, that it is exactly drawn up to a hair: But I hope it is pretty near
the matter, which you see arrives to this sum in a year, viz. One Hundred and
15 young Bullocks, thirty eight Rams, one thousand one hundred and three Lambs,
and thirty one Kids, smoking upon God's Altar: To which was added for Bread
and Drink, one hundred and fifty Ephahs, and three Omers of five Flour, sixty
four Baths, and one Hin of pure beaten Oil, and fifty six Baths, four Hins, and
six Logs, of excellent Wine. This was the constant Yearly Sacrifice:

SECT. III. The third Section of this Chapter, promised in the beginning of it,
shall treat concerning the various sacrifices under the Jewish Paedagogy, their
Nature, Manner, Use, and End, with their attendant Rites and Ceremonies.
IN reading of the Scriptures we find six various Offerings presented unto
God. 1 Burnt-Offerings. 2 Sin Offerings. 3 Trespass-Offerings. 4
Peace Offerings. 5 Meat Offerings. And 6 Drink Offerings. With two Appendixes,
Lev. 2.13. Lev. 2.11. Vol. 3. p. 54.
Salt and Incense. Honey and leaven were both forbidden expressly: as being of
one Nature even to Ferment: as learned Weemse observes.

The main and ultimate End of these Sacrifices were to point at Christ, and to
be the sacred Hieroglyphics of his death and Atonement for Sinners.

The subordinate and intermediate End was, that therein the Jewish People
should be exercised in sacred worship that was typical.

Gul. Parisi. de legibus cap. 8.
The burning of the sacrifices noted the death and consumption of Sin. To
represent also, to the minds of the Offerers, the dreadful effects of Sin as it
merits death: together with the goodness of God to save the sinner, to pardon
his sin, and by the death of his sacrifice to typify an Offering once for all
in the latter days. Some of these Sacrifices were for expiation of sins of
Ignorance or Knowledge, if so be they were not committed presumptuously. For
which sin there was no Sacrifice: Number. 15.30 Heb. 10.36.
but the person was to be cut off from his people. Others were for
acknowledgement of homage and tribute to God the great and mighty LORD that
made all things by the word of his power. Others for thanksgiving after the
receipt of some eminent Mercy, and for many other Ends, as will appear more by
and by.

The things offered were either of Beasts or Birds or fruits of the Earth. Of
Beasts these three only, Bullocks, Sheep, and Goats: Of Birds, Turtles, De
leg. c. 11 Ceremonial Law. pa. 52. Vol. 3. Lev. 14.4.
and Pigeons, and, as Parisiensis and Weemse think, Sparrows also, as in the
case of Leprosy. So some take the word (...) to signify. We find it translated
in our Bibles by Sparrows Psalm. 84.3. and 102.7. The Creatures you see are
domestical and mild. They feed on Herb and Grass, are not fierce carnivorous
Beasts: It Is observed by some to that purpose, that they have neither crooked
Nails and Claws, nor continued Sets of Teeth, and besides are the most useful
to man in his life. Of the Birds one is a mournful Creature, the other, is
commonly reported, by reason of its innocence and harmlesnesse, to be without a
Gall. Fishes we see were not offered: because (say some) they could not be
brought alive: which was one ing^edient of the Sacrifices. Another was, to be
without spot or blemish, not that of Color in the Hair or Wool: but without
any imperfection, either of natural Monstrosity or of accidental hurt or
disease, and for the most part well-liking, fat, and young. The Blood was to be
poured out, and the fat always was dedicate to God all the Fat was the Lord's,
Lev. 3.16.
says the Text in Leviticus. I shall now speak briefly, and in order, of these
Sacrifices, of what Creatures, for what Causes, and how ordered, and in what
feasts they were offered.

1 Of the Burnt-Offering.
The Cause.
This was either offered by Gods injunction for particular Causes recited
beneath or else as a free will Offering: Lev. 1.3, 4.
But in all cases it signified Atonement for the person that lifted it up to
God and showed the demerit of sin, even to be burnt to Ashes by the fire of the
Lord's wrath.

The Kind.
Lev. 1.3, 5, 10. etc. 22. v. 19.
The Kind of Creature offered was either of the Herd, a Bullock; or of the
Flock, a Sheep or Goat; always a Male and without blemish: Among Fowls, the
moaning Turtle or the loving Pigeon.

The Seasons and Occasions.
The Seasons were either arbitrary or instituted: Arbitrary, when it was a Vow
or a Free Will Offering. Levit. 22.18. Exodus 29.18. Lev. 8.18. Lev. 5.7, 10.
Lev. 9.2, 3. Lev. 12.6. Weemse Vol. 3. p. 64.
Instituted times are these remembered in Scripture. 1. A Ram at the
consecration of Priests. 2ly, In case of the four trespasses mentioned in Lev.
5. the person transgressing was to bring either a Turtle or a Pigeon for a
Burnt-Offering. 3ly, At the Initiation of Aaron and his Sons to their Office,
there was a Ram for Aaron and a Calf and a Lamb of the first year for the
people. 4ly, At the Purification of Women a Lamb wat burnt: If poor, then a
Turtle or Pigeon, which a learned man observes to respect original sin at the
birth of a Child. 5ly, As to Leprosy: there were commanded to be offered by him
at his cleansing two he Lambs and one Ewe Lamb, whereof one he Lamb being spent
in the Trepass Offering ver. 12. though the Text tell us not whether the
Burnt-Offering were a He or a She Lamb: Lev. 14.12. Ver. 20.
yet by the forecited rule that none but Males must be sacrificed in the
burnt-Offering, therefore we put down a He Lamb, if the Leper were able; or
else a Turtle or a Pigeon. Ver. 22. Lev. 15.30. Numb. 6.11.
6ly, At the cleansing of separated Women a Turtle or young Pigeon. 7ly, For
Nazarites in two cases. First, at their restitution in case of defilement, a
Turtle or Pigeon. Secondly, At the period of his separation, or the Manumission
from his Vow, one He Lamb. 8ly, Ver. 14. Number. 7.15.-8.12. Number. 15.24. Exo.
29.42. Number. 28.3.
At the Dedication of the Tabernacle each of the twelve Princes of Israel
offered a Bullock, a Lamb, and a Ram. 9ly, At the consecration of the Levites,
a Bullock. 10ly, For a Sin of Ignorance of the whole Congregation, a Bullock
also. These hitherto related were instituted upon the incident cases mentioned.
There remain yet the constant burnt-Offerings, which were these. 1 The daily
Sacrifice of two Lambs, which were burnt together with their Meat Offering and
Drink Offering upon the Altar. 2ly, On every seventh day, or Sabbath, four
Lambs. 3ly, Numb. 28.9, 10. Ver. 11. Ver. 19. Ver. 24. Lev. 23.12. Ver. 18.
Number. 28.27
On every new Moon distinctly for it self as a new Moon or first day of the
Month, two Bullocks, one Ram, and seven Lambs. 4ly, On the fifteenth day of
the first or Passover Month, being the first of the seven days of that great
festivity after the Passover, 2 Bullocks one Ram, and seven Lambs, and so for
seven days continually. 5ly, In the Sheaf of the first fruits, one he Lamb.
6ly, In the feast of first fruits; If we consult the Leviticall Book, we read
of seven Lambs, one Bullock, and two Rams. But in the Book of Numbers, seven
Lambs, one Ram, and two Bullocks: which I shall leave to consideration. 7ly, In
the first day of the seventh Month, or the feast of Trumpets, one Bullock, and
29.2.
one Ram, and seven Lambs. 8ly, On the tenth day of the seventh Month, or the
Expiation day, one Bullock, one Ram, and seven Lambs. Ver. 8.
In another place we read particularly in the case of Atonement upon that day,
besides this Offering there was a Ram for the High Priest himself, Lev. 16.3, 5.
and another for all the People. 9ly and Lastly, On the fifteenth day of the
seventh Month being the beginning of the feast of Tabernacles, thirteen
Bullocks, two Rams, fourteen Lambs, and so constantly for seven days, only
every day there decreased one Bullock from the Offerings, till at the seventh
day there were but seven Bullocks. On the the eight and last day there was
offered but one of each.

The Manner.
The Manner of service in the burnt-Offering was this for the Bullock, 1 The
Person that brought it was to put his hand on the head of it: Lev. 1.4.
as it was usual in point of confession of sin.

Ver. 5.
2ly, He himself was to kill his own Offering: some think the Priest did it,
(who indeed did slay the constituted Temple-Offerings) but if the words be well
considered, we find the Priest coming in to action after the the flaying of
the Sacrifice. So in the relation of Hezekiah's Sacrifices, there seems to be a
manifest distinction between the Persons that killed them and the Priests, 2 Chronicles. 29.22. But that which was the Sin-Offering of all Israel, the Priests
did slay. Ver. 24.

Ver. 5. Ver. 6. Ver. 7. Lev. 1.8.
3ly, The Priest was to sprinkle the Blood round about the Brazen Altar. 4ly,
The Priest stayed off the Skin. 5ly, He cut it in pieces.

6ly, He put fire on the Altar, and laid the wood in order upon the fire.

7ly, He laid the parts, the head and the fat in order upon the wood that was
in the fire which was upon the Altar.

Ver. 9.
8ly, He washed the inwards and legs in water, and then burnt all upon the
Altar^ an Offering made by fire, of a sweet savor unto the Lord. So much for
the Bullocks burnt-Offering.

If it were a Sheep or a Goat, the manner was the same, only mention is made
of its being slain on the side of the Altar Northward before God.

Ver. 11. Ver. 15.
I^ it were a Foul. 1 The Priest wrung off its head and burnt it on the Altar.
2 The Blood was wrung out at the side of the Altar. 3 The Crop and Feathers
were cast beside the Altar on the Eastpart by the place of the Ashes. Ver.
16,17.
4ly, It was to be cleft with the wings, but not our asunder, and so laid upon
the Altar and burnt, an Offering made by fire of a sweet favor unto the Lord.

Thus it was to continue and lie burning all night upon the Altar unto the
morning: Lev. 6.9, 10.
Then the Priest having put on his Linen Garment and Breeches took up the
Ashes and laid them beside the Altar. After that putting off his priestly and
putting on his other common Garments, he was to carry forth the Ashes out of
the Camp, and afterward out of the City, into a clean place: Ver. 12.
while the fire on the Altar was still continually burning by a constant supply
of wood laid in order upon it every morning.

The Priest's Portion.
To conclude with the last thing of this Section, and that is, what portion the
Priest had in the burnt-Offering, Lev. 7.8. and 8.8.
and that was the Skin of the four footed Creatures.

2 Of the Sin-Offering.
The Cause.
The Cause for which the Sin-Offering was enjoined by God, is recorded by Moses
to be this, Levit. 4.2.
If any Soul sin through Ignorance against any of the commandments of the Lord
concerning things which ought not to be done.

The Kind.
The Creature in this case offered was of the Herds, either a young Bullock, or
Calf or a red Heifer: of the Flocks, a Male Kid, a Female Kid; or an Ewe Lamb:
of Foul, a young Pigeon or Turtle.

The Occasion.
The Seasons or Occasions of this Offering upon what account it was instituted,
were either for accidental sins, or on set stations of the year.

Levit. 4.3. Numb. 15.24. Levit. 4.14. Levit. 4.23. and Numb. 15.27. Lev.
4.28.32. Exodus 29.14. Levit. 8 2, 14. Levit. 9.2, 3. Levit. 12.6. c. 14.19.
Ver. 22.
1 In case the anointed Priest sinned, there was to be offered up a young
Bullock for a sin-Offering. 2ly, For the sin of the whole Congregation, a young
Bullock; likewise if it be for Ignorance in not observing the Levitical
Ordinances, a Kid. 3ly, For a Ruler, a Male-kid of the Goats. 4ly, For any of
the Common People, a Female Kid of the Goats, or a young Lamb. 5ly, At the
Consecration of an High Priest, a young Bullock. 6ly, At Aaron's Initiation
into his Office, a young Calf: and at the same time for the people, a Kid of
the Goats: 7ly, At the Purification of Women, a young Pigeon or a Turtle Dove.
8ly, At the cleansing of a Leper, an Ewe Lamb: If the Leper were very poor, a
Turtle or Pigeon. But why an Ewe Lamb, if able, see above concerning his
burnt-Offering. 9ly, At the cleansing of Women separated for uncleanness
mentioned in the Leviticall Law, a Turtle or young Pigeon. 10ly, Lev. 15.30.
Number. 6.11. Ver. 14. Number. 7.16.8.12.
For the Defilement of of a Nazarite, a Turtle or Pigeon: but at the end of his
separation, an Ewe Lamb. 11ly, At the Dedication of the Tabernacle, every of
the 12 Princes of the Congregation of Israel offered a Kid of the Goats. 12ly,
At the Consecration of the Levites, a Bullock.

The constant Sin Offerings through the year were these following.

1. On every new Moon, one Kid of the Goats. 2ly, Numb. 28.15, 22, 24. Ver. 30.
and Lev. 23.19. Number. 29.5. Lev. 16.6. Ver. 7, 9, 10. Number. 29.11. Ver. 16.
On the fifteenth day of the Passover Month one Goat, and so on, for seven
days together. 3ly, In the day of the first fruits, one Kid. 4ly, In the feast
of Trumpets, one Kid. 5ly; On the Expiation day, that great and solemn fast to
afflict their Souls, there was a Bullock appointed to make Atonement with, for
the High Priest and his Family: and two Kids of the Goats for the People: the
one for the Offering, the other for an escape into the Wilderness, according as
the lot fell. Besides this Atonement-offering, there is express command for
another Kid of the Goats to be offered up this day for a Sin-offering. 6ly, and
lastly, On the fifteenth day of the 7th Month, one Kid of the Goats, and so for
eight days together, during the Feast of Tabernacles.

The red Cow or Heifer, of famous mention in Scripture, by the manner of its
Offering appears to be most properly ranked among these Sin Offerings, it being
nearest a-kind to it in the method of its solemnities; Number. 19.9.
and besides, the Ashes laid up are expressly said to be a purification for sin.

The Manner.
The Manner of the Solemnity in the Sin Offerings, was this following. first,
As to the Bullock of the Priest's Offering for sin. 1 It was to be brought to
the door of the Tabernacle of the Congregation. Lev. 4.4, 5.
2ly. His hand who had sinned was to be laid on the head of his Offering. 3ly,
He was to kill it. 4ly, The anointed Priest was to dip his finger in the Blood
and to sprinkle it seven times before the Lord, that is, Ver. 6. Ver. 7.
before the Vail of the Sanctuary. 5ly, He was to put some of the Blood upon
the Horns of the golden Altar of Incense. 6ly, The rest of the Blood was to be
powered out at the bottom of the Brazen Altar. 7ly, He was to take the fat of
the inwards, the Kidneys and their fat and the Caul above the Liver and burn
them upon the Brazen Altar. 8ly, He was to take the Skin and the Flesh, the
Head and the Legs, the Inwards and the Dung, Lev. 8.17. Exodus 29.11, 12.14.
even the whole Bullock, and to burn him to ashes without the Camp. 9ly and
Lastly, He that officiated in the burning of the Bullock, was to wash his
Cloths, and bathe himself in water, Lev. 16.27.
and afterward he might come into the Camp.

The manner of Offering the Bullock for the whole Congregation, had only this
different Ceremony: that the Elders, Lev. 4.15. etc.
as the Representatives of the Congregation, were to lay their hands upon his
head; and then he was to be slain.

As to the He-Goat for the Sin-offering of the Ruler, and the Ewe Lamb or She
Kid for a common Person; The Sinner was to lay his hand upon the head of his
Offering: and then it was to be killed in the place, where the burnt-offering
was slain. Then the Priest was to put of its blood with his finger upon the
Horns of the Brazen Altar* but not to come into the Sanctuary near the Vail
with its blood, as in the former case, but was to pour out the rest at the
bottom of the Brazen Altar. Then the fat of this offering was to be burnt upon
the Altar, after the Manner and Ceremony of the Sacrifice of Peace Offerings,
Ver. 26, 31.
and therefore the parts of it were not to be burnt without the Camp, as the
flesh of the Bullocks which were offered for the Priest and the whole
Congregation, before spoken of, had been: The Priests Portion. Lev. 10.18.
but, according to the rites of Peace Offerings, it seems it was to be eaten by
the Priests; Whereof more in the next Section. Levit. 6.26. Wherefore we read
of Moses's being angry with Eleazar and Ithamar, that the Goat for the
Sin-offering was not eaten in the holy place; and gives this reason, why it
should; because the blood of it was not brought within the Sanctuary: But that
whose blood was brought into the holy place must not be eaten, it must be
burnt. Lev. 6.30.

In the last place, the Manner of sacrificing the Red Cow or Heifer was thus,

Numb. 19.
1 There was chosen out a red Heifer without spot or blemish^, on which there
never came any yoke. 2ly, The High Priest was to bring her without the Camp,
and there she was to be slain. 3ly, The Priest was to take of her blood with
his finger, and sprinkle of it seven times before the Tabernacle. 4ly, The
Skin, Flesh, Blood, and Dung were to be burnt in that place. 5ly, The Priest
was to cast Cedar wood, Hyssop, and Scarlet, into the midst of the fire. 6ly,
Both the Priest and he that burnt her were to wash their clothes and bathe
their flesh in water, to remain unclean till the Even, and then to come into
the Camp. 7ly, A person that was clean did gather up the Ashes, and laid them
up in a clean place without the Camp, for the water of separation, and to be a
purification for Sin; and then to wash his clothes, and to be unclean unto the
Even. 8ly, The use of these Ashes was this, they were to take of these Ashes
and put running water to them in a Vessel; Then a clean Person was to dip
Hyssop in that water, and to sprinkle any Persons, Vessels, Tents, which had
been near a dead body, or had touched a bone, or one slain, or one dead, or a
Grave, on the third day and on the seventh, on which last day of his
uncleanness, he was to wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be
clean at Even: and so he that sprinkleth of the water must do the like. If this
purification were not done, the Person that refused or neglected it, was to he
cut off from the Congregation of Israel. To which custom the Apostle, Heb.
9.14.
expressly speaking, argues a minori, If the sprinkling of the Ashes of an
Heifer on the unclean, sanctify to the purifying of the flesh: How much more
shall the blood of Christ purge the conscience from dead works, De Legibus cap.
10.
as that did from dead bodies As for the conceit of Parisiensis, that the red
Cow did look back unto the sin of the golden Calf by way of Expiation, I leave
it to its favorites: and proceed to the next sort of sacrifices.

3 Of the Tresspass-Offering.
In this Section before we proceed, it is necessary to speak something about the
difference betwixt the Sin-offering and the Trepass Offering. As to which I
shall not spend time to recite the various opinions in several Authors
concerning this point. It Is sufficiently known that the words (...) usually
translated by Peceatum, or sin; and (...) Delictum or Trespass; are sometimes
interchangeably used without any accurate or nice distinction* and their
Offerings also in the same manner. As for example, the very same which is
called a Trepass Offering, Lev. 5.6. is called also a Sin-offering, Ver. 7, 8,
9, and 11. of the same Chapter. But when they are precisely distinguished,
Sin-offering, strictly so called and taken, and trepass offering seem to be
the species, or two sorts of sin offerings more largely taken, and whereunto as
a Genus they are both referred: So that Sin-fering, taken in its large sense,
communicates to its Inferiors both name and nature. For as the Sin-ffering, so
is the Trepass Offering, there is one Law for them, Lev. 7.7. But yet the
communication is not equally alike to the one Species as to the other, and
therefore draws somewhat nigh and may be reduced to that which the Logicians
call Genus anologum. Wherefore according to that ancient Canon, Suarez Met.
disp. 32.. 2.
Analogum per se positum stat pro famo siori significato: Sin-offering, when
mentioned apart by it self, and in contra distinction to the other, is to be
understood of that Offering which we spoke of in the last Section: and is most
commonly and generally so taken. But as to the true distinction betwixt them,
when rigorously taken, and in opposition one to the other: I shall desire to
set down the words of Ribera de Templo, l. 4. cap. 6. p. 271. p. 186. Edit. fol.
which are related in the very same terms with small variation by judicious
Rivet on the 40 Psalm, and highly approved as the best opinion about this
point, who might have dealt a little more ingeniously in mentioning his Author,
though a Papist. Cumque pateat (says River) quando illa duo secernuntur,
delicta esse quae per ignorantiam fiunt, and peccata etiam inter ea numerari,
quae per ignorantiam facta sunt; inferunt, necesse esse, alteram esse
ignorantiam, pro qua offertur hostia pro peccato; alteram, qua hostia pro
delicto expiatur. Eam, quae invenitur in quibusdam ex it is, quae proprie peccata
hic dicuntur, esse ignorantiam facti; eam vero, quae in delictis, esse
ignorantiam juris, aut potius juris and legis oblivionem. Itaque illos pro
Peccato offerre qui factum ignorant, hoc est, qui nesciunt alienum esse quod
capiunt, aut sacrum esse quod edunt aut pollutum esse quod tangunt. Pro Delicto
vero, qu^^id, quod faciunt aut lege prohiberi nesciunt, aut certe non
recordantur. etc.] The sum of all which discourse is this, That Sinofferings
were then presented: when the person at the time of the commission was ignorant
of the Fact, that is, he knew not what he had taken, to have bin another; or
that to have been holy which he had eaten; or that to have bin unclean, which
he had casually or otherwise touched. But Trespass-offerings were then brought:
when the committer of such a sinful action did not clearly understand or
perfectly know, that was forbidden by the Law, or at least had at the time of
his perpetration of the act sheerely forgotten its prohibition. So that it is
observable, that forgetfulness is not mentioned as to those Crimes for which
the Sin-offering was to expiate, but in the case of Trepass-offerings: as may
be observed Lev. 5.2, 3. If the sin be hidden from him, that is, if he had
forgotten: for so the phrase is explained ver. 4. by addition of these words,
[When he knows it he shall be guilty.]

To conclude then, The Sin Offerings did purge the Person and take off his
guiltiness as to sins of pure and unwilfull Ignorance. The Trepass Offering
was to remove the guilt of sins committed knowingly but through infirmity: and
not with the full career and consent of the Will in a violent way against Gods
Commandments. For such a sin was called Presumption, and (as was said before)
had no Sacrifice allotted to it.

As a Corollary then we may note briefly, That the Trepass Offering was
appointed to expiate greater and grosser sins then the former, as may appear by
their Catalogue, and some expressions mentioned in their rehearsal, whereof in
the following List here exhibited.

The Causes.
The first four cases wherein the Trepass Offering was commanded were these.

Lev. 5.1, 2. etc.
1 If any Person heard another swear, if he did not utter or reveal it.

2 If he touch the carkase of any unclean Creature.

3 If he touch any uncleanness of a man.

4 If he swear to do good or evil: if he do not the good, or if he do the
evil he swore to, and knew not or had forgotten that such things are forbidden
by the Law: then finding himself guilty, he was to bring an Ewe-Lamb or a
Female Kid; if not able, then a Turtle or a young Pigeon, Lev. 6.7.
for his Trepass Offering, which in both the sixth and seventh ver. is called
by the common name of a Sin-offering; or if yet unable, then a Meat Offering:
whereof beneath.

5 If the Trespass be committed against the Lord immediately, in taking away any
holy things, then he was to make amends for the harm, and to add a fifth part,
Ver. 15, 16. Lev. 6.17, 18
and to bring a Ram for his Offering.

6 If he wist not, that is, had forgotten the prohibition of the Law directly
spoken against such and such Sins, and so should prove guilty ex ignorantia
juris vincibili, and that only at that time per accidens, that is, having been
accidentally ignorant through mistake, oversight, or non-attendency: which he
might easily have overcome, had he been diligent in the inquiry of God's Law,
and the pondering of his action according to it: Wherefore the Learned Weemse
says, these sins were done ignorantly, as when one in drink kills another: but
not from Ignorance or want of Knowledge that Murder is a grievous sin when in
his sober wits. page 68. In this case, God was graciously merciful to pardon
his servant, and appointed him a Ram for his Trepass Offering.

So that there have been two grand cases mentioned, in case of forgetfulness or
imperfect Knowledge of the Laws prohibition. Now follows a third in case of
knowledge and witting commission of a sin, but yet through weakness or
infirmity, being over powered by temptation and the prevalency of lust. As

1 If a Person did lie to his Neighbor concerning goods, that they were nor
delivered, or in partnership, or in things taken by violence, or in things of
plain fraud or deceit, or concerning what was lost, and lies or swears
falsely. Levit. 6.6. Number. 5.8. Lev. 27.3.
In all these cases he was to restore the principal and also a fifth part, and
a Ram for his Trepass Offering, together with his estimation, who if he were
between 20 and 60 years of age, it was 50 Shekels of silver.

Besides these, we read of two Cases more wherein these Offerings were
presented, as 1 For the defilement of a Nazarite, who had broken his Vow of
separation, Number. 6.12. Lev. 14.12.
his past days were to be lost, and to bring a Lamb for a Trepass Offering. 2
At the Purification of the Leper there was appointed one Hee-Lamb for a
Trepass Offering.

The Manner.
1 The Sacrifice for Trespasses was to be slain in the same place, where the
burnt-offering was killed.

Lev. 7.2. etc
2 The Blood was to be sprinkled round about upon the Altar.

3 The Fat of the inwards, the Rump, the Kidneys, the Caul, and in general all
the Fat was to be burnt upon the Altar; and just as was dealt with the
Sin-offering so with this, Ver. 7. Lev. 4.26, 31.
there was one Law for both. Now whereas it is said that Sin Offerings were to
be managed as the peace offerings. It is to be understood as to the burning of
the fat, which was to be taken away, as from the Peace Offerings: not that they
were divided accordingly into 3 parts. The Priest 's Portion. Lev. 7.6, 7. Lev.
14.13.
For of the Sin Offerings and Trespass-offerings, whatsoever was not solemnly
given unto God by burning upon the Altar, was the Priests only; and their Males
alone were to eat of it in the holy place. For as the Sin-offering is the
Priests, so is the Trepass Offering his; it is most holy.

SECT. IV. Of the Peace Offerings.
The Cause.
THE End of these Peace Offerings was twofold; either to testify the freeness
of their Hearts, in dedicating somewhat of their store to God, and then to
implore some mercy at God's hands, or else to congratulate at His Altar for
some notable or eminent Deliverance: In respect to which, if accomplished, they
had vowed in their distress, to offer up to God a testimony of their praise.
The first sort was called, Free Will Offerings; and therein, though the
Sacrifice had a member superfluous, or were deficient in any part, it might be
accepted. But for a Vow, which was the second sort, Lev. 22.23.
it might not. In neither of them, might any blind, broken, or maimed Creature,
or that had a Wen, or the Scurvey, or was scabbed, or was bruised, crushed, or
cut, be presented at God's Temple. For if they offered the Blind, the Lame and
Sick, was it not evil? Mal. 1.8.
Would an Earthly Governor receive such a Present at the hands of his
Suppliant? much less should God be so dishonored, more especially in the case
of Vows, in the time of our being hedged in with perplexing difficulties. Men
must be as careful to pay, as they were liberal to promise in the time of
anxiety; and be su^e to follow the Counsel of Asaph, To pay, as well as vow
unto the Lord. Psalm. 76.11. Deuteronomy. 23.22, etc.
We must be quick in this work; for the Lord else will surely require it, and
it will prove sin to us.

The Kind.
The Creatures offered were of the Herd; either Bullocks, or Heifers: of the
Flocks, a Goat; Ram, or Lamb: They might offer Male or Female, Lev. 3.1, 6.
of Fowl, a little Bird which some say is to be meant of the Sparrow; as in the
case of Leprosy.

The Occasions.
The Seasons were either constant, or accidental, according to the Emergency of
Providencies. Of the last sort were these; 1. At the Consecration of a Priest,
there was a Ram offered up for a Peace Offering. Exodus 29.19, 28. Levit.
8.22-29.
For if you observe, they dealt with this Ram, according to the Law of
Peace Offerings: only in the Division of it: whereof anon. Secondly, At
Aaron's Initiation, a Bullock and a Ram for himself, and the like for the
people, Lev. 9.4, 18. Thirdly, At the purification of a Leper, they were to
take two Birds; to kill one of them in an Earthen Vessel over Running-Water;
and then joining Cedar, Scarlet, and Hysop, with the other, Lev. 14.6. De
legibus, Cap. 11.
to dip him in the blood of the slain. The Cedar (as Gul. Parisiensis
conceives) was for a handle; and the Scarlet Thread was to bind the living Bird
in the midst of the Hysop, and all together to the handle; and therewithal to
perform the Ceremony: which was also to be done to a house defiled with
Leprosy. Lev. 14.50 51, etc.
The reason why we rank this among Peace Offerings, is, because all
Thanksgivings for receipt of Mercies comes under this Tribe, with all their
various Rites and Attendancies. Fourthly, At the period of a Nazarites vowed
separation, he was to offer a Lamb for a Peace Offering; which possibly is
styled a Ram, v. 17. that is, by way of Explication, that the Lamb was to be a
Male, Number. 6.14.
or a young Ram, about, or under a years age. Fifthly, at the Dedication of the
Tabernacle, each of the 12 Princes of Israel offered two Oxen, five Rams, five
He-Goats, Number. 7.17.
five Lambs, for Peace Offerings. As to the constant Offerings, in the Feast of
First Fruits, we read of two Lambs for a Sacrifice of Peace Offerings: But of
no other do I read, unless we may reduce the Passover Lambs unto these
Offerings; Lev. 23.19. Exodus 12.27. Lev. 22.30. Exodus 12.10.
which indeed were Eucharistical, to put the people in mind of their great
deliverance out of Egypt: Besides, as in the Thanksgiving Sacrifice, it was to
be eaten upon the same day, and none of it lest till the morrow: So was the
Command concerning the Passover: let nothing of it remain till the morning;
that which remained, was to be burnt with fire.

The Manner.
Let us then come to the manner of the Solemnity about these Peace Offerings.

Lev. 3.2.
First, He that offered it, did lay his hand upon the head of this his
Sacrifice, and kill it at the door of the Tabernacle.

Secondly, The Priest was to sprinkle the blood upon the Altar round about.

Ver. 3.
Thirdly, All the Fat of the Inwards, the two Kidneys, the Caul upon the Liver,
and all their Fat, was to be burnt upon the Altar, for a sweet savor unto the
Lord.

Ver. 7, 9.
Fourthly, If it were a Lamb of the Flocks, then the Rump was to be burnt also.
This was the Lord's part, in the Peace Offerings.

The Priest's Part.
Deuteronomy. 18.3. Lev. 7.31, 32.
The Priest's Part, (as in all Sacrifices nor wholly burnt, which are
abovementioned) was the Skin; besides, the Cheeks and the Maw were his.

And lastly, the Breast and the right Shoulder belonged to him as a
Wave-Offering, and a Heave Offering, in the day of Atonement. The rest of the
Creature was for the person who brought it, to feast upon that Sacrifice, and
to eat at the Lords Table with joy. But when the Priest offered up a
Peace Offering, it was shared into two parts only; one for God, to be burnt on
the Altar; Lev. 8.25, 28, 31. Ver. 32. Lev. 22.30. Lev. 7.15, 16. Ver. 17.
the other to be eaten by him after it was boiled. But what remained was to be
burnt, If the Offering were for a Thanksgiving, it must be eaten by the Offerer
the same day: If for a Vow, it might be eaten the same day part of it, and the
rest on the morrow after: but is must never be kept till the third day to be
eaten, for if ought did remain, it was to be burnt with fire.

SECT. V. Of the Meat Offerings.
The Cause.
THE Cause for which these Offerings were presented, was the same with the
former already mentioned, wherewith most frequently they were joined: but
whether united, or apart, it will appear by the recital of particulars beneath,
that they were commonly enjoined, as an Appendix to the other Sacrifices:
showing the Interest God has in us, and all our Enjoyments: which coming from
him, must be acknowledged by way of chief Rent in Sacrifice.

The Matter.
The Matter of there Offerings, were these things following: fine Flour, Barley
Meal, green EarS of Corn, Oil, Frankincense, and Salt.

The Meat Offerings differently composed of some, or other of these
Ingredients; were either conjunct with other Sacrifices, before mentioned, or
separated from them, and apart by themselves, according to the Law of their
Injunction.

The conjoined Meat Offerings, did accompany either Burnt-Offerings, or
Peace Offerings.

Meat Offerings, conjoined with Burnt-Offerings, Lev. 23.18. Numb. 15.4, etc.
had this proportion following. If the Burnt-offering were a Lamb; then an
Omer, or tenth deal of Flour, was to be mingled with the fourth part of a Hin
of Oil: If it were a Ram, then two Omers of Flour, and the third part of a Hi^
of Oil: If a Bullock, then three Omers and half an Hin. If a Kid, the quantity
was the same as for a Lamb. Thus was it to be done in the Offerings of the
Solemn Feasts.

When Meat Offerings were jointly presented with Peace Offerings, Ver. 8.
the case is generally the same, unless in a Thanksgiving; for then the person
made an addition. For he was to prepare unleavened Cakes, mingled with Oil, and
unleavened Wafers anointed with Oil, Lev. 7.12, 13. Ver. 14.
and Cakes of fine Flour mingled with Oil, and fried; with unleavened Bread
beside. One of these Cakes was to be a Heave Offering for the Priest.

There is no mention of any Meat Offering joined with Sin Offerings. The
separated, or dis-joyned Meat Offerings, even such as were presented alone by
themselves, were in two Cases.

First, in the Case of Jealousy, Number. 5.15.
there were no other Offerings enjoined but this following: The tenth part of
an Ephah of Barley Meal, without any Oil or Frankincense. A handful hereof was
to be burnt upon the Altar, Ver. 26.
the rest was the Priest's, according to the constant Law of Meat Offerings.

Secondly, in case of Poverty: As to the four particular points, wherein the
Trepass Offering was required, if the person were unable to arise to the
Expense of those Flesh-offerings, in that Case enjoined, and above-recited:
Then the tenth part of an Ephah of fine Flour, Number. 5.11.
without any Oil or Frankincense, was to be presented in stead of the Lamb,
Kid, or Fowl, and should be accepted for a Sin or Trepass Offering; a handful
whereof was to be burnt on the Altar; and the rest was devolved over to the
Priests use and behoof, as in an ordinary Meat Offering. Ver. 13.


The Occasion.
The several Seasons, wherein these Meat Offerings, either conjoined to, or
separated from other offerings, were yielded up to God, were these ensuing.
Exodus 29.23. Lev. 8.26, 28.


First, At the Consecration of a Priest, there was to be a Basket of unleavened
Bread; and out of is to be taken one unleavened Cake, a Cake of Oyled Bread,
and a Wafer, all to be burnt upon the Altar. To which purpose, the Priest at
his Sacred Unction, was to offer the tenth part of an Ephah, that is, an Omer
of fine Flour to be mingled with Oil, and baked in a Pan. It must be wholly
burnt, and not eaten. Lev. 6.22, 23.


Lev. 9.4.
Secondly, At Aaron's entering upon his Office and Function, there was offered a
Meat Offering, mingled with Oil.

Lev. 14.10.
Thirdly, At the cleansing of the Leper, the Meat Offering was to consist of
three tenth-deales, that is, Omers of fine Flour mingled with Oil, according to
the proportion of the 4th pert of a Hin of Oil to each Omer; and besides that,
a Log of Oil for the other Ceremonies; which being performed, Ver. 21. Number.
6.17.
the remainder was the Priest's.

Fourthly, At the Expiration of a Nazarites Vow, there was to be presented
before the Lord, a Basket of Unleavened Bread, Cakes of fine Flour, mingled
with Oil, and Wafers of Unleavened Bread, anointed with Oil. One Cake, and one
Wafer were waved, as Wave-Offerings to be bestowed on the Priest; Ver. 19, 20.
the rest was the Offerer's.

Numb. 7.13, 14.
Fifthly, At the Dedication of the Tabernacle of Moses, each of the 12 Princes
of Israel offered both fine Flour and Incense, according to the quantity of the
Silver Vessels, which they presented.

Numb. 8.8.
Sixthly, At the Consecration of Levites, there was a Meat Offering to be
presented, according to the proportion allotted to a Bullock, that is, three
Omers of fine Flour, and half a Hin of Oil, as was before rehearsed.

Numb. 15.20.
Seventhly, At the Children of Israel's entering into the Land of Canaan, they
did consecrate the first of their Dough, and presented it for a Heave Offering
to the Lord. As for the constant Feasts and Solemnities, enjoined by God, every
Burnt-offering and Peace Offering had its Meat Offering, according to the
proportions forementioned, and set apart for a Bullock, Ram, Lamb, or Kid.

Some of the Festivities have their particular Meat Offerings laid down. In the
number whereof, were these following.

First, the constant Shewbread, brought into the Holy Place every Sabbath day,
and set upon the pure Golden Table, is to be here accounted; which came to the
number of 12 Cakes for the 12 Tribes of Israel, each Cake of the Shewbread
consisting of two Omers of fine Flour, and composed with Oil: Lev. 24.7, etc.
a handful whereof was burnt on the Altar, for a memorial of a sweet savor
before the Lord. The rest was made into so many Cakes; six standing in an
upright Row one upon another, and a Golden Dish of Frankincense on the top of
each Row, upon the Holy Table. These Cakes being taken away every Sabbath (when
the New were set on) became the Priest's.

Lev. 23.13.
Secondly, In the Sheaf of First Fruits, there were two tenth deals of fine
Flour, Lev, 23.16, 17.
mingled with Oil, given in for a Meat Offering.

Thirdly, In the Feast of First Fruits, the Children of Israel were commanded
to bring two Wave-loaves; each of them consisting of one tenth Deal of fine
Flour, Lev. 2.13.14.
baked with Leaven; and this is that oblation of the First Fruits, which was
commanded by God to be offered, and forbidden to be burnt, because there was
leaven in it; and therefore was wholly reserved for the Priests house, to
consecrate the use of Leaven in their Bread, in their Habitations, when they
fed upon the fruits of the Land, whereof they had now in these first fruits
presented a taste unto the Lord: who resigned it over to his Ministers and
Officers in the Temple, Ezekiel. 44.30.
that a Blessing might rest upon their houses. But, as to the Offering in this
Feast of First Fruits, that did burn upon God's Altar, it was this; they were
at that time to bring in some of the young new Corn newly ripe, and to beat the
Corn out of the fullest green Ears, Lev. 2.14, 15.
and to dry it by the fire; then to pour Oil upon it; and then to lay
Frankincense upon it. Part whereof, even part of the beaten Corn and part of
the Oil; together with all the Frankincense, was to be burnt for a memorial of
their Thankfulness; as an Offering by Fire, of a sweet savor unto the Lord.
The rest (as is often remembered in all such Meat Offerings) came to the Priest.

The Manner and Rites.
The manner of this meat offering (to put a period to this Section) was on this
wise. First, there was fine Flour prepared; then a quantum sufficit, Lev. 2.1,
2. Lev. 6.15, 16.
or a fitting proportion of Oil powered upon it, and mingled with it, and then
the Frankincense was laid on the top of the Cake, Wafer or Loaf, to make a
sweet perfume, when the Nidor, or inconvenient scent of the Flesh and Cake, and
Oil, might otherwise stain the purity of the Air. The general proportion (as is
above remembered) was this; to every tenth Deal, or Omer of Flour, there was the
fourth part of a Hin of Oil to be measured out. The quantity of Frankincense I
do not find mentioned; unless we could bring forth the exact quantities of the
capacity of those Vessels offered by the 12 Princes of Israel, at the
Dedication of Moses his Tabernacle. Numb. 7.13, 14.
It Is known among us, by the Statute of 23. H. 8. cap. 4. that the weight of
several of our English Vessels, is commanded to be of such a quantity,
according to the proportion of its inward content or capacity. I know not
whether there were such exactness used of old among the Jews: or, at least,
whether these Vessels of the Princes were not ad arbitrium, and not according
to any Standard-Vessels, in their capacity. If there were any preciseness in
their frame, as it should seem there was, because they did offer just so much
fine Flour and Oil, according to so many Lambs and Bullocks; which quantity,
was stated by the Mosaical Law: Then there will appear some proportion of the
Incense to the Meat Offering. For if you observe, Numb. 7.13.
there was one Silver Charger, whose Weight was a hundred and thirty shekels,
and one Silver Bowl of 70 shekels, both filled with fine Flour, mingled with
Oil: which arrives to two hundred shekels, that makes at half an Ounce. Troy
the shekel (according to a laxe acception) an hundred Ounces in Weight. The
Vessel of Incense, which we translate a Spoon, was but ten shekels, or five
ounces in Weight. All these three Vessels were full, Ver. 14.
says the Text: the first two, of fine Flour and Oil: the last, of Incense. Now
if the same proportion between the Weight of each, did extend also to intervene
between the Content of each: which, though I confess there is no solid ground
for, yet some Neighboring probability give us leave to indulge at present in
this Point; then it will be as two hundred to ten, or as eight pound four
ounces, to five ounces, that is, where there was so much as eight pound four
ounces in Flour and Oil, expended in Meat Offerings, there was five ounces of
Frankincense, to yield a fragrant savor upon Gods Altar. He that is more at
leisure, may count all the Sacrifices of each Prince, and proportion the
quantities of Flour and Oil, according to the rule often mentioned; and then
say, According as the Weight of the two Vessels, to the Measures of the
contained Meat Offering, so possibly was the Weight of the Spoon to the
Frankincense contained: which was adhibited proportionably to such Offerings.
But to leave conjectural uncertainties, the confection or making of the
Incense, we read to be of Stacte, Exodus 30.34. Ver. 38.
Onycha, Galbanum, and pure Frankincense, of each a like Weight: which being
compounded by the Officers of the Temple (for none else might make it) was paid
for, according to its value; and the quantity which the Sacrifice of each
Suppliant Offerer did take up. But as to the Daily Service, and Annual
Festivities, there was a set quantity to be made, Ver. 36.
and to be laid up in the Sanctuary for these uses.

As to the common Meat Offering, thus prepared with Oil and Frankincense, the
Priest took a handful of it, even of the Flour and Oil, with all the
Frankincense, and burnt it for a memorial upon the Brazen Altar, for an
Offering of a sweet favor to the Lord. The Remnant was the Priest's Portion.

The Priests Part.
Lev. 2.3 Lev. 7.9, 10.
As for those Meat Offerings that were baked in Ovens, or dressed in Frying-Pans,
or upon thin Flat-Plates, they all fell to the Priest. Every Meat Offering
also, that was mingled with Oil, or that was dry, (that is, without Oil) was
theirs also.

Lev. 2.4.
Such of these Offerings; As,

First, were baked in an Oven, were Unleavened Cakes, mingled with Oil, or
Unleavened Wafers anointed with Oil.

Ver. 5.
Secondly, If dressed in the Pan, then they were made of fine Flour unleavened,
mingled with Oil, and divided into several parts, and Oil poured upon them.

Thirdly, If they were made ready in the Drying Pan, they were then made of
fine Flour mingled with Oil, Lev. 2.11.
and there was no Leaven, nor Honey, to be offered up to God in them. But Salt
was expressly enjoined, that it should not be wanting in any Meat Offering
presented to God. Ver. 13.


SECT. VI. Of the Drink Offerings.
Number. 6.17. Lev. 23.18. 2 Chronicles. 29.35. Numb. 15.5, 10. Numb. 15.5, 7, 10.
THE Drink Offering was always of Wine; and was always also conjoined with other
Sacrifices, but never alone.

Burnt-offerings, and Peace Offerings, had Meat Offerings, and Drink Offerings
joined with them: but the Sin Offerings had none.

In every Sacrifice where there was a Bullock slain, the quantity of a
Drink Offering, was half a Hin of Wine: for a Ram, the third part of a Hin of
Wine: for a Lamb, or Kid, the fourth part of a Hin. There are three Seasons
distinctly mentioned, wherein Drink Offerings are by name enjoined: though we
must be sure, that they were constantly poured out, according to the Law, with
all the Offerings fore-spoken of. But the particular times are these.

Numb. 6.15, 17. Lev. 23.13.
First, At the limited period of the Nazarites Vow, he was commanded to bring
his Drink Offerings, together with the rest.

Secondly, At the offering up, or dedicating of the Sheaf of First Fruits, the
Drink Offering then to be presented, was the fourth part of a Hin of Wine.

Ver. 18.
Thirdly, In the Feast of First Fruits, the Drink Offerings are distinctly
mentioned, and appointed for the 7 Lambs, one Bullock, and two Rams, that were
slain in that Festival.

The manner of this Offering, was to pour out the quantity of Wine allotted,
even as the Blood of the Sacrifice, beside the Altar.

Thus much shall suffice, at present, for the brief History, or Relation of the
Temple-Sacrifices: wherein I have endeavored, as much as may be, to keep to
the Letter of the Scripture. What is found defective in this Account, may be
supplied out of the ample Treasury of Dr. Lightfoot's Rabbinical; yea, and all
kind of Oriental Literature.

As for all particularities of the Annual Festivities, and the other
Solemnities, be pleased to consult his learned and excellent Treatise of the
Temple-Service, where you may receive abundant satisfaction, while We endeavor
to find out what Salary and Reward the Great God appointed to His Priests, for
their great and constant pains in Temple-Service; which We shall lay down
briefly in the next Chapter.

CHAP. VI. Of the Revenues and Endowments, assigned to the Temple, and its
Officers.
THE first Work we have to do in this Chapter, is to provide Houses over their
heads, and to give in a Catalogue of the Cities which came to the Children of
Levi by Lot, when Joshua divided the Land of Canaan: which Country is
estimated by Sir Henry Spelman (in his larger Work of Tithes, page 3.)
according to the Description of it by Jerome, not to have been equal to the
Principality of Wales, with the Marches: yet it did yield, for inhabitation to
that Tribe of Levi, 48 Walled Cities, more then are (as he says there) in all
England: Which, though possibly most of them might not have been so large as
many of our Cities and great Towns; yet surely were well strengthened, according
to the Fortification of those days, seeing they are styled Castles in the Book
of Chronicles, 1 Chronicles. 7.54. which we shall dispose in their Scriptural Order.

First, for the Priests, their Cities were nearest to the City of Jerusalem,
and lay, for the most part, in the Kingly Tribe of Judah.
Josh. 21 13-16, etc.
In Judah they had Hebron, a Royal City, and a City of Refuge, with its Suburbs:
but the Fields and Villages were disposed of to Caleb, a happy man, that could
live under the droppings of the Sanctuary all his days. Surely, his Fields
were fat, that were washed with Rain from the Hills of Hebron. 2. Libnah, and
then Jattir, Eshtemoa, Holon, or Hilen, 1 Chronicles. 6.58. Debir, Juttah, and
Bethshemesh.

Josh. 21.16. and 19.7.
In Simeon, the Priests had Ain, or Ashan, 1 Chronicles. 6.59.

In Benjamin, they had Gibeon, Gebah, Anathoth, and Almon, or Alemeth, 1 Chronicles.
6.60. So that the Priests had 13 goodly Cities, with their Suburbs. Josh. 21.19.


The Levites that were of Kohath, had these Cities.
Josh. 21.21, etc. Josh. 21.25.
In Ephraim, 1 Schechem, a City of Refuge: then Gezer, 3 Kibzaim, possibly the
same with Jokneam, 1 Chronicles. 7.68. and Bethoron.

In Dan, they had Eltekeh, Gibbethon, Aijalon, and Gathrimmon.

In the half Tribe of Manasseh, on this side, or West of Jordan, they had
Tanach, called Abner, 1 Chronicles. 6.70. and Gathrimmon; possibly the same with
Bileam, Ver. 26.
1 Chronicles. 7.70. In all, they had ten Cities, with their Suburbs.

The Levites that were of Gershom, had these Cities.
In the half Tribe of Manasseh, beyond, or East of Jordan, they had, Josh.
21.27, etc.
1. Golan in Bashan, a City of Refuge, 2. Beshterah, called Ashteroth, 1 Chronicles.
6.71.

In the Tribe of Issachar, they had Kishon, or Kedesh, 1 Chronicles. 7.72. Dabareh,
or Dabarath, 1 Chronicles. 6.72. then they had Jarmuth, or Ramoth, 1 Chronicles. 6.73.
And lastly, Engaunim, called Anem, 1 Chronicles. 6.73.

In Asher, they had Mishal, or Mashel, 1 Chronicles. 7.74. Abdon, Helkath, Josh.
21.30, etc. Ver. 32.
or Hukok, 1 Chronicles. 6.75. and Rehob.

In Naphthali, they had Kedesh in Galilee, a City of Refuge, Hamoth-dor, or
Hammon, 1 Chronicles. 6.76. and Kartan, called also Kiriathaim, 1 Chronicles. 6.76.

These all belonged to the Gershomites, even 13 Cities, with their Suburbs.

The Levites that descended from Merari had these Cities.
In Zebulun they had Jokneam, and Kartah, and Dimnah, Ver. 34.
otherwise called Rimmon, 1 Chronicles. 6.77. And lastly, Nahalal supposed to be the
same with Tabor, 1 Chronicles. 6.77.

In Reuben, they had Bezer, a City of Refuge, Ver. 36.
the same is said to be in the Wilderness on the Plain, Josh. 20.8. then
Jahazah, called Jahzah, 1 Chronicles. 6.78. and Kedemoth, and Mephaath.

In Gad, they had Ramoth in Gilead, a City of Refuge, Mahanaim, Heshbon, Ver.
38.
and Jazer.

These are the Cities belonging to the Merarites, even 12 Cities, with their
Suburbs.
Thus we see the Priests had 13 Cities in the Tribes of Judah, Simeon, and
Benjamin.

Secondly, The Levites of Kohath had ten Cities in Ephraim, Dan; and Manasseh.

Thirdly, The Gershonites had 13 Cities in Manasseh, Issachar, Asher, and
Naphtali.

Fourthly, The Merarites had 12 Cities in Zebulun, Reuben, and Gad, Josh. 12.
that is, 48 Cities in all. Whereof nine were Kingly Cities of the Canaanites,
and probably, according to those times, were bravely built and fortified, viz.
Hebron, Jarmuth, Gezer, Debir, Libnah, Taanach, Kedesh, Jokneam, and Dor, or
Hamath-Dor: Six were Cities of Refuge, viz. Hebron, Shechem, Golan, Kedesh,
Bezer, and Ramoth-Gilead; and the rest, no doubt, were very famous among the
thousands of Israel. These 48 Cities had Suburbs assigned to them for their
Cattle, and their Goods, and all their Beasts. Here I shall not pass over in
silence, the Conjecture of Sir H. Spelman, in his larger Tract about Tithes,
Chap. 3. apprehending by the somewhat differing names of the Levitical Cities
mentioned in Chronicles, that they had 68 Cities in all, before their
transmigration into Babylon; according to the increase of their Generations.
But hereunto I shall only object the Opinion of another Judicious and Learned
Knight Sir Walter Raleigh; who, by his citation of Junius to that purpose,
seems to conceive otherwise, that they were but the same Cities for the most
part, only having different names, or else in succeeding times somewhat
varying from their ancient denomination in the time of Joshua, unless as to Ain
and Ashan, in the Tribe of Simeon, which are mentioned as two distinct Cities,
Josh. 19.7. and 1 Chronicles. 4.32.

Furthermore, it will be a little worth enquiring what quantity of ground the
Suburbs of each City took up: And 2dly, how they were measured; seeing there
seems to be a contradiction in the Book of Numbers: Where verse 4. informs us,
that they were to reach outward a thousand Cubits; and yet the 5th verse says,
they were to measure on the East Side, 2000 Cubits. I answer to the first: The
Suburbs were various, according to the largeness of the City, which might
happen to lie in a long square, or a Rhomboides, or a Trapezion, which is the
most common Figure: seeing Cities are accidentally formed, according to
accession, or increase of Inhabitants, who seldom are so curious to mind
Regular Figures, unless in Fortification. But upon the supposition of a set
Figure, and its quantity, this may be answered easily. As to the second
Question, we shall best satisfy the Querist, by giving in a Diagram of a City
built apiece: such as the Scripture-measures of that Text seem to
intimate. Let then Bezer, the City of Refuge in the Tribe of Reuben, be the
Example, (because it is mentioned, as built upon a Plain) which we will exhibit
in this subsequent Figure. Let the four Angles of this Cities square Figure,
diagram of the city of Bezer be A, B, C, D, each side; as from A to B, 1000,
Cubits. Now says the Text, verse the 4th, [ The Suburbs of the Cities shall
reach from the Wall of the City, and outward 1000 Cubits.] So do these Suburbs,
from A to E, or D to G, or C to H, or B to K, or N to O, or P to Q. From the
Wall of the City, there will still be 1000. Cubits to the Line of the Suburbs,
that runs parallel with the City-Wall. Now whereas the Text says, [round
about] some have construed it, to intimate a Circular Figure, which cannot be
true. For whether the City and Suburbs be both Circular, or whether the City be
square, and the Suburbs circular, or vice versa; it were easy to demonstrate,
that none of these Figures can possibly agree to the Delineation laid down in
the fifth verse. As for Example, In the Circular Diagram, following A, B, C, D.
let the Diameter A C. running through City and Suburbs, be four thousand
Cubits, that is, a thousand from the Walls on both sides, and the City
consequently two thousand over: where will you find any Line or Lines from
Sides or Angles, agreeing to two thousand Cubits outward from the Walls, either
in one Line single, or in two Lines, from one Angle drawn to the Circumference
of the Suburbs, circular diagram of the city of Bezer that will fall in
precisely with the measures in the fifth verse. The Chord Line F, that is a
Contingent to the Circular East-Wall of the City, being the most likely to fit
the fifth Verse, will be found in its full extent to exceed 3000 Cubits, and
its Semi-Chord, from G to F, will fall beneath two thousand. Moreover, suppose
the City to be square; as H, I, K, L, within Circular Suburbs, there will then
be but four Lines only from the middle of the sides, to the Circumference that
will arise to one thousand Cubits, as M, A. or G, B. Whereas from the Angles,
to the same Circumference, will be but five hundred; as from L to O, or K to P;
and from other parts variously unequal, still falling short of a thousand, and
so it will prove in any other Figure but a square for both City and Suburbs,
whether the Figures be regular or irregular. Wherefore now to answer to the
Objection from that word in the verse [round about] I say that (...) the word,
in the Hebrew, for round about, cannot here signify a Circular Figure; but is
spoken of all the four sides of the square Wall that includes the City, and so
we shall find it used frequently in Scripture, Exodus 25.31.
for the compass of a square Figure: As in Exodus, the Scripture says, that
there was a Crown of Gold made and placed round about the Ark: which appears by
its Description to have been a long square: So likewise in the Book of Kings,
The Side-Chambers are said to be built round about the Temple; whereas it is
evident by the measures of the Temple, that it was no Pantheon, but a long
Square also. And lastly, in Ezekiel. 42.20. He that measured the outward Court of
that Visionary Temple, the Text says, he measured it by the four sides, and
that it had a Wall round about, where the Hebrew words are (...). So that in
all these places, this very same word is used for a square Figure. To mention
no more therefore, and come to the point in hand, the 5th verse of this 35 of
Numbers, teaches us plainly, both what the Figure was, and how to measure it.
Our English Translation reads it thus [Ye shall measure from without the City,
on the Eastern side two thousand Cubits] and so on the other Quarters; which
the Hebrew makes most evident (...) Angulum Orientis, ye shall measure at the
Angle of the East two thousand Cubits. The word is famously known for an Angle
or Corner; and so one says, Pagnin.
Est proprie angulus, qui alio se vertat, and is thus used, Levit. 19.27.
Nehem. 9.22. Amos 3.12, etc. which being well understood, makes this Text, and
the first Diagram to agree fitly. For if you measure from any part, Exodus
25.11. 1 King. 6.5.
of any of the four Walls of this supposed apiece City of Bezer, in the
first Scheme; as from A to M, or B to K, or P to Q, or any other point at
pleasure, there will still be produced a thousand Cubits from the Wall to the
nearest Line of the Suburbs, according to the 4th verse. Again, whereas the 5th
verse says, [Ye shall measure on the East side two thousand Cubits, or] as we
have translated it, at the East Angle, or Corner; let us conceive it thus, that
from the East-Corner, or Angle, suppose at A, a Line may run two ways from that
one Point, one Eastward from A to E, and another Northward, from A to M; each
of which Lines measures a thousand Cubits, and both together two thousand: So
that without the City, from the East-Angle, ye may measure two thousand Cubits;
one thousand whereof extend toward the East; the other thousand toward the
North. And this makes that vexed place to consist with a very fair and handsome
construction. Now these Measures must be repeated at every other Angle, and
then the City will be in the midst exactly, according to our former Diagram.

To conclude then, I have in this City of Bezer put down the least quantity
that can be almost imagined for any famous Walled City, that so I might not
over-shoot the sum of Land, which we shall gather up by and by from all the
Cities for the Habitations of the Priests and Levites. For the longest
Cross-street (unless it be a Diagonal, very improper for a Walled City) will
prove but a thousand Cubits, or three hundred Italian Paces: whereas it is very
probable, that Hebron and Shechem, and diverse other Cities, were much larger.
To come then to an up shot, each outside of the Suburbs, as from A to S,
according to this Figure, will be three thousand Cubits, and the whole compass
of them twelve thousand, according to the Grecian Measures of Feet and Furlongs
(largely spoken to above, where I have showed, that four hundred Cubits are
equal to six hundred Grecian Feet, which makes the Olympic Stadium, and six
hundred twenty five Roman Feet, to be just equal to six hundred of theirs)
these twelve thousand Cubits will be reduced unto thirty Furlongs, or three
miles and three quarters about the utmost Limb of the Suburbs, of each of the
Levitical Cities. Again, if all the 48 Cities be drawn into one Parallelogram,
the Area will prove to be one thousand, four hundred, and forty Furlongs; each
whereof plan of the 48 Levitical cities has six hundred foot square. The
compass round about the whole will be two hundred and ten furlongs. So that if
all the Levites Cities were joined together in a plain Level, they would take
up in compass twenty six miles, and a quarter of Italian measure: which
measures of twelve thousand Cubits for each City, and of one thousand four
hundred and forty Furlongs for the whole, have some consanguinity and
resemblance to the Mystical City of New Jerusalem in the Revelations, which is
related to be twelve thousand Furlongs in compass, and the Wall to have been
one hundred forty and four Cubits in Measure, Revel. 21.16, 17. The common
square Root of each being twelve, a sacred number much prosecuted by the
Learned Mr. Potter, in his 666. Chapter 5th. But God's Majesty contrived, that
these foresaid Cities should not lie together, partly for the Priests pleasure,
not to be stifled up in one close body; partly for the Peoples profit, to be
taught the Laws of God. Therefore were they dispersed through all the Tribes,
being mercifully divided in Jacob, Genesis 49.7.
and scattered in Israel, according to the Prophetical Dictate of the Holy
dying Patriark.

Thus I have done with the first Enquiry, and that is, what Glebe Lands the
Officers of the Temple enjoyed.

2 But did these persons, with the Revenues of their Lands, 2 King. 12.4. Exodus
30.13.
find for Sacrifices or Reparations? No such matter* We find a constant Tax
laid upon all the people; which is called the money of every one that passes
the Count. And what that was, may be read in Exodus, to wit, half a shekel for
every Head throughout Israel at any general Muster, least the Plague break out
upon them: which Tax-money, Antiq. l. 7. c. 10. p. 244.
David having forgotten (says Josephus) to take at his numbering the People,
was the cause of that sore and sudden Plague at that time.

3 There was the money that every man was set at, 2 King. 12.4. Neh. 10.32. De
Bell. Judaic. l. 7. cap. 26. Number. 18.21. Lev. 27.30, etc.
which in Nehemiah's time, was a yearly Tax of the third part of a shekel for
the service of the House of God; and as it seems by Josephus, there was an
Annual Tax of two Attick Drachmes, equal to half a shekel according to him:
which being formerly paid by every man to the Temple, was afterward imposed
upon the Jews, for the Capitol at Rome.

Fourthly, They had the Tenth of all the Land, even of the Increase of the
Seed, of the Fruits of Trees, of Herds and Flocks, etc. Mr. Seldom observes in
his History of Tithes, Cap. 2.. 4. p. 17. that this Revenue was far more then
the Tenth. For, as he has there computed it, of six thousand Ephahs of Corn
supposed to be the Burden of such a man's Land, when all the Deductions for the
Sanctuary were taken out, there remained but four thousand, seven hundred,
seventy nine to the Owner. So that he paid 21 Ephahs above the fifth part of
his reaped quantity; for there were one thousand, two hundred, twenty one
Ephahs paid to the Temple. Concerning this, and many other of these Revenues,
assigned to the Levitical Tribe, be pleased to peruse what is learnedly
observed by Dr. Edw. Reynolds, on Psalm. 110. p. 478. etc. And Mr. Weemse on the
Ceremonial Laws, p. 123, etc. Exodus 23.19. Ezekiel. 44.30. Number. 18.12, etc. Deuteronomy.
18.4. Neh. 10.35, etc. Ezekiel. 44.29. Numb. 18.9, etc.


Fifthly, They had the first fruits of all things, and that of the best, of
Oil, Wine, Wheat, Men, and Beasts. Some things whereof, as the first of men,
and of unclean Beasts, were redeemed with Money, five shekels for every head,
and paid to these Officers. Nay, they had the first of the Fleece of the Sheep,
and of the Dough, etc. The quantity of this Offering of the First Fruits, was
not to exceed the 40th part, not to fall beneath the 60th part of those fruits,
as it is observed by Ribera out of Hierom, upon Ezekiel. 45. See Ribera de Templa,
lib. 3. cap. 2.

Sixthly, For Offerings,] of the Meat Offerings, Sin Offerings, or
Trespass-offerings, the Heave-offerings, or Wave-offerings, were all given to
them.

Seventhly, All Vows and Free Will offerings, and all hallowed or dedicated
things were theirs also.

Eighthly, They had some shares in all Sacrifices, Number. 18.18. Deuteronomy. 18.3. Lev.
7.8. Weemse, Vol. 3. p. 123, etc.
(except the whole Burnt-offering) as particularly the right shoulder, and the
Breast, the two Cheeks and the Maw, and the skin of every man's Burnt-offering.
All which Portions, may be more amply learned out of Mr. Steph. Nettles Answer
to Mr. Seldom, about Tithes page 120. and Mr. Weemse, a Learned Divine of the
Scottish Nation.

Ninthly, There was none of the Children of Israel that came up to Jerusalem
before the Lord, at the three solemn Festivals, that durst come up
empty-handed, it being God's strict command, Exo. 23.15.
that they should bring some Gift or Offering to his Majesty: All which was
received by these Officers.

Tenthly, The recompenses of many Injuries came also into their hands, Numb.
5.7, 8.
which was the principal, and the fifth part besides.

Eleventhly, We must also remember this, that no Priest, Levite, Singer,
Porter, Nethinim, that is, the Gibeonite, the Drawer of Water, Ezra 7.24.
etc.) or any Minister of the House of God did pay Contributions, as to civil
Affairs, or Exigencies. For it was not lawful to impose Toll, Tribute, or
Custom, upon them: which indeed was but rational, because the Priests lived
upon the Bounty and Alms of the people, by God's Appointment.

Antiq. l. 3. cap. 11. p. 96. and l. 4. c. 4. p. 108.
In the 12th, and last place, we shall add what Josephus tells us, that they
were free from all Military Service, unless it were to blow the Trumpets, as
was observed before.

These are the Particulars of the Revenues and Duties incumbent upon the people
for the Temple and its Officers, which was a noble and splendid maintenance,
befitting such a Royal Priesthood. Indeed, it was convenient they should have
sufficient, lest wanting Necessaries, they should be compelled to employ
themselves in sordid Affairs, for maintenance of their families, and support of
their Posterity, and so should negligently handle Divine Matters. Nay, it was
proper they should have a plentiful maintenance, that they and their
Temple-Services might not be obnoxious to the contempt of mean and unworthy
persons, such as is the generality of the Comminalty, who esteem neither
Magistracy nor Ministry, if not attended with Honors and Revenues above the
Vulgar Sphere. Wherefore, the All-wise Majesty of Heaven contrived most amply
for this His Ministerial Tribe that waited upon His Altar: For if you put all
the forementioned sums together, there will arise a Revenue for the Temple,
and its Officers, above four times as much as fell to the Lot of tho richest
Tribe in the Land of Canaan.

Let us, to this purpose, view the numbers of the Levites, compared with the
rest of the Children of Israel in Moses's time, when all these Revenues were
appointed them. Numb. 1.45, 46. Dr. Edward Reynolds, on Psalm. 110. p. 477.


First of all we read that the number of the Males of the Children of Israel
was 603550. from twenty years old and upward. Now we may safely conjecture,
there were half as many more under twenty, if not full out. For where one man
out-lives twenty years, many times two for one dye before that age; it may be
more, if the Providence of God in that kind were exactly attended: but let us
give in but half, that is, 301775 persons, which makes the whole sum to be
905325, the sum of the other Tribes. But all the Levites being numbered from a
month old and upward, arose but to a sum of twenty two thousand. Number. 3.39.
By which, if you divide the foregoing number of the people, the Quotient
gives you ^: so that the Levites were not equal in number to the 41 part of the
people. Now one would think they could expect in Equity but the one and
fourtieth part of maintenance that arose from the Revenues of the Land of
Canaan. But you will find, they together with the Temple had four times as much
as the Wealthiest and fattest Tribe in the Land of Promise; which must be needs
above the third part of the Income of the whole Country. Nay, in Ezekiel's
Visionary Land of Canaan, the sacred Portion seems to be the third part of the
Land. For if we observe, the whole House of Israel was to have been but five
thousand Reeds broad, and twenty five thousand long, Ezekiel. 45.6. which cannot
be understood of the City, which was to be but square four thousand, five
hundred, c. 48.30. And being compared with the Portion of the Priests and
Levites, considering also what fell to the Prince: it is conceived by some,
that the third part of the Land was theirs; showing the ample Provision which
God determined made for the Gospel-days.

From all this Discourse will clearly follow, an inference of great shame to
many Christian Nations of Europe; who allow more ample maintenance to very mean
and inferior Officers in the State, Civil and Military, then to the very
Captains in the Spiritual Army; who, for want of due supplies, are generally
constrained, to their grief, to walk Antipodes, and contrary to their own
Doctrine of Hospitality; many times, after their own departure, exposing their
nearest Relations to stand in need of others Hospitality to the great dishonor
of God, and true Religion. Nay, such Countries many times compel the Stewards
of God's lively Oracles, to serve Tables, and the Dispensers of the Mysteries
of Faith, (not being able to provide like men for their own Households) even
practically to deny the Faith, and unwillingly to prove worse then Infidels. 1 Timothy 5.8.
Whereas it is but equal by the Law of Nature, that the Ambassadors of most
joyful Tidings (such as is the Gospel, and the New Covenant of Grace) should
have the most plentiful Rewards: when as the Legal Messengers brought News of
a fiery Law, and a Yoke of costly and insupportable Ceremonies. Besides, their
Work generally contained outward and bodily labor, which whets the Appetite,
and strengthens the Digestive Faculty; whilst the New Testament Service, being
of a more sublime Orb, is greatly exhaustive of the Vital Spirits, which calls
for greater and more costly Supplies for their refection and sustentation.

Let us in fine, remember, and beware lest St. Peter's Keys, for want of Oil;
should contract an unseemly rustiness, and the beautiful Lamps of the
Sanctuary, without a supply of the Juice of the Olive, should go out in
obscurity, or at least burn exceeding dimly. A sordid maintenance, for certain,
will produce a rusty and sordid Ministry. A Jeroboam's Priesthood of the lowest
of the People, may well carry Wisps of Hay to feed Calves at Dan and Bethel. A
thing to be trembled at in Gospel-days, that the Arch-Enemies of the Truth
should have their Designs so deeply fomented. But however, seeing God's Majesty
has ordained more copiously and splendidly for his own appointed Ministers in
the Temple: Let then these Divine Officers go on cheerfully to their Work of
Sacrifices at the Solemn Dedication of the Temple in the next Chapter, and
answer their Relations, Genesis 2.8.
as Abraham did his, when going up to offer in this very same Mountain of
Moriah, with (...) God will provide.

CHAP. VII. Of the Encoenia, or Solemn Dedication of the Temple.
HEre it is requisite, for the discharge of our duty, as to this Chapter, that
we first set down the circumstance of time, wherein this stately Work was
performed: Wherein to avoid all Contests, at present, We shall follow the
renowned, pious, and learned Primate of Ireland, in His forecited Annals, page
58. who places it in the Three Thousand, Seven Hundred, and Tenth Year of the
Julian Period, and the Three Thousand and first Year of the World, and shows,
that it was co-incident with a Year of Jubilee: and in the seventh Month of
that year called Ethanim. 2 Chronicles. 5.3.
The first day whereof (according to his Calculation, though it is greatly
disputed to the contrary) did exactly concur with the 230 October of that
Julian Year. The Temple was finished in all its parts in seven years, and about
six months. For it was first founded in the second day of the second month,
2993. But the Dedication was prorogued to the 8th Year, because of the
solemnity of the Year of Jubilee, says our Reverend Author. So Pe^avius de
Doctr. Temp. lib. 13. p. 537. 1 King. 6.38.
Solomon is said indeed to be but seven years in erecting this Building and all
its Appurtenances, that is, seven complete years, though there were several
months over. We shall then, according to His mind present this Season in a
silent Scheme: only let us remember, it was the 2758 Judaical Year, the Julian
Cycle of the Moon five, and the Judaical three, the Cycle of the Sun that year
was 14, the Dominical Letter D. Therefore the Neomenia Tizri, or first day, or
New Moon of Tizri, called Ethanim in those days, must be Feria Sexta, or
Friday, October. 23. according to Him.

Ethanim. October. Feria. 8 30 6 The first day of the Feast of Dedication. 9 31
Sab. day The second of the Feast. November. 10 1 1 The 3d day; and Expiation Day,
Numb. 29.7. 11 2 2 The 4th day. 12 3 3 5th day. 13 4 4 6th day. 14 5 5 7th day,
1 King. 8.65. 15 6 6 The first day of the Feast of Tabernacles, 2 Chronicles. 7.8.
and Numb. 29.12. 16 7 Sab. The 2d day. 17 8 1 3d day. 18 9 2 4th day. 19 10 3
5th day. 20 11 4 6th day. 21 12 5 7th day. Here the two Feasts of 14 days
ended, 1 Kin. 8.65. 22 13 6 8th day. A solemn Assembly, 2 Chronicles. 7.9. Numb.
29.35. 23 14 Sab. Sabbath day. At Even the Sabbath being ended, and being the
23 day of the month, Solomon sent the People away, 2 Chronicles. 7.10.

There are great Wranglings among Chronologers in this particular. Calvisius
places the 23 day of Ethanim, on the 5th of October, being Monday, as he says,
A. M. 2940. Scaliger, An. P. J. 3703. the New Moon of Ethanim, October 12. and
so his Scholar Helvicus. But a late Learned Author casts the New Moon upon
October. 5. The first day of the Dedication, October. 11. and the departure of the
People, October. 27. It would take up more time, then is necessary to employ on
this Design, if we should spend many Lines upon the Reconcilement of various
Authors, that treat upon this Point: To which purpose, it were very necessary
to enquire anxiously into the exact Julian Year wherein this dedication fell
out, a and fterward to calculate the New Moon of Nisan out of the best Tables,
and then to assure the Reader, by the falling out of the New Moon, before or
after the Equinoxe, whether it was a common or intercalated year. Nay, to be
most exact, to deduce the Moons Conjunction, out of the Tables for the month
of Ethanim it self, and then add to that time of the precise Synod, Lang. de
annis Christi l. 1. c. 10. and Seldom de anno Civili Judaeorum, cap. 13.
27 hours, and for to give the Moon a visible Phasis; according to which day of
its first appearance, the Jewish New Moons were vulgarly celebrated. If I
should perform this at present, it would swell this Treatise too much, for
which it is not of any great moment to insist; and therefore we shall proceed
briefly to describe the pompous Solemnity of this Dedication.

In the first place we read, that King Solomon, for this rare Festival,
assembled the Elders, the Heads of the Tribes, 2 Chro. 5.2. 1 Kin. 8.65.
and the chief of the Fathers of Israel, and a mighty Congregation of all the
Nation, from the entering in of Hamath, to the River of Egypt.

2 Chro. 7.7.
After this, Solomon hallowed the middle of the Court, because the Brazen Altar
would have proved insufficient to contain the multitudes of the intended
Offerings.

The Elders of Israel being assembled, waited upon the King at Mount Zion,
where the Ark of God's Covenant was yet resident, which the Priests took up
upon their shoulders: 1 Kin. 8.3, 4.
The Levites, mean while, according to their several designed Ranks, carried
the Tabernacle of Boards and Curtains wherein the Ark stood, with all the Holy
Vessels of Moses.

2 Chro. 5.2.
Thus in a pompous Holy Procession they walked leisurely from the City of David,
the Ark being brought up to the sacred Mountain: the King and all the
Congregation sacrificed before it Sheep and Oxen without number. Ver. 6.


Ver. 7.
Then the Priests conveyed the Ark of the Covenant into the Oracle, or most Holy
Place, and set it under the Wings of the Golden Cherubims, which being done,
and the Priests returned out of that mysterious place, one hundred and twenty
of them with silver Trumpets (for Moses his were of silver) sounded in the
Court, and near to them the Singers, Asaph, 1 Chronicles. 6.33. Ver. 12.
Heman the Grandson of Samuel the Prophet, and Jeduthun, with their Sons and
Brethren, being arrayed in White Linen, and accommodated with Cymbals,
Psalteries, and Harps, stood at the East End of the Altar, lift up their
Voices, and sung this Verse: For He is good; For His Mercy endures for ever.
While this admirable Consort of Vocal, Pneumatical and Organical Music, 2 Chronicles. 5.13.
made a joyful sound throughout the Temple, its Courts, and the Neighboring
City; Behold a Cloud of Glory filled the House of God, with such bright and
shining Beams, that the Priests could not stand to minister by reason of its
Radiant Majesty.

Immediately upon this, King Solomon standing upon his Brazen Scaffold before
the Altar and looking toward the Cloud of Glory, thus bespake the Divine
Majesty, 2 Chronicles. 6.1, 2. Ver. 3, 4, etc.
The Lord has said, that He would dwell in the thick Darkness: But I have
built an House of Habitation for thee, and a place for thy dwelling for ever.
Then the King turns his face to all the people as they stood, makes a short,
but elegant and pithy Oration, and gives them His Royal Blessing.

After this, He turns His face West, again, to the Temple, and the Altar,
directing His Eyes steadfastly toward that Divine Glory, and falling down
devoutly upon His Knees, 2 Chronicles. 6.12, etc. 2 Chronicles. 7.1,
and spreading out His Hands toward Heaven, He powrs out a large and Heavenly
Prayer before the Majesty of God, riding upon the Chariot of the Cherubims.

At the conclusion thereof, miraculous Fire descends from Heaven, consuming the
Burnt-Offering, and the Sacrifices, while the Glory of the-Lord filled the
House with such Orient Splendor, that the Priests could by no means enter.

Now when all the Children of Israel saw the Fire from Heaven, and the Glory of
GOD upon the House, they bowed themselves with their Faces to the Ground upon
the Payement, worshipped and praised the Lord (with one Voice) saying, For He
is good; for His Mercy endures for ever.

Then the King offered His stately Sacrifice to the Lord of two and twenty
thousand Oxen, and a hundred and twenty thousand Sheep.

Thus the King and all the People dedicated the House of the Lord throughout
seven days: After which followed the seven days of the Feast of Tabernacles;
together with an eighth, being the solemn Assembly, the 22 day of the month.

The 23 followed, which was the Sabbath,; and that being concluded, on the
Evening of the 23 day, Solomon sent away the people to their Tents, 2 Chronicles.
7.10. Lev. 23.40, and 42.
(which were made, during this Feast, according to the Law, of Willows, and
Palms) glad and merry in heart, for the goodness which the Lord had showed to
David, to Solomon His Son, and to His People Israel. After which night, having
slept sweetly, on the first day of the Week, every one takes up his Journey to
his own Habitation, according to their various distances from the Holy Temple.

CHAP. VIII. The Temples Duration.
THis famous Building, being thus famously hansell'd and house-warm'd with so
many fat Burnt-Offerings, we will account its continuance not from the
Foundations first laying, when it was yet an imperfect Embryo: but from the 23
day of the month, Ethanim in the Julian Year, 3710. or of the World, 3001.
which day, according to our Author, being co-incident with the 14th day of the
Julian Month, Lev. 25.9.
November; and being the second Sabbath of the Year of Jubilee now begun, [For
the first was one of the days of Tabernacles] shall be the first standing day
of the Temple, and keeping house upon its own Revenues, apart from these grand
and solemn Festivals, being united for the more August and noble Celebration of
its Dedication. From which day, till the Year of the same Julian Period, 4126.
Aug. 27. being the Sabbath also, it stood four hundred and fifteen years,
Vsser. p. 131.
two hundred and eighty five days, according to the Julian Account; which I
shall briefly exhibit in this Laterculus, or Scheme, wherein the Names, Reign,
number of the Kings, may be observed at one view under which it stood. Not but
that it received many sore shakings, by many Heathen Kings, by the Idolatrous
Neighbors of the Kingdom of Israel, or the ten Tribes; who many a time laid
their Sacrilegious hands upon these Divine Materials. Nay, which is most to be
lamented, it was wounded in the house of its Friends (that should have been)
even some of the Kings of Judah: For all which, I refer you to the sacred
Annals of the Kings and Chronicles, as to the larger view of those
Transactions, which I have linked in a more compendious Chain before the close
of this Chapter. Only before I give in this ensuing Type, remember, that the
Dedication being solemnized in the 11th of King Solomon's Reign; and that He
holding the Scepter 40 years, we must set down 29 for Him, after this great
Dedication.

Years. 1 Solomon 29 1 King. 11.42. 2 Rehoboam 17 Chap. 14.21. 3 Abijah 03
Chap. 15.11. 4 Asa 41 15.10. 5 Jehoshaphat 25 22.42. 6 Jehoram Whereas it is
related concerning Jehoram, that He reigned 8 Years; we are to remember, that
the 4 first years of His Reign, were co-incident with the 4 last of
Jehoshaphat's.
04 2 King. 8.16, 17. 7 Ahaziah 01 8.26. 8 Athaliah, Queen. 06 11.03. 9 Joash,
complete 39 12.1. 10 Amaziah 29 14.2. 11 Azariah, or Vzziah 52 15.2. 12 Jetham
15 15.33. 13 Ahaz, complete 15 16.2. 14 Hezekiah 29 18.2. 15 Manasses 55 21.1.
16 Ammon 2 21.19. 17 Josiah 31 22.1. 18 Jehojahaz 0 Three Months 23.31. 19
Jehojakim 11 23.36. 20 Jeconiah 0 Three Months 24. 8. And ten days, 2 Chro.
36.9.
21 Zedekiah 11 24.18. Years 415. 6 Months, and 10 Days.

I will not say, that all the difficulties of this Chain of the Reigns of the
Kings of Judah, as to their particular years, are clearly resolved by
Chronologers: But that the current and complete years, being examined by the
co-incident Reigns of the Kings of Israel, will produce the Sum Total of their
Reigns, at the foot of the Catalogue: I suppose the Characters of the Temple's
dissolution, by the 11th of Zedekiah, and the 19th of Nebuchadnezzar will
clearly evince: So that we may hence learn, that it stood (though not
constantly in equal beauty and luster) under the Reigns of twenty Kings, and
one Queen, the space of four hundred and fifteen years complete, and two
hundred eighty five days, or a little above three quarters of a year, as was
said in the beginning of the Chapter: Or, if you reckon from the first day of
its Foundation laid (which as you heard, Cap. 2. in the beginning of this
Treatise, according to the Learned Primate of Ireland, was in the three
thousand seven hundredth and 2d Julian Year, May 21.) to the four thousand one
hundred twenty sixth Year, Aug. 27. It continued four hundred twenty four
years, and ninety eight days complete; as the same Author computes, page 131.
To which Petavius agrees in his Diagram of the Kings of Judah, in his
Rationarium, Part. 2. lib. 2. c. 11. page 108.

I know the Rabbis, from their Pseudo-Mysterious Cabal, would fain deduce the
length of its duration, to be four hundred and ten years only, which they
derive most learnedly from Bereshith, the first word in Genesis, having rare
inspection into the blind Visions of Letters, and idle Dreams concerning
syllables. But their Rabbinical Astronomers, soaring yet one Sphere higher,
would make us believe, that the destruction of Jerusalem by Nebuzaradan, was at
the time of its conflagration, legible in the Heavens, there being eleven Stars
then Vertical, which by a Rabbis Feskue might be pointed out for to make five
Letters; and according to their Canon of Abbreviatures, would yield a man
learned in those Hyper-Aegyptian Hieroglyphics, some words to premonish the
Inhabitants of that Cities Ruin.

But leaving these crude Conjectures, to be boiled up to a Romance in the
Skull-Pans of those Chemical Divines, we shall proceed to mention the Names of
the several Highpriests; under whose Rule, and by whose Guidance, the sacred
Services of the Temple were administered: whereof we shall give in two
Platforms; and, in each, three Authors, making up six in all; and then produce
a Connection of these Authors together, in a successive Story: wherein we shall
endeavor, with all possible care and perspicuity, to untie the difficulties,
that have as yet in many things locked up this part of the sacred History from
Vulgar Capacities, or Cursory Readers of these ancient Matters.

The Authors I shall mention and digest, are these following.

1. The Holy Scriptures.

2. Josephus in the 10th Book, and 11th Chapter of his Antiquities, Page 342.
G. Edit. Genesis who being himself a Priest, possibly might receive some
Intelligence from his Ancestors in these Affairs.

3. Nicephorus Callistus, in his Ecclesiastical History, lib. 2. cap. 4.

4. The Book called (...), Or, The Breviary of Times; which is annexed by
Scaliger, to Eusebius his Chronicles, and thought to be the Alexandrian
Chronicle.

5. Nicephorus the Patriarch, set forth also by Scaliger in the same Book; and
lately also at Paris.

6. A Jewish Chronicle, recited by Petavius in his Doctrine of the Times' lib.
10. cap. 49. page 242. and by learned Seldom, in his Book, De Successione in
Pontificatum Ebraeorum, lib. 1. cap. 5. page 134. I cannot undertake to bring
all these in a peaceable compliance and union, and make them in all Points
agree with Scripture: But shall first exhibit the Sories; and then endeavor
to give the best satisfaction we can.

The First Platform.
Josephus. Nicephorus Callistus. Scripture. 1 (...) 1 (...) 1 Zadok. 1 King.
2.35. 2 (...) 2 (...) 2 Ahimaaz. 2 Samuel 15.36. 3 (...) 3 (...) 3 Azariah. 1 Chronicles. 6.9. 4 Johanan. 1 Chronicles. 6.9. 5 Azariah. 1 Chronicles. 6.10. 4 (...) 4 (...)
6 Amariah. 1 Chronicles. 6.11. 5 (...) 5 (...) 7 Ahitub. 1 Chronicles. 6.11. 6 (...) 6
(...) 8 Mera^oth. 1 Chronicles. 9.11. 7 (...) 7 (...) 8 (...) 8 (...) 9 Zadok. 1 Chronicles. 6.12. 9 (...) 9 (...) 10 (...) 10 (...) 11 (...) 11 (...) 10 Uriah. 2
King. 16.11, 15, 16. 12 (...) 12 (...) 11 Azariah, 2 Chronicles. 31.10, 13. 13 (...)
13 (...) 14 (...) 14 (...) 12 Shallum. 2 Chronicles. 6.12. 15 (...) 15 (...) 13
Hilkiah. 2 Chronicles. 6.13. 14 Azarian. 2 Chronicles. 6.13.14. 16 (...) 16 (...) 15
Serajah. 2 Chronicles. 6.14. 17 (...) 17 (...) 16 Jehozadak 2 Chronicles. 6.14.

The Second Platform.
Nicephorus the Patriarch. Chronicles of Alexandria. The Jewish Chronicle. 1
(...) 1 (...) 1 Sadoc under Solomon. 2 (...) 2 (...) 2 Ahimaaz, under Rehoboam.
3 Azariah, under Abijah. 3 (...) 5 Jehojarib, under Joram. 4 (...) 4 Joahaz,
the same with (...) of Josephus, and transposed for Jehojadah, and set under
Jehoshaphat. 7 Jehojadah, the same with Jehoahaz the 4th, and set under Joash.
3 (...) 6 Jehoshaphat, transposed, being the same with Zachariah, in Petavius,
and set under Ahaziah. 8 Phadea, under Athaliah and Joash, being called
Phedajah by Petavius. 4 (...) 5 (...) 6 (...), the same person. 9 Zedekiah,
under Amaziah. 10 Joel, under Vzziah. 11 Jotham, under King Jotham. 5 (...) 7
(...) 12 Vriah, under Ahaz. 13 Neriah, under Hezekiah. 6 (...) 8 (...) 7 (...)
9 (...) 14 Hoshajah, under Manasseh. 10 (...) 15 Sallum, under Amon. 8 (...) 16
Hilkiah, under Josiah. 11 (...) 17 Azariah, under Jehojakim. 9 (...) 12 (...)
18 Serajah, under Jehojakim. 10 (...) 19 Jehozedek at the Captivity.

This last High Priest, called Jehozedek, Jehozadak, and Jozedek, was carried
to Babylon, being the son of Serajah, and the Father of Jeshuah, who assisted
Zorobabel, in the re-edifying of the Temple of God, after the return of the
Jews out of their Babylonian Captivity; as may appear out of these places of
Holy Scripture following, viz. Ezra 5.2. Hag. 2.2. Zechar. 3.1. To conclude,
Ezra, that famous Scribe, so often mentioned in Scripture, was the son of
Serajah, Brother to Jozedek, and Uncle to Jeshuah the High Priest, Ezra. 7.1.

Now we shall endeavor to connex these several Lineal Successions of Priests,
(which have been hitherto presented in these preceding Schemes, or Diagrams) in
one Historical View, after an orderly method; declaring as clearly as may be,
the corruptions of several of the Authors; and as far as the Lamp of Truth has
shined forth upon us, do our utmost to chain them by several probable
co-incidencies with the Holy Scriptures, and afterward proceed to lay down the
more ample story of the Temples duration, and the various Transactions
respecting it, under the times of those Noble Kings that swayed the Imperial
Scepter of Judah, whose times are more famously registered in the sacred
Writings of Scripture-Pen-men, and accordingly more precisely made known to the
diligent Inquirer into those Blessed Volumes.

But in the first place, according to our proposal, let us examine the
Successions of the Highpriests, who served in that sacred Function under the
first Temple.

The Succession of the Highpriests under the first Temple.
1 Zadok being the first High Priest in the Temple, and descended of Eleazar,
the son of Aaron, was instituted and inducted into his Office by King Solomon
Himself. After that Abiathar (of the Line of Eli, and Ithamar) had been
displaced by that Royal King, for taking part with Adonijah in his Conspiracy
for the Kingdom. This Zadok was the son of Ahitub, and is corruptly called
(...), by the Alexandrian Chronicle; whose Lineal Descent will be more
apparent, and manifest by this G^nealogical Scheme hereunto annexed.

Aaron. Eleazar, Josh. 24.33. Phin^has Josh. 22.13, 30. Abishua Bukki Uzzi, 1 Chronicles. 6.50. Zerahiah Merajoth Amariah Ahitub Zadok, 2 Samuel 8.17.









Ithamar. Eli, Contemporary with Samuel; but how many persons were betwixt Him
and Ithamar, is not mentioned. Hophni. Phinehas. 1 Samuel 4.4. Ahitub 1 Samuel
14.3. Ahijah. 1 Samuel 14.3. Ahimelech, 1 Samuel 22.11. Abiathar, 1 Samuel 22.20. and
23.6.

Ichabod, 1 Samuel 4.21.



There be, that interpose betwixt Samuel's Eli, and Ithamar, three persons,
viz. Abiezer, Buzi, and Ozi, but upon no warrantable grounds; and therefore
scarce deserve to be mentioned in this place. Wherefore we shall proceed to our
Temple-Priests.

2 Ahimaaz. the son of Zadok: This person, corruptly called (...) by the
Alexandrian Chronicles, was sent by Joab to carry the tidings of Absalom's
death to King David, 2 Samuel 18.19, 23, 27, etc. 2 Samuel 15.27, 36. He is
mentioned in the Roll of the Highpriests, recited in the Book of Chronicles, 1 Chronicles. 6.8. and possibly may be the same person, who married Basmath, one of
the Daughters of Solomon; it being familiar for the Highpriests, to link
themselves with the Royal Family: as is observable of Jehojadah, in the Reign
of Joash, intimating the union of both the Kingly and Priestly Office in Jesus
Christ, who was prefigured by the Highpriests of Israel.

3 Azariah, the son of Ahimaaz, 1 Chronicles. 6.9.

4 Johanan, the son of Azariah, 1 Chronicles. 6.9. As to whom, it is conceived, that
he might be the same person, who is called by the name of Jonathan, the son of
Abiathar, 2 Samuel 15.36. Where it is to be noted, that both these are omitted in
the Catalogues of Josephus, Nicephorus Callistus, Alsted, and the Hebrew
Chronicle, cited by Petavius, although mentioned by the name of (...), in the
Alexandrian Chronicle. Nay, none of these 4 first High Priests are found in the
Register of Ezra: The reason whereof is conjectured at by Dr. Lightfoot, in his
Temple Service to be, because the Service in the Temple began not till the days
of Azariah, the son of Johanan; as he expounds that place in the Book of
Chronicles, of his executing the Priests Office.

5 Azariah, the son of Johanan, 1 Chronicles. 6.10. and Ezra 7.3. In the former Text
he is said to be the man that executed the Priests Office in the Temple that
Solomon built in Jerusalem: which I take to be thus understood, sc. that he was
the first person, who did execute his office in that place only, whereas his
Predecessors had officiated in the days of David and Solomon, not only in the
Temple, but also in the Tabernacle at Gibeon, 2 Chronicles. 1.3.
and at Zion. Others apprehend it to be meant of some notable act, which he
performed by virtue of his Office, and apply it to that Azariah, who thrust K.
Uzziah out of the Temple: But the great distance of times will not give way to
that Exposition: Seeing this Azariah, (if the two former be excluded from the
High Priesthood, as to the chief Office) might in the latter days of Solomon be
of age sufficient, after the Decease of his Progenitors, to have performed his
Work in the Temple, even in that King's days; and also in the Reign of
Rehoboam, and Abijah, (which was but twenty years) and in some part of Asa's
Reign. For some do apprehend, that Azariah and Johanan, the third and fourth in
this orderly nomination, were of the Line of Ithamar, and as Substitutes to
Zadok and Ahimaaz, might assist them, as secondary Priests, in time of sickness
and separation from ordinary pollution, according as it was usual, whereof we
have spoken before in the Office of the High Priests. Now whereas they are
called Sons in a Lineal Descent, let us remember, that it is usual in Scripture
for such persons to be styled by the name of Sons, by virtue of some Office
wherein men succeed, or attend others. If this be a real truth, then the
omission of the two former by Josephus, and others, will claim kindred with our
Conjecture; and also help to fortify it, concerning their not being the chief
Highpriests; but as secondary, assistant to, 1 Chronicles. 6.9, 10.
and contemporary with the former. Yet seeing Scripture terms them, as lineally
begotten one of another, in an orderly way of Generation, I shall not be
peremptory, but leave the Knot to be solved by abler Pens.

6 Amariah, the son of Azariah, 1 Chronicles. 6.10. Ezra 7.3. who is expressly
recorded to have been chief Priest in the days of King Jehoshaphat, and to
have been over the Jews in all matters of the Lord; 2 Chronicles. 19.11.
which some apprehend to be meant of his being of the Sanhedrin, or Great
Council at Jerusalem. Part of his time was spent, probably, under the Reign of
Asa likewise, and that he continued in this Kings days for some time. He is the
same person, probably, who by Josephus, and Nicephorus, is called Joram, and by
the Hebrew Chronicle Jehojarib, though transposed out of his due place,
especially since we read of one Jehoram, at the Helm of the Priesthood, in
Jehoshaphat's time. Now seeing this Joram is recounted by Josephus, 2 Chronicles.
17.8.
as the fourth from Zadok inclusively, having omitted Johanan, and Azariah the
second. The last (if the forementioned Conjecture should prove true concerning
Johanan, that he was the son of Abiathar, and that the Line of Ithamar was
re-introduced to their former dignity, though not to the supreamest place)
might then possibly fall in contemporary with Ahimaaz, and Azariah the first.
For many times (as we have hinted) we find two Highpriests coupled together,
though one of them had the greatest pre-eminence: whereby Scripture and
Josephus might be reduced to a tolerable agreement; especially, since there be
some probable apprehensions, that Azariah the second (of that name in the
Series of nomination) might have officiated in the latter days of King Solomon,
according to the sense of Dr. Lightfoot, in his Temple-Service, Chap. 4. Sect.
2. Page 24, 25. line 1, and 37. which assertion would prove very strange, if he
were the fourth in order from Zadok, in the beginning of the Temple-Work in
Solomon's days; especially since Amariah (who is expressly recorded to have been
his Successor) is definitively laid down in Scripture (as we have said) in the
execution of his Office, under the Rule and Dominion of Jehoshaphat, the 4th
King after Solomon, there being about sixty one years from the last of
Solomon's reign to the first of Jehoshaphat's. To conclude then; whereas it
might be objected, that Johanan, and Azariah the second, (who are not produced
by Josephus, and others) are distinctly mentioned in Scripture, as begotten by
the precedent, and so to be termed their sons; either we may imagine them to
have been but of small duration in a successive Line: or rather that they are
so termed only Jure Officii, being indeed but Surrogates to the others (with
whom they were co-incident in time) in several necessary cases; seeing it is
sufficiently known, that those who were not natural sons, are yet styled by
that name, upon account of their succession in the Government: which will
evidently appear, by comparing together Matthew and Luke, Mat. 1.12. Luke 3.27.
the two Evangelists, and several other places of Scripture.

7 Ahitub, the Son of Amariah, 1 Chronicles. 6.11, 12. and Ezra 7.2. who is called
by Josephus (...), and by Nicephorus plainly (...), who likewise expressly lays
down the Character whereby to know him, Niceph. Callist. Eccl. Hist. l. 2. c. 4.
consonant to the Scripture it self: that this is the very man that lived one
hundred and thirty years, and flew Godoliah (that is, in Scripture Language)
Athaliah the Queen: which name and story evidently points at Jehojadah the
High Priest, Uncle to King Joash, and is termed also by Petavius, in his
alleged Chronicle, Jejadah, in distinct words; being the same person,
doubtless, who in that confused Chronicle is set the fourth in number, and
called Jehoahaz: from whence Josephus his (...) is corrupted; who for his great
care of the Temple, and Worship of God, and the wonderful Reformation, effected
in his days, 1 Chronicles. 9.11. Neh. 11.11.
is styled, The Ruler of the House of God.

8 Merajoth, the son of Ahitub: This person, though omitted in the 1 Chronicles.
6.12. yet is particularly mentioned in 1 Chronicles. 9.11. and in Nehem. 11.11. Now
if Ahitub before spoken of, be indeed that Godly Jehojadah, as it seems very
probable; then this Merajoth will prove to be the slain Zechariah, or some
Elder Brother of his who succeeded Ahitub in the latter days of Joash the King.
He is called by Nicephorus the Patriarch, (...), who adds, (...) slain for his
Zeal to God; which shows the corruption of his name for (...); who is also
called Merajoth, and was the same with Holy Zechary, as is attested by the
forecited Chronicle, which places Jojadah, and his two Sons Zechariah and
Phedajah contemporary with Queen Athaliah, and King Joash. Josephus in his
Greek Copy* names these three, (...) Nicephorus calls them (...), that is,
Jehojadah, and his two sons, Zechary and Phedajah, who were slain at the
Commandment of the King. Selden's Copy of the Seder Olam Zuta places
Jehosaphat, Jehojadah, and Phadea successively: wherein, admitting one
transposition, Jehojadah being placed first, Jehosaphat, may be put for
Zachariah his Son, expressly named in Petavius his Copy, where the name of
Jehosaphat is deficient; it being common for one person to have two names among
the Hebrews.

9 Zadok, the Son of Merajoth, 1 Chronicles. 9.11. Nehem. 11.11. This High Priest is
styled by Josephus (...): by Nicephorus Callistus (...): and by the
often-recited Chronicle, in plain terms, Zedekiah, agreeing very near with our
Zadok, and is very probably the same man, who was Father in Law to King Uzziah,
and did in such an eminent and zealous manner thrust his Son in Law out of the
Temple, 2 Chr. 26.20.
when usurping the Priests Office; and is called in the Text, mentioning that
Fact, by his proper name, Azariah the chief Priest: but presently in the
beginning of the twenty seventh Chapter is supposed to have his name altered by
the Spirit of God and called Zadok* from that his courage in an act of
exemplary Justice and Righteousness, and accordingly so recorded to after
generations, by this name of Zadok, in the Babylonian Registers of Ezra the
Scribe. This very Fact is mentioned under the name of a second Azariah in
Nicephorus the Patriarch's Catalogue. Who is called by the Alexandrian
Chronicle (...) with the annexion of another called (...), telling us that they
lived under Athaliah, and Joash; which passage plainly carries in its very
Forehead, the corruption of that Author, in placing (...) here viz. after
Zadok, who was the famous Jehojadah, or Ahitub; and likewise in placing Zadok
under Athaliah, who was under Vzziah.

Before we come to the next, it is to be remembered, that Josephus interserts
two more Priests, called (...) but by Nicephorus (...) and by the Chronicle,
Joel and Jotham. The first being placed in the days of Vzziah, the other of
King Jotham. But who they were, or where and how to insert them; Scripture
yields no light, that I have yet discerned.

10 Vriah whom some think to have been of the line of Ithamar, and exalted to
this dignity by ungodly Ahaz: who though he be not mentioned in the Genealogies
penned by Ezra, being omitted, as some guess, because of his idolatrous
obsequiousness to King Ahaz about the Altar of Damascus: yet we have a certain
record of his name and time, he being expressed again and again in the book of
Kings. 2 King. 16.11, 15, 16.
With whose Scripture-name Josephus does clearly agree, calling him (...), and
more particularly Nicephorus, expressly recording that he lived in the days of
Ahaz and Hezekiah, and is supposed to be mentioned, Esai. 8.2.

11 Azariah another High Priest succeeds, though not expressed by name in Ezra,
or in the book of Chronicles chap. 6, or 9. Yet have we famous mention of him
by the Title of chief Priest and Ruler of the house of God, 2 Chronicles. 31.10, 13.
in the days of Hezekiah of blessed memory, and likewise that he was of the
house of Zadock, being in Josephus corruptly called (...), in Nicephorus (...)
in the Chronicle Ne^iah, which claims him as contemporary with Hezekiah.

Here in this place, there intervenes another High Priest cited by Josephus
under the name of (...), by Nicephorus (...): by that Hebrew Chronicle, Osaiah;
and in Selden's Copy Hoshaiah, which is probably a grand mistake, interverting
the order, and inverting the name of Jehojadah before mentioned. For this (...)
probably is the very same with (...) the sixth in the Alexandrian Chronicle,
who is called (...) by Nicephorus Callistus, Osaiah by the Jewish Chronicle,
and (...) by Josephus in the fifth place. All conspiring either with the true
or corrupted writing of the name of Jehojadah. Otherwise, concerning this man's
line, there being no Scripture Light, to me apparent; I shall remit him to his
Authors, till clearer times.

Moreover we must not here forget the two Highpriests inserted by some
Authors, as follows. First by Nicephorus the Patriarch, in his Chronography
set forth by Scaliger, An. Do. 1606, together with Eusebius his Chronicles, and
printed again A. D. 1658. page 307. of the greek Copy: and again in another
Edition at Paris 1652, wherein he is called Archbishop of Constantinople, page
407.

I B. (...).

1 (...). Corrupted for (...) or Shallum the next High Priest in order.

In the Epitome of Chronicles likewise, being another Tract set out by
Scaliger, page 240. and supposed by some to be an Alexandrian Chronicle, we
read thus.

(...).

By which Authors some have been imposed upon to apprehend that Somnas or
Sobnas, as also Eliakim, were Highpriests in the days of King Hezekiah: 2
Kin. 18.18. Isa. 36.22.
Whereas indeed Eliakim the Son of Hilkiah was no other then the Ruler or
Steward of the Kings Household, and Shebna the chief Scribe or Recorder, as
appears by the royal History of the Kings of Judah. Without all doubt both
these Writers were deceived by a misapprehension of the Prophet Isaiah, Isai.
22.21.
who mentioning the Robe and the Girdle of Eliakim, might give occasion to
conceive of them as Highpriests: Especially since the Text says they were
over the House (...) they misconstruing the King's House for the Temple.
Concerning which you may be more satisfied in Seldens discourse De succes.
Pontif. Ebrae. c. 5. p. 142. For in one verse of Isaiah the vulgar Latin
calling Shebna Praepositus Templi, Isa. 22.15.
the Provost or Ruler of the Temple; the sequacious pens of Popish Authors not
daring to start from it for fear of the forked curse of the Tridentine
convention, have followed this old and blind Error, as is well observed by Dr.
Rainolds, page 78.
in his conference with Heart concerning that inconsequent Argument of the
Pope's supremacy drawn from one High Priest set over the Jewish Church, during
that economy.

To let then these Popish dreams alone to their wilfully stupefied brains, as
given up by God to believe lies: we will proceed to the rest of the
Highpriests mentioned in Scripture-Records. 2 These. 2.11.


12 Shallum, called the son of Zadok in 1 Chronicles. 6.12. and Ezra. 7.2. and
Meshullam in 1 Chronicles. 9.11. In Josephus (...), In Niceph. (...). It is probable
this man was not the immediate son of Zadok: because Azariah before him is said
to have been of the House of Zadok: as if he neither had been the next
immediate successor: But might have had Uriah as his Father betwixt him and
Zadok, according to the Scripture-History of the sacerdotal function, unles it
should refer to Solomon's Zadok. But we submit the whole to candid Judges,
only remembering that this man is generally conceived to have spent most of his
days under the reign of King Manasseh: who little regarded the worship of the
Temple: Huldah the Prophetess is called the wife of this High Priest by the
Alexandrian Chronicle p. 24.

13 Hilkiah the son of Shallum, 1 Chronicles. 6.13. and 9.11. Ezra. 7.1, 2. Neh.
11.11. This man is famously known to have been in the days of Josiah, 2 Chr.
34.14. 2 Kin. 22.4. and 23.4. Strom. l. 1. p. 240, 241. edit Heins. 1616.
a great coadjutor of his in that honored and most memorable Reformation of
God's Worship and solemn Service. Whereto all Computators do freely give in
their Suffrages. Concerning whom Clemens Alexandrinus adds further, that he was
the Father of the Prophet Jeremy, with which opinion concurs the Alexandrian
Chronicle.

14 Azariah the son of Hilkiah, mentioned in Scripture, in 1 Chronicles. 6.13. and
9.11. Ezra, 7.1. But omitted by the three forecited Catalogues: yet having a
threefold evidence from Scripture, we have accordingly so fixed him. Yet
Josephus in his History of the Jewish Antiquities bethinking himself, Lib. 20.
c. 8. p. 700. D.
asserts that there were eighteen Highpriests from the building of the Temple
to its first dissolution: which number cannot be fetched out of his Catalogue,
unless this Azariah be admitted for one. To whom also, as to the number of
eighteen, agrees our common Egesippus, which goes about the World as his,
concerning the destruction of Jerusalem.

15 Seraiah the son of Azariah. 1 Chronicles. 6.14. Ezra, 7.1. He is called by
Nehemiah's Register, the son of Hilkiah, Neh. 11.11.
though it seems apparent by the Scriptures affixed to Azariah, that he stood
not in so immediate a relation to him. But this place of Nehemiah possibly
might give occasion to the three Authors to omit Azariah, whereas this person
is called by Josephus and Nicephorus (...), 2 Kin. 25.18, 21.
and is reported to have been slain by the King of Babylon at Riblah.

16 Jehozadak the son of Seraiah, the Father of Jeshua, mentioned by the
Prophet Zachary, and Brother of Ezra the Scribe, called by Josephus (...), by
Nicephorus (...), 1 Chro. 6.14, 15.
was carried captive to Babylon by the armies of Nebuchadnezar; with whom ends
the Line of the Priest's during the first Temple.

So that according to this view of the Succession of the Highpriests intended
for the enodation and untying of some former difficulties in the Historical
relation of the Jewish Highpriests in some measure: I humbly conceive, there
needs no such vexatious and perplexing figure as a Metathesis to be introduced:
seeing the apprehended mislocations (wherein we ought to be extreme sparing of
imposing upon any Scripture, without urgent necessity and clear Testimony from
other places) may be now more safely laid aside, and the Chronicle vindicated
to its purity in a regular procedure with its names. According to which, having
examined several Authors, the several Highpriests of the first Temple may
tolerably well synchronize with the Kings of Judah in this Method following.

1 Zadok 2 Ahimaaz 3 Azariah with King Solomon. and 4 Johanan with King
Solomon.
5 Azariah with the latter end of King Solomon's reign, Rehoboam, Abijah, and
the beginning of Asa.

6 Amariah contemporary with the greatest part of Asa's reign, and some part
of Jehoshaphat's.

7 Ahitub or Jehojadah, who lived one hundred and thirty years, probably did
concur with the latter part of Jehoshaphat, Jehoram, Ahaziah, Athaliah, and
part of his Nephew Joash.

8 Merajoth, so called in the Babylonian Register, but probably the same with
Zachariah, in the reign of Joash.

9 Zadok with Joash, Amaziah, and his Son in Law Vzziah.

10 Vriah in the latter end of Vzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, and the beginning of
Hezekiah.

11 Azariah during the greatest part of the reign of Hezekiah.

12 Shallum in the days of Manasseh.

13 Hilkiah supposed by some to be in the latter part of Manasseh's time, all
Amon's, and the most part of Josiah.

14 Azariah in the end of Josiah, Jehoahaz, and Jehoiakim's days.

15 Seraiah in the time of Jeconiah and Zedekiah, and was then slain at Riblah.

16 Josedek, At the end of Zedekiah's reign who was carried captive to
Babylon: after that the holy Temple was laid in rubbish. The more complete
Story of which most famous building as to the various accidents which befell
it, shall now follow, while it continued under the reigns of the particular
Kings of Judah.

Before we conclude this present Chapter, we shall give in an Historical view
of the state of the Temple, during the several Kings of Judah, according to
the various changes related in holy Scriptures, under which it labored;
together with the year of the World, according to the Annals of the most
learned Primate of Ireland.

The state of the Temple under Solomon, the royal Founder of that glorious
Pile. Anno Mundi 3000.

1 King. 11.9.
THe Divine History presents to our view, in the first place, a very sad
Relation concerning Solomon himself, (to whom the Lord God of Israel had twice
appeared) viz. that in his old age he should affront the Temple-Worship, 1 Kin.
11.7.
by the Erection of Heathenish Idols on Mount Olivet, the Hill over against
Jerusalem, in the full view of the habitation of God's sacred Majesty. For
there he fixed a seat for Moloch or Milcom the abomination of the children of
Ammon: so called from the Kingly power of that damnable Statue (inspired by the
Devil) over the hearts of stupid Idolaters. Nay he was not ashamed to prepare
a high place for Chemosh, which (it seems by the History of Jephthah) was also
the God of Ammon, Judge. 11.24. Being also excellently styled in the Sacred
Leaves the abomination of Moab, because of those horrid and libidinous Rites
performed near his dunghill Throne, His denomination being taken (as some
observe) from (...) Palpare, a thing not fit to be explained. The reason, why
the ancient Heathens did worship this Chemosh, Hos. 9.10.
together with Priapus, of Baalphegor that shameful Idol, and others of the
same Litter, under such detestable and pudendous figures, Edit. Hen. Steph. l.
1. p. 55. lin. 30. and lib. 4. p. 149. lin. 37.
is best rendered by Diodorus Siculus to be (...), as the causers of foecundity.
Therefore did they many times Male and Female lie together in the very Temples,
imploring the aid of those beastly Numen's. For the same cause likewise was the
Moon, or, as some think, the Planet Venus, exalted unto the dignity of Worship,
under the name of Ashtoreth by the Sidonians, allowed also by the same King
Solomon, in connivence with his idolatrous wives, who stole away his heart from
the true God. Yet, notwithstanding the full Millenary of Females which he
enjoyed, permitting mean while their Sacrifices to those strange Gods, possibly
to gain their aid in point of fruitfulness: we may bring in Solomon (though in
a sense alien from that place, 1 Kin. 11.3. Eccles. 7.28 cap. 2.19. Neh. 13.26.
yet allusive to this purpose) complaining in his own words, that among a
thousand Women have I found but one man, Rehoboam, and him a foolish Prince, to
sit upon my Throne after me. For we read but of one Son and two Daughters that
he had, of all his Wives, 1 King. 4.11, 15. Did not Solomon King of Israel sin
by these things? Yet none like him among the Nations, beloved of his God: to
warn the wisest and the holiest amongst men to beware the dangerous inticements
and solicitations of near Relations unto sin. Concerning these Idols, whereby
God was deeply provoked, you may please to consult more at large three learned
men, viz. Syntag. 1. c. 5. and 6.
Seldom in his Tract Of the Syrian Deities, lib. 2. c. 5.
Vossius in his books about Heathen Idolatry, and Nicolas lib. 11. c. 13
Fuller in his sacred Miscellanies. The exact time of Solomon's Age or Reign at
the erection of these Pagan impurities, as not worthy to be mentioned in a
divine Calendar, we do not read: Neither of the place of one of them, viz.
Ashtoreth, where it exactly stood, though it appears in general that they
stood on the right hand of Mount Olivet, 2 Kin. 23.13. That is on the Westside
of the Mountain, being on the right hand, as they went up to the Temple to
worship. O^ as others, the southerly side, which is commonly expressed by the
right hand in Scripture. Happy King Solomon, had he been as great a stranger to
their defiling and Kingdom-consuming Ceremonies; as we are to the praecise time
and punctual place of the situation of each of these abominable Idols. For if
the Father had not so soulely praevaricaed, his son probably had never felt the
weight of the Loins of God's vengeance upon his Kingdom, nor the lash of those
divine Scorpions, that in most righteous and just judgment whipped off ten Tribes
at one blow from the Scepter of Judah in his days: whereof we now proceed to
speak.

The state of the Temple under Rehoboam the second King after its Building.
A.M. 3029.

This famous Fabric stood in its beauty, unspoiled of its Ornaments all the
days of Solomon, notwithstanding the grand provocations of the divine Majesty,
1 Chr. 11.17 cap. 12.1.
and so persisted during the three first years of the reign of Rehoboam: But
having strengthened himself in the Kingdom, he forsook the Law of the Lord and
all Israel with him, denoting to us, That unsanctified prospe^ity, to a carnal
Spirit, proves many times a sad Temptation to fearful Apostasy. But did not
God also forsake Rehoboam? yes surely! For when he had idolatrously turned his
back upon the Temple, he beholds in his fifth year, Ver. 2.
Shishak King of Egypt marching in the Van of a terrible Army toward
Jerusalem: probably incited by Jeroboam (but certainly by God) who under the
reign of his Father had resided in Egypt. This potent adversary and his Wars,
Aut. Iudaic. lib. 8. cap. 4. Lib. 2. p. 127 Edit. Paul. Steph. A.M. 3026 Page
30. Argonaut. l. 4. ad ve. 272
Josephus peremptorily asserts to be falsely ascribed by Herodotus to Sesostus:
Concerning whom the latter Historian relates in his Euterpe, that in Palaestina
of Syria he himself saw stones inscribed with the memorial of his Victoryes.
But I rather incline to the Judgment of the learned Primate of Ireland in his
Scripture-Annals, and Mr. John Greaves in his discourse of the Egyptian
Pyramids, who comparing Manetho the Priest with the Scholiast of Apollonius
Rhodius Africanus, and Eusebius together, does fully agree with Scaliger that
this Shishak is the same King called by them Sesochosis, or Sesonchis, and
possibly the same which Josephus de bello Judaic. l. 7. c. 18. calls Asochaeus;
telling us of his taking Jerusalem: the same called by Herodstus Asychis,
reciting some of his Laws, lib. 2. and plainly called Sasyches, and related as
a famous Lawgiver, by Diodorus, lib. 1. p. 59. Edit. H. Steph. Who came up to
the holy City, rifled the Temple, 1 Kin. 14.26 2 Chr. 12.9. ver. 10.
and took away the Treasures of the House of the Lord, together with the
Shields of Gold, which his Father Solomon had made. In the room whereof
Rehoboam was constrained to substitute brazen ones, for the Guard to carry
before him, when he went up to the Temple. This was the first plundering Bout
which befell that stately piece in this Prince's days, Ver. 12.
who having humbled himself lived the remnant of his life in the Sunshine of
peace, having reigned seventeen years in Jerusalem at his decease.

Under Abijah the third King. A.M. 3046

Nothing considerable did occur in his three years reign in relation to the
Temple: But the Dedication of some Gold, some Silver, and Vessels of service to
the House of God, which were carried within its sacred Walls by Asa his godly
Son and Successor. 1 Kin. 15.15.


A.M. 3049
Under Asa the fourth King.
2 Chr. 24.3, 5
It is recorded concerning this good King, that he took away the Altars of
strange Gods, their high places, brake down the Images, and cut down their
Groves, among all the Cities of Judah, which was succeeded with serene days of
peace and quietness. Nay his Legions in war were attended with fortunate
Laurels in the famous Battle managed against Zerah the Captain of the Arabian
Troops (as Sir Walter Raleigh excellently manifests him to be, Hist. of the
World part. 1 lib. 1. cap. 8.. 10.. 6. 2 Chr. 21.16.
and not of the Aethiopians of Africa) who came against him with a Million of
men. Whence we learn, That prosperity both in peace and war does crown the
heads of those Magistrates that promote the purity of God's Worship. Asa the
famous Conqueror upon admonition of Azariah the Prophet, in the fifteenth year
of his Rule, and the third Month of the sacred year, put away all the
abominable Idols out of all his dominions, 2 Chr. 15.8.
and renewed the brazen Altar for Sacrifices in the Court of the Priests,
gathered all his People to Jerusalem, and offered of their victorious spoils
seven hundred Oxen and seven thousand Sheep to the God of Battle: At the same
time he made a solemn Covenant between God and his People, and commanded that
whosoever would not seek the Lord should be put to death. His Grandmother
likewise he removed from being Queen (of the Idol Beth-peor, De diis Syris p.
160. Syntag. 1. c. 5. Ver. 18. 2 Chr. 16.1. Anno Mundi 3064. 1 Kin. 15.18. 2
Chr. 16.2.
as some conceive) stamping her Idol to pieces and burning it at the Brook
Kidron. He brought likewise the Silver, Gold, and Vessels, into the House of
God, (which himself and his Father had dedicated) in that famous year of his
Reformation.

In the thirty sixth year of his Kingdom since the revolt of the 10 Tribes,
but the 16th year of his Reign (as the reverend Primate observes in his
Annals) he presents all the Silver and Gold that was left in the Treasures of
the House of the Lord unto Benhadad the King of Syria, to bribe him to a breach
of that League which he had contracted with his fatal Enemy, Baasha the King
of Israel. Here we see that Sacrilege and Truce-breaking, two enormous sins,
are linkt together: But he that dares put his hand to the Robbing of God of his
Temple-Treasures, will not fear to be unjust to man; as we behold sadly
testified of this Prince, who being reproved by Hanani the Seer (sent from God)
added yet more sins to the former, in putting the Prophet in prison, and
oppressing the People at the same time. But from thenceforth God denounced War
against him, and In the thirty ninth year smote him in his feet, and yet he
added to seek to the Physicians and not to the Lord, and died in the one and
fourtieth year of his Reign. Take heed therefore of being hardened by holy men's
sin, as well as of despairing by the story of their falls. It was no wonder to
behold an Egyptian King spoiling the Temple of God; But for an Asa the
Protector and Enricher of the Temple to commit such Egyptian wickedness, for a
godly King to manifest such heinous impiety demonstrates the Instability of the
best without God's manutenency: who though not bound to preserve us always
from sin, yet has engaged himself to punish it even in the Children of David;
when he threatened to visit their Transgressions with the rod, Psalm. 89.32.
and their Iniquity with stripes: which is manifest in the Judgments that
befell this King, 2 Kin. 15.14.
whose heart in the main was upright before the Lord all his days. The Spirit
of God loves to give a gracious report of Saints, when gone into their Graves,
and weighs their hearts, not their actions, in the Scales of the Sanctuary.

Iehoshophat the fifth King. A.M. 3090

This pious and victorious King being assailed by the forces of Moab and Ammon
makes his application to him that dwelt between the Cherubims, for divine
assistance, and powered out a fervent prayer, 2 Chr. 20.5.
as he stood in the House of the Lord before the new Court. Whether this Court
was distinct from the other two, or called new only from some late reparations
made by his Father Asa in the fifteenth year of his Government: As the Hebrew
does not utterly reject, it being termed New-made or repaired from (...)
restaurari as well as De novo. If a real new Court, where to fix and describe
it, or to say when it was built, is utterly unfeazible out of Scripture. But
here finding the mention of it, we are obliged to recite it. Before which this
famous King received an answer of success and victory. For which he neglected
not to come with Psalteries, Harps, Ver. 28.
and Trumpets to praise the Lord in this Mountain of his Holiness; and having
reigned twenty five years, (being stained by joining affinity with Ahab: 2
Chro. 19.3.
when the sore temptations of Riches and Honor in abundance entangled his
Soul, 2 Chronicles. 18, 1, and ver. 28. and with helping that ungodly Family, cap.
20.33.
and permitting some high places to remain) he slept with his Fathers in peace.

Iehoram the sixth King. A.M. 3112

The Government of this King was but short and generally very wicked: yet we
read of some things which he dedicated to the House of God: 2 Kin. 12.18 2 Chr.
21.19 ver. 11. 2 Kin. 8.18.
But of what and how many, Scripture is silent: Yet of his deplorable disease,
by the falling out of his Bowels, there is a memorable record, to terrify
sinners in their attempts against the holy Law of God, and in joining affinity
with the Enemies of God.

Ahaziah the seventh King. A.M. 3119

A wicked son succeeds a wicked Father, being counseled by an ungodly Mother
to walk in the sins of Israel: yet we find, that he also disposed of some
Treasures unto the House of the Lord. But it seems, 2 Chro. 22.3. 2 Kin. 12.18
2 Chr. 24.7.
being seduced by his wicked Mother Athaliah, he with his Brethren broke up the
House of God, and bestowed all the dedicate things upon Baalim, and having sat
in the Throne but one year was slain by the followers of Jehu: showing us how
dangerous it is to be found in the society of the wicked at the time of the
Execution of divine judgments.

Athaliah the Queen. A.M. 3120

Athaliah the Wife of Ioram and Mother of Ahaziah (the daughter of Ahab and
Granddaughter of Omri) seeing her Son slain, 2 Kin. 8.18. 2 Chr. 21.6 22.10.
arose and destroyed all the Seed Royal of the House of Judah, except little
Ioash: who was admirably preserved by his Aunt Iehoshebah (the Wife of
Iehojadah the Priest) in some private Chamber of the Temple from the
blood-thirsty fury of his cruel Grandmother. Who having arrived to the
seventh year of his Age was anointed, crowned, and proclaimed King of Judah, at
the appointment of his zealous and godly Uncle Iehojadah. At which time the old
Murdress coming into the Temple, was laid hold on, 2 Kin. 11.15 2 Chr. 23.15
carried forth without the Ranges, and slain in the Horse-way leading to the
King's House. Murder we see, seldom passes unrevenged of God, and Tyranny
rarely says its dying head upon a dry Pillow: Nay sometimes the place where
divine wrath finds a sinner is signally fixed, to note, That the path of beasts
is good enough to drink up the blood of an usurping and murderous Queen.

Joash the eighth King.
Famous were the Actions at the Inauguration of this young Prince, performed by
the High Priest his Uncle, in contracting a Covenant between the Lord on the
one part, Joash and his People on the other part, and another also between the
King and his Subjects. The people being encouraged by the example of holy
Jehojadah, 2 King. 11.18. brake down the House, Altars, and Images of Baal:
they did their work thoroughly, and slew Mattan the idolatrous Priest and
offered him as a Sacrifice upon his own Altars to the Justice of the true God.
So excellent a Mercy is it for a Nation to have a zealous Ruler to go in and
out before them in the pure worship of God: such was Jehojadah the Protector of
this King in his Nonage. From whom in his ripening years (as having enjoyed
such admirable Tuition under the wings of the Temple-Cherubims) we may justly
challenge some notable Transactions toward the repair of that holy Fabric so
violated and profaned by his Predecessors. Neither does he frustrate our
Expectations: 2 Rin. 12.4.
but takes special care to advance money from the People: hires Masons, Hewers
of stone, and Carpenters, to repair the breaches of God's holy mansion. For
receipt of the money there was a Chest prepared with a Hole in the Cover, Ver. 9.
and placed on the South Side of the Altar. When it was pretty well lined, they
put it in bags, Ver. 15. Ver. 14.
and being told expended it on the workmen, never calling the Trustees to
account, because they were faithful. Now whereas its related in the Book of
Kings that of this money there were no Vessels made for the service of the
Temple: we find an Explanation of it in the Book of Chronicles, 2 Chr. 25.14
that when the workmen were paid by the King and his Uncle for the reparation
of the breaches: of the remaining money Vessels of Ministration were made; so
that till they saw what money was left of the charges employed in the great and
main work of reparation, there were no Vessels made for the particular
services: But the surplusage was faithfully laid out upon Bowls, Snuffers,
Basins, Trumpets, Spoons, and other Vessels of Gold and Silver. Ver. 14.15.
After which they offered Burnt-offerings continually all the days of
Jehojadah who lived 130 years.

But when this holy man was dead, Joash forgot his ancient zeal, and yielded
his Ears to be anointed with the Oil of Flattery: Manifesting, within the
compass of a few years, what a Mercy it is for a King to have faithful and
godly Counselors, and on the other hand how dangerous it is to give Attention
to fawning Parasites: who courted him out of his religious service to the house
of God and turned him to Groves and Idols. Ver. 20.21.
The sequacions Nature of Princes is the foundation of deadly changes in a
State. Behold in Joash a lively example: who though warned by Zechariaeh the
Prophet his near Kinsman; (whose Mother had kept him in his Infancy from ruin,
and was now inspired of God to rebuke his Idolatry) yet permitted the People to
stone him in the Court of the House, between the Temple and the Altar, Ver. 22.
and forgetting the kindness of his Father contracted the sin of Murder upon
his own head. That this was the same man mentioned by our Lord in the
Gospel-story, Mat. 23.35
though the name of his Father be there styled Barachiah, is most probable: For
that the place of his Murder there recited does agree to this, and that Hierom
observes on the place, that in the Gospel used by the Nazarenes he is termed
the son of Jojada. Besides, it is observable that the two Names of Barachiah and
Jehojadah do little vary in signification, the former signifying the blessing
or praising of God; the other, the acknowledging or confessing of God, (i. e.)
in a way of praise.

To let this inquiry pass: Did Joash go unpunished? No certainly; but at the
end of the year God's Judgments took up an expedition against this revolting
and treacherous Prince, 2 Kin. 12.17
and made Hazael King of Syria the General of his angry bands to execute his
fierce wrath upon Judah. These Syrian Troops though small in number; yet
reinforced with the anger of God, destroyed all the Princes of the People, 2
Chr. 24.24
and conquered an huge Host of Joash, and executed Judgment upon Him and his
People: for they had forsaken the Lord God of their Fathers. The face of this
Enemy being turned toward Jerusalem, Ioash took away all the hallowed things
that were given by Iehoshaphat, Iehoram, Ahaziah, and himself, 2 King. 2.18
together with all the Gold in the Treasures of the Lord's House and of his
own, and sent them to Hazael: Wherewith the Tyrant being pacified, turned his
face to Damascus. But though Hazael was, yet God was not gone from Ioash, but
marched toward him in the paths of anger: For the Syrians left him under the
hand of God in great diseases (as the same Word (...) in that Text does
other-where clearly signify; 2 Chr. 24.25
as you may read in 2 Chronicles. 21.15. Prove. 18.14. Ierem. 15.4. etc.) Neither did
God permit him to die of such grievous Sickness; but bloody violence must be
compensated with a dysastrous death, and accordingly we presently hear of his
Servants conspiring against, and slaying him upon his sick bed; Ver. 25.
That so a violent death might ride to his bedside before a natural death had
dispacht him. The Spirit of God reciting the reason of all to be, for the blood
of the Sons of Iehojadah. Neither yet does vengeance forsake him but carries
him from the Sepulcher of the Kings: not suffering him to rest with his famous
Predecessors. From all whose Judgments, we learn what a hateful sin Apostasy
from true Religion is in the sight of God: for in him that draws back, the Soul
of God will take no pleasure: Heb. 10.38. Prove. 14.14
but the Back-slider in heart shall be filled with his own ways.

Amaziah the Ninth King. A.M. 3165

The former Section exhibited the downfall of an irreligious Apostate: but
herein we have the view of a notorious Hypocrite, who did that which was right,
but his Heart was not perfect with God: 2 Chro. 25.2
He had prosperous success against the Edomites of Mount Seir; but being lifted
up with pride, would needs challenge the King of Israel to Battle: wherein
being overthrown, and taken prisoner at Bethshemesh, in the Tribe of Judah, by
Ioash, the King of the Ten Tribes, he was carried as a Triumphal Captive to his
chief City by the Conqueror: who being arrived at Jerusalem, brake down the
Wall of the City, for the space of four hundred Cubits, lying between the
Corner-Gate, and the Gate of Ephraim, on the North side of this famous
Metropolis, that he might enter the capital City with the greater pomp and
magnificence. After which stately admission, 2 Chr. 25.24 2 Kin. 14.14
this King of Israel, spoils the Temple of all the Gold and Silver, and carries
away all the Vessels that were found in the House of God with Obed-Edom's sons,
who had the charge of the Treasury that lay in the house of Asuppim, near a
Gate of the same name in the West Side of the outward Court of the Temple. 1
Chr. 26.15 2 Chr. 25.15
But this wicked King who had worshipped the gods of Seir, that could not save
their stupid Proselytes out of his own hands, thus deeply provoked the Lord to
such fierce wrath, that it prosecuted him to a violent death: for falling under
the hands of his own servants at Lachish, Ver. 28.
he was brought much like Richard the Third from Bosworth Field, upon horses,
in an ignominious manner, to his Burial at Jerusalem. Thus we see, the
discovery and downfall of Hypocrisy, a sin greatly detested of God: who
uncloathed this Hypocritical Zealot of his Religious Cloak (which he wore in
his first days) by the Warm Sun of Success in War against the Children of Edom.
Whereby being encouraged to show what he was, and supposing he stood now strong
upon his own legs, he bows down to the Idumaean Idols; but never rose up again
into the pristine state and glory of his Kingdom: for being pursued by thick
Troops of Divine Vengeance, at last he is constrained to resign up both Scepter
and Life to the severe Avengers of God's broken Covenant. Thus usually, the
Lord is pleased to deal with ambiguous Hypocrites; first to discover, and then
to ruin them.

A.M. 3194
Azariah, or Uzziah, the tenth King.
I shall not meddle with any of his Civil or Warlike Actions, that do not
Historically relate to the Temple, during his long and prosperous Reign, 2
Chro. 26.5. Ver. 16.
while he sought the Lord. But let us observe only, that when he was strong,
his heart was lifted up to his fatal destruction; for having fortified the
City, and repaired the ruins it suffered under his Predecessor, and done many
noble Exploits; Ver. 9.
at last unworthily usurping the Priests Office, he entered into the Temple, to
burn Incense upon the Golden Altar. Whereupon he was immediately smitten with
Leprosy by God, thrust out of the Temple by the High Priest, and deposed from
his Kingly Office, his Son Jotham being admitted to the Execution of Judgment
in his room: yielding a notable document to the highest and most imperial
persons in the World, not to intermeddle with sacred Functions.

A.M. 3246
Jotham the 11th King.
His powerful Wars, crowned with notable success against the Ammonites as the
reward for the preparing of his ways before the Lord his God, we shall omit; 2
Chro. 27.6.
and take notice only of the stately high Gate, which he built for the House
of the Lord; which is conceived to be the West-Gate, leading to the Kings
House, and mentioned by an Historical Prolepsis, in the days of Joash, 2 Chr.
23.20
a former King. But of this I have formerly treated, Chap. 3. Page 53. and do
incline to think it to have been the great Eastern Gate of the Priests Court:
which being decayed, he new built in a magnificent manner: It being called the
Upper-Gate in the Book of Kings, and the Newgate in the higher Court of the
Lords House, 2 Kin. 15.35 Ier. 36.10.
by the Prophet Jeremy, from this King's new work about it, who having walked
religiously, reigned victoriously, he dyed peaceably, and slept quietly in the
Sepulchers of his famous Ancestors.

A.M. 3262
Ahaz the 12th King.
Now arises up into the Throne one of the most wicked Kings of Judah, walking
in the ways of the Kings of Israel. He made his Son pass through the Fire and
burnt Incense in the Valley of Hinnom; he erected molten Images to Baalim, 2
Kin. 16.3. 2 Chr. 28.3.
and sacrificed in the high places, and on the Hills, and under every green
Tree. Wherefore the Lord sent Rezin, the King of Syria, and his confederate
Pekah, King of Israel, to besiege him in Jerusalem: wherein, though they
prevailed not to take the City, yet Rezin smote his Land, and carried a great
multitude away Captive to Damascus, and recovered Elath, a strong Fortress from
Judah, 2 Chr. 26.2.
which his Father Vzziah had fortified. Pekah slew one hundred and twenty
thousand valiant men in one day, and carried away captive two hundred thousand,
with much spoil to Samaria. This King being thus sorely distressed, sends a
Message to Tiglath-Pilezer, King of Assyria, with a Present of the Silver and
Gold found in the House of the Lord. 2 Kin. 16.8. 2 Chr. 28.21
For he was not only desperately plunged by the two former Kings; but sorely
afflicted by the Edomites, and the Philistines; the former, carrying some away
captive; and the latter, seizing many of his Towns. The Assyrian King, upon
this invitation, falls in upon the Kingdom of Syria, slew its King, took
Damascus the chief City, and subdued it under him: Whereupon Ahaz meets him at
Damascus, and takes there the pattern of an Idolatrous Altar, and sends it to
Vriah the Priest; and being returned, causes the Brazen Altar of the Lord to be
removed, and his new Altar Damascenum to be placed in the Court for his own
Sacrifices. New Inventions of men, in God's Worship, never thrive: for his
Confederated Friend out of Assyria falls now upon the King of Judah himself. 2
Chr. 28.19, 20. Isai. 10.28
For he came up, says Isaiah, to Ajath, he passed to Migron, and laid up his
carriages at Michmash, mentioning with these, other Cities of Judah: and says,
he shall shake his hand against the Mount of the Daughter of Zion. Ver. 32. 2
Chr. 28.23
In the time of this his great distress he did trespass yet more against the
Lord: for he sacrificed to the Gods of Damascus that smote him, which was his
ruin. Now he plunders the House of God to purpose, and makes mad work in the
Temple. He gathers together the Vessels of the House of God and cuts them in
pieces. He pulls away the borders of the Bases, and removes the Laver; takes
the Sea of Brass off from the backs of the brazen Oxen and sets it on the
stone-Pavements: 2 Kin. 16.17
certainly he was troubled in conscience that they had so long served God in
bearing that stately Vessel, and pitied their weariness under their long
burden, out of a sacrilegious madness of Spirit mixed with his distress and
necessity. The Covert also for the Sabbath which probably was built to shelter
the Priests in rainy and tempestuous weather, he turns out of doors. Nay, Dr.
Lightfoot harm. p. 116. Mr. Fuller 's Pisgah, page 283. Usher. Annal p. 93. 2
Chr. 28.25 Ver. 22. Dr. Lightfoot.
that stately Passage or Entry of the King to the Temple, called the Causey or
Shallecheth on the West, he either obstructs, diverts or destroys, and that
either out of fear of surprizal by the Assyrian, or rather to manifest his
utter rejection of the worship of God, in favor to the Emperor's Idolatry,
Afterward he put out the Lamps and leaves off burning Incense in the House of
God: he shuts up the doors and turns High Priest to the Devil: For he made
him Altars in every corner of Jerusalem, and in every several City of Judah he
made high places to burn Incense to other Gods, and provoked to anger the Lord
God of his Fathers. This is that King Ahaz! But what follows? Most probably
deposed, for all this, by his faut or the King of Assyriae, and sees his own
son lifted up to the royal Throne in his stead. For if his son Hezekiah began
to reign in the third year of Hoshea King of Israel, as you read expressly 2
King. 18.1, 2. Then did he begin in the fifteenth year of his Father Ahaz. For
Hoshea's beginning to reign in the twelfth of Ahaz. 2 King. 17.1. does
determine the fifteenth of Ahaz, to synchronize with the third of Hoshea, the
commencement of Hezekiah's Reign; who hereby must needs prove to be assumed
into the Empire by his Father as the learned Bishop Usher would have have it,
or else introduced by the Assyrian, as learned Dr. Lightfoot declares. Besides,
it is distinctly noted in 2 King. 18.9, 10. that Samaria was taken in the sixth
of Hezekiah, which was the ninth of Hoshea: Therefore the first of Hezekiah is
the third of Hoshea and the fifteenth of Ahaz, when Hezekiah began to reign in
his Father's life time; who died after 16 years dominion, whether complete or
current is not expressed. 2 Chr. 28.27
But he died ingloriously, and was not buried with honor in the Sepulchers of
his famous Ancestors. Thus this abominable Polluter and Prophaner of the Temple
came to an untimely end, not being able to tell the hour of God's wrath upon
the Dial of his idolatrous Wickedness: Though he erected a famous Material
one in some place of his House or of the Temple, much spoken of and contested
about by learned Authors, yielding a miraculous confirmation to the faith of
his pious Successor. Vol. 3. in his judicial Laws c. 25. p. 89. Page 246. Page
162.
Concerning this Dial, Mr. Weemse has an exercitation, but there speaks not
of the place, only conceives it to have been a polar one. Mr. Gregory of (
Christ's-Church in Oxen) in his posthumous Works seems to assent to Cornel. A
lapide, that it was placed on a wall of the King's Palace, and that it was a
South-verticall Dial. Adrichomius places it in the Temple, and says, it was
made of the brazen Altar of the Lord which he removed from its situation; but
he proves nothing. I shall only leave to consideration as to the place, that
seeing some Altars are mentioned to be fixed on the top of the Upper-chamber of
Ahaz, 2 Kin. 23.12
and that spoken of in the mids. of a Relation concerning two
Temple-pollutions, whether this Dial might not be supposed to have been placed
on some wall of that Chamber, which he built, possibly in the Temple.

A.M. 3277
Hezekiah the 13th King.
Glorious were the Atchievments of this holy King, who no sooner stepped into the
royal Throne but he presently made a solemn visitation of the Temple in the
first year of his reign, and in the first Month of the sacred year, 2 Chr.
29.3.
He opens the doors of that late-polluted House, shut up by his ungodly
Predecessor, and repaires them in a magnificent manner, overlaying the doors
and pillars with Gold. 2 Kin. 18.16
Then having gathered the Priests and Levites into the East-street, he makes an
eloquent Oration to them, filled with divine and persuasive Rhetoric, and
rouzes them up to the purification of the Temple from the idolatrous pollutions
of Ahaz. Which when they had finished in the space of sixteen days, they
prepared and sanctified all the Vessels for divine use. Whereupon, they offered
sacrifices of Atonement and Reconciliation for the sins of Ahaz in profaning
the Temple-Worship. 2 Chr. 29.21
The Number of the burnt-Offerings brought by the Congregation were seventy
Bullocks, one hundred Rams, and two hundred Lambs, and the consecrating
Offerings were six hundred Oxen and three thousand Sheep. 2 Chr. 30.2. Numb.
9.11
After which they solemnized the Passover on the fourteenth day of the second
Month according to the Law of Moses in case of Impurity. The Sacrifices of
Peace Offerings which were then presented to God were two thousand Bullocks,
and seventeen thousand Sheep, 2 Chr. 30.26
there being such joy at that time in Jerusalem, as the like thereof had not
been known since the days of Solomon. When this was finished, all the People,
who had been present in the Temple, went out and brake the Images in pieces,
cap. 31.1.
cut down the Groves, and tumbled down the high Places and Altars in all Judah
and Israel, and particularly destroyed the Brazen Serpent of Moses, 2 Kin. 18.4.
calling it Nehushtan, a poor piece of Brass, because the Israelites had burnt
Incense to it in an idolatrous manner. Moreover, he set in order the Courses of
the Priests, and gave forth a portion of his own Estate to maintain the
constant and solemn Sacrifices of God's worship, and commanded the People to
bring in their First Fruits and Tithes to encourage the Priests in the Law of
the Lord: 2 Chr. 31.4, 5
preparing Chambers in the House of God wherein to lay them up. Thus did he
work that which was right and good and truth before the Lord his God. Ver. 20.
The Lord was with him whithersoever he went. Being encouraged by this his
great prosperity he shoke off the yoke of the King of Assyria and smote the
Philistines even to Gaza and the border thereof. 2 Kin. 18.7.
But after the establishment of the worship of God and his Kingdom. [Giving a
true and an eminent pattern to all Princes to begin first with Temple-work and
the Reformation of the Worship of God; if ever they intend to set warm in their
Thrones, and settle the Scepter in their hands. Which Method being usually
mistaken by great pretenders to Reformation, they generally lay the Basis of
their own ruin in the Quagmire and Queachy ground of rotten policy] Behold yet
even after all this, 2 Chr. 32.1. 2 Kin. 18.13 and 15.16.
he was invaded by Sennacherib the great King of Assyria, in the fourteenth
year of his Reign. To pacify whose rage, he sent him all the Treasures of
Silver, and the gold of the Pillars and Doors of the Temple. But that haughty
King being nothing satisfied, whetted but his appetite for more Glory and
Riches, 2 Chr. 32.17
and sent railing Letters against the God of Zion. Hereupon this holy King of
Judah spread the Letters before the Lord in his Temple, and, 2 Kin. 19.14, 15.
which was better and more acceptable, he spread his Hands and his Heart before
the Lord, in a most ardent and heavenly prayer. Whence we may perceive that
intended Mercyes are fetched from Heaven in the Chariot of prayer, and a holy
Prophet is made the mouth of God to declare his gracious answer, Ver. 20.
honoring his Ministers with the divine messages of his Will. Which was
seconded that very Night by a direful stroke of vengeance on the Assyrian Camp,
cutting off all the mighty men of valor, Ver. 35. 2 Chr. 32.31
with the Leaders and Captains of his Army, to the number of 185000 men. The
King himself returning with shame was slain by the Children that came out of
his own Bowels, in the House of his god. After this, Hezekiah being sick, and
recovered, with the attendance of a miraculous sign of the Sun's retrocession
on the Dyall of Ahaz, he rendered not again according to his mercies: but being
left by God to try him, and to know all that was in his heart, 2 Chr. 32.31
he showed his stately Treasures to the Ambassadors of Merodach-Baladan King
of Babylon, called by Ptolomy (...), in that excellent Canon of his, esteemed
by Calvisius more precious then Gold, for the concatenation of the sacred and
civil Histories of those times. But this good King humbled himself for the
pride of his heart, Ver. 16.
showing his godly sincerity in heart-reformation lying low before God for his
being lifted up before the Legates of an earthly Prince. After which, reigning
in peace and great prosperity, the usual Concomitant of Integrity in God's
worship, he died in peace, Ver. 33.
and was buried in the chiefest of the Sepulchers of the Sons of David.

Manasseh the 14th King. A.M. 3306

The ungodly Son of a holy Father puts on the orient Diadem, and succeeds in
the royal Seat of Judah, 2 Kin. 23.1.
builds up the high places destroyed by Hezekiah, rears up Altars for Baal, and
makes a Grove like Ahab King of Israel, and worships all the Host of Heaven,
for whom he built Altars in both the Courts of the Lord's House. 2 Chapter 33.6, 7
2 Kin. 23.4.
He caused his Children to pass through the fire in the Valley of Hinn^m and
erected a carved Image of the Idol Baal which he had made in the Temple of God
in a most profane and presumptuous manner, not harkening to the menacing
Messages sent by God. At last, the Majesty of Heaven bing deeply incensed, sent
against him the Captains of the King of Assyria, who took him among the
thorns, bound him with Fetters, and carried him captive to Babylon. In which
affliction having greatly humbled himself before the Lord, and deprecated the
fierceness of his wrath by earnest supplication, he was brought again to
Jerusalem and to his Kingdom. Where to demonstrate the sincerity of his
Repentance, he took away the strange Gods, and that damnable Idol of Baal out
of the House of the Lord, and all the Altars which he had built in the holy
Mountain, and in Jerusalem, and cast them out of the City. Furthermore, he
proceeds to the reparation of the brazen Altar of the true God, and sacrifices
his Peace-and Thank-offerings thereon, commanding Judah to serve the Lord God
of Israel: who having reigned fifty five years, slept with his Fathers, and was
buried in his own House in the Garden of Uzzah. 2 Kin. 21.18


A. M. 3361
Amon the 15th King.
At twenty two years of Age began Amon to reign in Judah, and walked in the
wicked steps of the first years of his Father, sacrificing to all the carved
Images made by him, 2 Kin. 21.21. 2 Chr. 33.12
disgracing (what in him lay) the Temple-worship: But following him not in
Repentance and godly Sorrow. For he trespassed yet more and more, till he was
slain by the conspiracy of his own Servants in his own house, having reigned
but two years only. His life when young being preserved only (as may seem) for
the sake of Josiah in his Loins; and his Dominion, to that end, that his godly
Son might be fostered for a while, who was after to succeed him. God many times
would thunder out his Judgments against the Sons of Belial, were it not for
some of his elect that shall flow from them: as far as we may with all humility
and reverence give conjecture concerning the deeps of divine providence in his
dispensations throughout the world.

A.M. 3363
Josiah the 16th King.
Now enters at 8 years of Age into the Kingly Throne the holiest Reformer that
ever wore the Crown of Judah. The Greeness of his years set a verdant luster
upon his actions, like a stately Emerald incircling his Temples. For having
attained but sixteen years of his life he began to seek after the God of his
Father David: and at twenty years old he becomes mighty in zeal for the House
of his God, 2 Chr. 34.3.
the Groves he cut down, the Altars of Baallm he brake in pieces, the Images
both carved and molten he stamped to dust, and strowed the powder on the
Sacrificers Graves; he burnt the Bones of the idolatrous Priests upon their
profane Altars, and knocked the Altars themselves in pieces with Mattocks, not
only in Judah, but in Ephraim and Manasseh also, even to Naphthali round about.
In the eighteenth year of his Reign, Ver. 7, 8.
when he had purged the land and returned to Jerusalem, he commands some of his
chief Officers to sum up the money brought into the Temple, 2 Kin. 23.3, 4, 5.
etc. 2 Chr. 35.3.
causes Carpenters and Masons to be hired, Timber and hewn Stone to be
provided, and places the Ark again in the most holy place, which it seems was
removed by Manasseh. Meanwhile the Book of the Law being found by Hilkiah the
Priest was brought to the King, read by Shaphan, wept over by Josiah, and a
message by him sent to the Prophetess, who answered him with a return of
peace, because of the tender meltings of his Heart under the denunciation of
judgment. The Reparations of the House being finished, and the Book being
carried up into the Temple of the Lord, the King himself read it in the ears of
the Elders of Judah, and all the People, and standing by the royal Pillar in
the wonted place, entered into Covenant with God, and caused them all to stand
to it. After this he commands the High Priest and his inferior Ministers to
bring forth out of the Temple all the Vessels of Baal, of his Grove, and the
Host of Heaven, to the Brook, burning and stamping them to dust, and laid the
dust on the Graves of the Children of the People. 2 Kin. ^3.7.
He proceeds further to break down the Houses of the Sedomites near the House
of the Lord, that is, possibly of those who were the Officers of the shameful
and bestiall priapeian Ceremonies of Baalphegor, not fit to be uttered. For as
common Idolatry is called Whoredom in Scripture: so this abominable Idolatry
is probably called by the name of Sodomy. For the Text says that Women did in
those Houses weave Hangings for that Grove, viz. of Baal, that was cast out of
the House of God, being probably an artificial imitation of the Idol-Temple of
Baal, Ver. 6.
with a Grove of Trees about it in some solid metal or stone, placed within
those sacred Walls, He defiles also all the High Places where the Priests had
burnt Incense, from Gebah to Beersheba, together with Tophet in the Valley of
Hinnom, where the Children were fried in that hellish fire to M^lech: Whence it
is, Chietomaei Graecobarb. N. T. p. 54. 2 Kin. 23.11.
that the new Testament assumes the word (...) to shadow forth the intolerable
Torments of the bottomless lake of God's aeternal Judgment. He took away the
Horses of the Sun also, and burnt their Chariots with fire, which were
dedicated by the Princes of Judah to the Prince amongst the Stars of Heaven,
which had been placed at the entering into the House of God. The Altars
likewise, on the top of the Upper Chamber of Ahaz, were dashed in pieces, and
those of Manasseh in both the Courts of the House were broken down and their
dust cast into Kidron. The High Places of Solomon together with their Altars
and Groves built for Ashtoreth, Chemosh, and Milcom on the side of Mount
Olivet, Ver. 13.
were utterly ruined and overthrown, and their places defiled being filled with
the Bones of men. Neither did he forget the Altar and High-place at Bethel,
erected by Jeroboam that great sinner of Israel. The Bones also taken out of
the Sepulchers in that Mount (whereon Bethel was built) he burnt on those
Altars, and polluted their imagined sanctity. Thus he did in the other Cities
of Samaria, slaying the Priests and burning their bones upon their Altars, and
returned to Jerusalem. 2 Kin. 23.23 2 Chapter 34. etc.
At last he celebrates the Passover, on the fourteenth day of the first Month,
in this eighteenth year of his Reign, in most solemn and magnificent manner,
the like having not been performed since Samuel and the days of the Judges,
nor in the time of any of the Kings of Judah or Israel. To which purpose the
King bestowed on the people thirty thousand Lambs and Kids, and three thou and
Bullocks out of his own substance, the Princes also bestowed 2600 small Cattle
and three hundred Oxen. The whole number of Sacrifices being 35900 for the
service of the Temple. Which was so punctually and strictly managed according
to the Law of Moses, that like him there was no King before him, nor after him
rose any King like him, 2 Kin. 23.25
that turned to the Lord with all his Heart, with all his Soul, and with all
his Might. Yet nothwithstanding after all this (says the holy Spirit) the Lord
turned not from the fierceness of his great wrath kindled against Judah for the
high provocations of Manasseh and his other Predecessors. But Josiah was in
this point happy, that he saw not the ruin of his Kingdom: but died in peace
(according to the Prophecy of Huldah) of his conscience, say some: 2 Chr. 34.28
though more probably of his Kingdom, as to utter desolation which was now
hastening toward it. Though the express words strictly examined do not say, he
should die in peace, but be gathered to his Grave in peace: for though he was
wounded in battle in a rash adventure against Pharaoh Necoh, who was going up
in haste to the war of Assyria, having overthrown Jesiah in battle, marched on
speedily toward Carchemish, and left him to a peaceable burial after his
mortal wounds that were received at Megiddo, called Magdolon by Herodotus: for
he died at Jerusalem, and was buried, with a most solemn and mournful
funeral, in the Sedulchtes of his Fathers, the Obsequies being managed by
Jeremiah a holy Prophet in sorrowful Lamentations, Law. 4.20.
weeping out that doleful Elegy, The breath of our Nostrils, the anointed of
the Lord was taken in their Pits, of whom we said, Under his shadow we shall
live among the Heathen.

A.M. 3394
Jehoahaz the 17th King.
After Josiah had reigned thirty one years, the People of the Land exalted
Jehoahaz his Son into his Fathers Throne. 2 Chr. 26.2.
Whose Reign was both wicked and short, not exceeding three Months. For the
Egyptian King after his Victory at Euphrates, returning to Jerusalem, put him
down, cast him in fetters at Riblah, and carried him away to Egypt, where he
died, The Conqueror having condemned the Land in a great Tax, and set up
another son of Josiah in his Room.

A.M. 3394
Jehojakim the 18th King.
The conquering Egyptian set up this King in the royal seat, who could do no
less then pay the Taxation to his Master, at which the Land was set, and then
falls to the old idolatrous pranks of the preceding Princes. But he was invaded
by another foreign Prince and bound in fetters to be carried to Babylon. 2
Chr. 36.6.
Some think the Emperor did not carry him thither: but the particle [also] in
the next verse, adjoined to the Vessels of the Temple, seems to insinuate that
he went along with them. But whether he went or no, being not fully clear, it is
certain that the Babylonian spoiled the holy Temple of many of its rich
Vessels, and placed them in the Temple of his God in the land of Shinar. Ver.
7. Dan. 1.2. 2 Kin. 24.6.
This is manifest, that if the Jewish King were captived, he was sent back upon
certain conditions: for we find him dying at Jerusalem, and buried there in the
11th year of his Reign.

A.M. 3405
Jehojachin or Jeconiah the 19th King.
The Dominion of this young King was but short, yet sour; wickedness being
usually disht up with Judgment, for he reigned but three Months and ten days,
and then at the end of the year Nebuchadnezar himself came to Jerusalem, 2 Chr.
36.10 2 Kin. 42.14
and carried away ten thousand Captives, together with the King and all the
Treasures of the Temple, and cut in pieces the goodly Vessels which Solomon had
made, and set Zedekiah his Uncle in his room over the Realm: by his very name,
given him by the Conqueror, importing the just Judgments of God.

A.M. 3405
Zedekiah the 20th King.
This was the Augustulus of the Judaean Empire, exalted by the proud Babylonian
to trundle under his vast Empire, But being highly wicked in the sight of God:
it came to pass through the anger of the Lord, that he rebelled against his
Master, 2 Kin. 24.20
that golden head of the Imperial Statue of Daniel. Whereupon, in the eleventh
year of his underling Reign, he was taken near Jericho flying from his
head-City, and was brought to Riblah, and there saw his sons slain before his
face, and after that, his own eyes were put out. Howbeit, though being blind he
never saw any more misery, yet he felt enough; for he was bound in ^etters of
Brass, and carried to Babylon. He that would not see the hand of the Lord lift
up in Ieremiah's threatening Messages, must now sink under the weight of that
iron Rod fallen down upon, and crushing his Bones into a dismal and utter
ruin. But he wanted not companions of grief to alleviate his sorrow,
especially the doleful ruins of that incomparable Temple, enough to qualify
his Spirit, under his personal Sufferings, if they had been mixed with serious
repentance, and if his blind Bals had been moistened with soul-melting Tears; so
that with a brave Heroic Spirit he might never have repined at the loss of his
own light, seeing the Lamps of God's House were extinguished: and like good Eli
even contented to break his neck when the Ark of God is taken, and cry out with
a funeral voice, and say with the famous Spartan General to his surviving
Soldiers, Diodor.
Reserve your selves for better times. Vitae est avidus, quisquis non vult
Templo secum pereunte mori. Seneca in Thyeste, v. 881.



Concerning the deplored ruins of which sacred and magnificent Pile, and its
final Catastrophe, more shall be spoken in the last Chapter, having now
continued about 415 years: During which space of time, it was ten times robbed
and plundered, viz. 1. By Shishak King of Egypt, and next by five of its own
Kings, by one of the Kings of Israel, and by Nebuchadnezzar three times in the
Reigns of its three last Kings, as may appear more fully in the foregoing
Chronicle. But before we come to the last and deplorable Chapter of its
Dissolution, we shall endeavor with all sobriety to refresh the mind of our
pious and devout Reader with those rare evangelicall Mysteries, that were
veiled under the Shadows and Caeremonies of this royal Structure: which we
shall crave leave to exhibit in the succeeding discourse.

CHAP. IX. Concerning the divine Mysteries of the Temple.
THis Chapter contains the Jewish Gospel, or the streaming forth of the
glorious beams of Christ incarnate, whilst he walked under the Exodus 34.33.
Vail of Moses. The Sun of Righteousness, like a Psalm. 19.4 5.
Bridegroom coming out of the caeremoniall Chambers, rejoices as a strong man
to run his race through the empyreall Regions of this mysterious Chapter. The
forementioned 2 Cor. 3.13, 14. etc.
Vail is buried in Moses Grave, The Curtain of the Temple is Mat. 27.51.
rent in sunder, and divided among the Roman Soldiers. The waxen Comb of the
ancient Figures and ^ypicall cells is fully melted, and rolled up in shining
Tapers to illuminate Temple-students, in finding out the Honey that couches in
the Judge. 14 8.
car^a's of the slain Lion of the Tribe of Judah. Jonathan dipped the top of
Moses Rod in the Honey that was found in the wood of the ancient solemnities,
and behold how his 1 Samuel 14.29.
eyes were enlightened. Psalm. 34.8.
O! taste and see that the Lord is good in giving to his evangelicall Israel, a
Land flowing with Milk and Honey.

The Jewish fleece is now become like the barren heath, that Jer. 17.6.
sees not when good comes: whereas the whole World has been long since
moistened with the dewes of Zion.

Many Sons and Daughters from the East and West do now lie down in the bosom
of Abraham: while the Mat. 8.12.
Children of the Kindome are shut out.

Those that of old cried, The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, may
now water its ruins with their Tears, perfume it with their sighs, lament it
with Elegies and doleful Ditties, to bring to remembrance the beautiful
Palaces, where once their Fathers worshipped: leaving breaches in their own
houses on purpose to commemorate its deplorable downfall: whilst the true
Temple of the Lord are Jer. 7.4, 5.
these, who thoroughly mend their ways, and execute Judgment between a man and
his Neighbor.

That ancient stately structure no doubt was a compendious Map of the then
Terra Incognita, or the unknown Land of the Gospel: It was Heavens
Geographicall Table of those Countries, whose shores only did appear to them
through a dark mist, even the watrish Vapors arising up from the Brazen Sea,
or the fuliginous smoke towering up toward Heaven from the Brazen Altar. But
now, the greatest part of the Continent, the spacious Plains, the flowery
Meadows, the Cedar Mountains, the pearling streams, the shady Vallyes, the
capacious Prospects, the Eshcol Vineyard, the Balsame Gardens of the Land of
Canaan are discovered.

The Garden of Cant. 6.11.
Nuts is now found out, whose pistachian shells of old were very beautiful,
being stained red with the blood of the Sacrifices: but now taste sweeter then
the choicest Honey that drops from the Comb of its own accord: To which place we
shall endeavor to lead our diligent Reader in the various walks of this
present Chapter.

In the former parts of this Treatise we have insisted upon the Rind and
Paring, now we shall comfort him with the Cant. 2.5.
Apples themselves: before we talked of Flagons, now we shall pour out the
Wine: before we viewed the Walls of an enclosed Garden, now we shall breathe
among the Cant. 5.13.
beds of Spices: before we came to the mouth of a sealed fountain, but now we
may exhaust Cups filled to the brim with potable Gold, the true Elixir, the
Nectar of the Wells of Salvation: seeing the mistaken Joh. 20.15
Gardener proves the true Messiah, leading his Children to the bauq^eting house
of his divine love, and inviting them with an affable voice and a cheerful
countenance, Cant. 5.1.
Eat O friends, drink, yea drink abundantly, O beloved.

This is the holy Mountain of Transfiguration, wherein Moses, Elias, and Christ
do feast together on the discourses of his divine Luke 9.31.
passion, while honest Peter would have played the Carpenter for his holy
Master, in erecting a Tabernacle for each of those transparent Glories, to be
veiled in from each other: not considering that Orig. Hom 6. in Lev. Edit.
Basil. 1545. p. 145.
one Tabernacle, as well as one Mountain would have contented those radiant
Persons: seeing that the Law of Moses, and the Prophets Oracles did all
concenter and harmonize in that Grace and Truth which came by Jesus Christ.

Deep are these Waters of Isa. 8.6.
Shiloah, that move but softly toward a full discovery of the Ocean of Glory,
into which they unlade themselves. Dark and profound are the Mysteries that lay
behind the Temple-walls: which possibly may shine forth more oriently, and
smile with a more lovely aspect in the Churches Horizon, when the Seed of
Abraham shall become the Mat. 21.2.
wise men of the East, and shall more anxiously inquire for the Rev. 22.16
bright Morning Star that shined over the Gates of Bethlehem: who being better
acquainted with the Letter of the Ceremony, may then help us to expound that
Gospel which of old was Romans 10.16 Gal. 3.8. Heb. 4.2.
preached to them inshadowes: For when they shall 2 Cor. 3.16
turn to the Lord, the Vail shall be taken away, and their Recovery shall
prove like a Resurrection or Romans 11.15.
Life from the dead.

In the mean while, we, the least among the many thousands of Judah, do crave
leave to cast in the small Mites of our Substance into the Temple-Treasuries:
wishing every Mite were a Shekel, every Shekel a Talent, to augment the
discoveries of these rare and profound Mysteries: Until the All-wise Majesty
of Heaven be pleased to reveal more ample and illustrious manifestations of
these hidden excellencies, thereby destroying in this holy Mountain of his
Temple the face of that Isa. 25.7.
covering which is cast over all people, and the Vail that is spread over all
Nations.

For this purpose I humbly conceive it requisite, in the first place to treat
of Types in general, and the Nature of their prefiguration of the evangelicall
Mysteries, and afterward to proceed in a distinct and orderly Method to the
examination of the particular Types laid up in the Temple, together with its
appendant Ordinances.

In reference to the Explication of Types in general, it is convenient to
follow the counsel of the great Philosopher [(...)] first of all diligently to
search out the force of the word, which if it has in it any designed
connotation of the thing, whereon it is imposed, may lend us some slender help
in this particular.

The word it self is derived (...); A Type being nothing else then (...), some
metalline of earthy matter stamped or impressed upon, wherein the Effigies or
shape of the bottom of a stamping Instrument is exactly represented to the
eye: as an Image or a device that is formed or fashioned by the percussion and
impression of a solid body. Thus coined pieces of money may properly be styled
the Types of their several stamps, which they exhibit and manifest upon their
surface. Thus the wounds of our dear Lord and Savior are in the Greek called
Joh. 20.25.
(...), the Types of the nails, that were driven into his holy hands upon the
Cross. Thus, the footsteps of the hammer of the Word upon the hearts of the
Romans, who were obedient to the faith: or if you please, the figure or shape
of the inside of the mould of Gospel-doctrine, whereinto their hearts were put
by the Apostles preaching, is called Romans 6.17.
(...), the Type or form of doctrine whereinto they were delivered and
effigiated according to the mind of Christ.

According to this sense, we may conceive of the Gospel under the notion of a
stamp, and of the Ceremonial Law, as the Type or Effigies or Shape of that
Gospel stamp impress't upon it by God. Evangelical truths then are to be deemed
as the Originals, and tanquam ideae (as one speaks) in mente Divina, as the
Idea's or preconceived forms in the divine understanding of God, and most
curiously exemplified in the Types of the Law.

Those ancient Types were the silver pictures imbellished with the Golden
Apples gathered in Gospel-Gardens: They were the pleasant Exodus 38.3.
looking-glasses (so termed) made of pollished brass, wherein the beautiful
face of Christ was darkly reflected. They were the cloudy and fiery pillars
directing the true Israelites in their way to the holy Land, to find out Jesus
disputing in the Temple about those lively Indexes of his incarnation.

To proceed, the word (...), is by two learned verbalists Hesychius and Suidas,
gloss't upon by two terms much of the same strain, viz. (...) and (...). The
last of them conceives it to be nothing else but the dark representation of any
species, mentioning a person, who for his fluent eloquence, was saluted with a
deep Complement, as one who was (...); The Type or Copy of Eloquent Mercury. To
this, Papias in Martinius adds, that a Type is a prophecy in things, Lex.
Philol.
and not in words, meaning doubtless, that (...), winged fluid words cannot
bear the weight of a Type upon their airy shoulders, but persons and material
things are to be counted the proper subjects of Types.

Having done with the name, let us speak to the nature and essence of a Type,
which may be comprehended in this Definition.

A Type is an Arbitrary sign, representing future and spiritual matters by
divine institution.

The Definitum, or the Subject of the Definition, is termed a Type, by a
metaphor taken from Images, Statues, or Pictures, which are the curious
artificial resemblances of their proper Originals.

The Genus in the Definition is a Sign, which being an Adjunct of substantial
Beings, falls under the Category of Relation, and has the Foundation of its
relation in Quality. Even such as all Similitudes and Analogies truly are,
according to the Opinion of the great Philosopher [or who ever it was that
compiled that Book of Metaphysics, that commonly goes under his Name, which
seems to limp, but not on so learned a Leg, Metaph. l. 4. c. 9.
as Aristotle did] whose words are these, (...), etc. (...). Things are said to
be like each other, whose quality is one and the same, or which agree in
quality.

The Difference of the thing defined, is taken from its several constitutive
parts, which divide and separate it from all other Signs, and are these
following.

1 One part of its difference is taken from the Efficient Cause, the Divine
Arbitrium, or Free Will of God Himself, who instituted and ordained Types, they
receiving their Esse, or Being (...), by the fore-appointment of Heaven: Whence
may be deduced this ensuing Corollary.

That the proper and genuine Knowledge of Types, together with the solid
Explication annexed to them, must be deduced out of Scripture only, which
contains the Revelation of the Will of God, in respect to their imposition.

2 Another part is raised from the matter of a Type, which is the thing
signifying, or representing: or that Subject, wherein the Type does inhaere,
and from which the signification is raised, in respect to the Antitype, that
answers to it. As for Example, The Ark, the Brazen Altar, the Mercy-Seat, the
Shewbread, the Candlesticks, or the like.

3 Another from the form of a Type. It Is (...) esse, or the Formality of its
Essence and Nature, lying in its imposed and designed signification in some
kind of Analogy, or proportion to and with the Spiritual thing that is
signified by it. As for Example, The Formality of the Type of the Oracle lies
in this, that it should signify and represent the Glorious Heaven, whereinto
our High Priest is entered, according to the Doctrine of the Apostle, in His
Epistle to the Hebrews. The Unction of Aaron typically signified the anointing
of the Lord Jesus with the Oil of Gladness, above his Fellows.

4 From the end of a Type: which was appointed, to shadow forth the excellent
things of the Gospel, which as to the Jews in their several Generations,
during their Legal Administrations, were as yet future, and appeared not upon
the Stage of the World in full view, until the Consummatum est, till our Lord
upon the Cross pronounced, IT IS FINISHED, declaring a full and final
abrogation of all those ancient Jewish Ceremonies. Though, no doubt, those
Jews, who by an Eye of Faith did look upon Christ (as slain upon the Cross) in
the Types of their Bloody Sacrifices, did suck some Gospel-sweetness from them,
during that Legal Dispensation.

From all these particulars, it clearly follows, that there are in every Type
these three things mainly and principally to be considered.

1. The matter of the Type, or the thing signifying. 2. The object of the Type,
or the thing signified. 3. The Ratio, or the signification interceding betwixt
the Type, and its respective Antitype.
Now because that in all Scriptural Types, their true and native signification
depends upon, and flows from the Divine Will; Therefore must we adhibite
especial care and diligence in the management of Discourses upon these rare and
excellent Subjects, and proceed with the most precise caution, that we
attribute and ascribe nothing by way of prefiguration to any things or persons
whatsoever, but to such as Holy Scripture does either directly, or by strong
and clear consequence hand forth to us. So that, although there may intercede
some Moral, Physical, or Historical Analogy between some Legal Materials, and
Gospel Truths: yet must they not therefore presently be interpreted under the
notion of Divine Types, unless there be some fair and probable hint upon
rational accounts, deducible out of Scripture it self for such a construction.
Nevertheless, it is most certain, that the Natural Harmony, and coincidencies
of things one with another does not, cannot obstruct the interpretation and
acceptance of such for Types, if Scripture do but darkly insinuate them to be
of that Kindred, but rather exceedingly promotes, and advances, and inlighten;
the Mind in the Conception and entertainment of them for such: Yet neither on
the other side, does any such Natural Harmony warrant them to be construed for
Types; unless God Himself has stamped the Seal of Divine Institution upon their
Harmony. Who will undoubtedly issue forth the Writ of a Quo Warranto, out of
the Court of Heaven, against all such bold Intruders into Divine Mysteries, who
dare presume to expound them without a Scripture-Guide. We must always
remember, to take up Philip into the Chariot, when we are reading Isaiah, about
the Typical Act. 8.32.
Lamb that was dumb, before the Shearers, and opened not his mouth. But many of
Old have forgotten to take heed to this Cynosure, or Pole Star, that shines in
the dark and shady Valleys of the ancient Figures, having not looked back with
Abraham, at the Voice of a Divine Angel, to the Ram in the Thickets, even
Christ that was held in the Briars of our imputed Transgressions. Such were
some of the ancient Allegorizing Fathers: Others, of the Schoolmen; and most
of the late Mystical Divines (so styled) among the Papists. But yet there is no
sound reason, why we should suspect some things of Old not to have been Types
for this cause only, because they carry in their Bosoms some Natural
Consanguinity with the Spiritual Substances of the Gospel: in case there be any
Divine Eradiation beaming from Heaven upon such particulars. For God has
Supreme Dominion over all His Creatures, and can uncontrolably, by the Right of
Creation, make, alter, and manage them all as He pleases, to His Divine, and
Holy Ends. For the Explication of this Point in hand, we may apply some part of
Aristotle's Definition of the Soul, recorded by Laertius in his life, in these
words. That the Soul is the Entelechia of the Body, etc. viz. that it is that
noble Form, which does (...) or (...), inspirit, actuate, and inform and
perfect the gross corporeal matter, and gives forth the impressions of its
quick and subtle Essence upon the Body. Afterward, ratione subjecti
recipientis, Edit. Casaub. 80. page 322.
(we speak now according to Laertius his Conception of the Mind of Aristotle in
this particular) in respect to the subject matter (or the Bodies reception of
the impression of the Souls Entelechia, or that (...), as he calls it, the
incorporeal form in the operation of its vigorous Essence upon the dull and
inactive matter of the body) He mentions a twofold Entelechia; The one,
Potential; the other, Habitual. Which distinction, that it is to be understood,
as the Entelechia does respect the inferior our matter of the body, he
endeavors to clear up by the example of a Mercurial Statue. To which purpose,
there is a mass of wax prepared for the impression of the external form or
figure of Mercury, which mass (says the Author) (...), has an aptitude or
disposition in it self, to receive the shape or lineaments of Mercuries body,
and this he calls the potential Entelechia: In which sense the shape of man's
body only, not of a horse, or a dog, has the potentiality to receive the
rational form: which cannot be so fully resembled by things artificial, such
as is this similitude of a Statue in this example of Laertius. The other, viz.
the (...), or the habitual Entelechia is called by him, (...) The Actual
consummation and lively expression of the true figure and shape of Mercury, in
the wax.

All which will receive more light from Johannes Philoponus, in his Comment
upon Aristotle's second Book, De anima, page 99 and 100 Edit. Venet. 1535.
Whose words (because the Book is rare) I shall crave leave to recite.

The text is this, (...).] (...).

[ For the matter is the power, but the form is the Entelechia, or the
perfecting act]. He does not say (...), in the dative case; but in the
nominative. For the matter receiving the form; that is said to be the
Entelechia: but this is to be understood of both together, (which Aristotle
himself, de anima, Lib. 2. C. 1. Text 2. calls the (...), the third thing, viz.
the Compound made up of matter and form). Moreover, the form it self is the
Entelechia, for he opposes the Entelechia to the power; wherefore the power is
imperfect, but the Entelechia is its perfection. For it signifies [to be in
perfection]. But in what every thing has its essence, even in that it has its
peculiar perfection. But every thing has its essence from its own form.
Therefore the prefection of every thing is its form. If then the form be the
perfection, and the perfection be the Entelechia, he does rightly and properly
change the name of the form into that of the Entelechia. To sum up all then,
if the form be the Entelechia, and if the soul be the form, then the soul is
the Entelechia; (or the perfecting act of the matter). But he does not only
call the rational form by the name of Entelechia: but the external form of
artificial things also. For in natural Philosophy, it is predicated of both.
For the figure or fashion of a man's statue, is its Entelechia, having equally
participated of the name of Entelechia, instead of form, [because the name of
form is translated even to Accidents.] To the same purpose does Simplicius
speak in his Comment on the same place, Fol. 23. Edit. Aldin. 1527. To which
may be added the Conimbricenses, p. 29. Edit. Lugd. 1627. Scaliger against
Cardan, Exerc. 307. Sect. 12. etc. But craving pardon, for insisting so long on
this point: let me beg leave to apply it to the matter in hand.

For in the like manner our Lord Jesus Christ in the Gospel may be termed (...)
the first, the chief, the lively spiritual form of the dead lump and mass of
the ancient Ceremonies. Some things whereof might have in their own nature, a
waxy aptness to receive the impression of the similitude and likeness of a
Type upon them, yet must not be so accounted for statues representing Christ,
till they have their (...), their (...), or the actual impression signed and
effigiated upon them, till their potential receptivity be invigorated and
actuated by a divine hand.

To which purpose we may observe, that some things in nature have in them some
tolerable consignification of that thing for which they are designed by God
himself. As for example, his glorious Majesty has de facto imposed a
signification of a future event upon a subject, which did exist in nature
before that imposition, and in some measure did and still does of its own
accord prognosticate, what it is new designed unto by divine praescription;
which is no other then the Rainbow, a (...), or apparition doubtless in the
ages before the flood. For Heathens, who possibly had never seen the writings
of Moses, do acquaint us with this as a prognostic of rain. As for instance
Aratus the Poet (cited by Paul for another end) has this passage in his (...)
ver. 206. and 208. Page 34. Edit. Grotii. Antwerp. 1600.
(...), etc.
(...):


A double Rainbow encircling the great heaven, is many times a token of rain
at hand. On which place the Commentary of Ed. Par. 1559. page 103.
Theon may be consulted. By which verses the Poet does intimate that a single
Bow is no prognostic of any durable or Soaking rain to follow. Wherefore Lib.
6. Artic. 15.
Fromondus a late Meteorologist agreeing with Aquinas and the Philosophers of
Conimbra does declare that the Rainbow naturally may (...) sign of no vast
inundations to follow the Showers, which it signifies. For when the heavens are
filled and overspread with thick and heavy Clouds, which totally suppress and
obscure the beams of the Sun, there can be no Rainbow visible at such a time:
which must appear naturally in some thin and ^orid Clouds opposite to the Suns
place at that instant. As Vitellio does determine in his optics. In Vapore
rorido Iridemgenerari necesse est. Lib. 10. Theor. 66. p. 458. Edit. Basil.
1572. Though no doubt they have shined most beautifully when very dark, and
thick Clouds have bin situate behind them: yet such thick Clouds are not the
proper cause of the appearance, but of the fortifying and strengthening the
apparition; even as opacous matter behind the glass makes the face appear the
more visibly in it. Whereas the dewy distillings of thin Clouds properly makes
the Rainbow to appear, and therefore is it that many times after a great April
shower, in the thin Relics, when the air is filled with moist vapors, these
Rain-bows have appeared with their horns or ends terminating in a valley, and a
great hill behind them, as once I observed near the River Tine in
Northumberland. From all which we may safely conclude, that the Rainbow is
rather an Index of no continuing rain; partly because of thin vapors which
cause its appearance, and partly because the Sun must at the same time shine;
the heaven not being overwhelmed with Clouds. Yet nevertheless, since the
ancient deluge, it is become a certain and an infallible token, (whenever it
appears) that Gods majesty will never drown the whole world any more, because
of the Covenant made with all flesh, having set Genesis 9.13.
his Bow in the Clouds, as a declarative token of his will. So that God has
now stamped his divine impression upon the Rainbow, to signify now more
forcibly and inviolably the same thing, which of its own nature, though
slenderly, yet in some measure it does prenotifie.

In the like manner, the infinitely wise God may please to inscribe or impose a
positive institution of his own, upon those very materials, which from
themselves do yield some natural reflection upon the things which they typifie
by divine ordination: whereby they are indeed elevated to a more ample and
significant honor. As for example; in the Levitical Law, Ferne^tus in
Therapeut. l. 5. c. 7.
hysop that is of an abstersive and mundative nature, was used in the case of
Leprosy. Nay, it is noted by Dioscorides, and his Commentator Matthiolus, that
it helps those diseases which come from sharp Intercutaneous humor, Edit.
Venet. 1554. p. 332. etc. and therefore is properly used to signify our
cleansing from sin. Again Cedar was the internal material of Solomon's
Cherubins, which is (...), an imputrible wood, noting the perpetuity and
immortality of the holy Angels.

Furthermore, when the divine Majesty has expressly declared in Scripture such
a person, such an edifice, such an utensil to take upon it the habit of a Type,
and has instituted and appointed it to Commemorate some spiritual good thing
in the Gospel: Then may we in general accept of this for a safe guide in our
procedure to the more particular part of such a great Type, and descend further
to enquire out the Analogy and proportion, to and with the Gospel-substance
held forth in them: So be it, the inquiry be managed with great sobriety,
humility, circumspection, and moderation.

From what precedes we may likewise infer, that as to those types which
signify upon no other account then (...), by divine choice and decision: it is
the safest way and most commendable to interpret them, only by what divine
Revelations are extant in Scripture, looking directly upon them. As when the
Corner stone of the Temple is applied to Christ, or the beaten piece of Gold
that was the cover of the sacred Chest in the Oracle, called the Mercy-seat; is
applied to Christ's mediator-ship, and the like. Whereas in those Types, which
have any Analogical harmony naturally interceding betwixt them and their
respective Antitypes, in joint Connection with Gods divine institution, some
more liberty of ampliation may be tolerably allowed: so be it, they be handled
with great diligence, accurate care, and submissive inquiries into the natures
of such typical things, and their correspondents in the Gospel, according to
all their views and habitudes; with a choice respect had to the Orthodxoy of
Faith, the Canon of the Scripture, and the Concurrent Judgment (in the main) of
the grave and learned luminaries of the Church of Christ.

Some persons have bin very apt to give a plenary indulgence to their own
private fancies, and then to applaud and clap their wings at the thinspread
issue of their own brains, which generally give little satisfaction to any, but
themselves. It was a failing certainly in some of the Ancients, (let me speak
it, with all modesty and reverence yet had to their learning and strictness of
life) as particularly in Origin, Ambrose, Bid, and others, to apply too
particular a signification to every nice punctilio of the ancient Ceremonies.
Surely they had Lynceus his eyes, (such as Orpheus in his Argonanticks relates
him to have had, wherewith he could see cross the Ocean) who in every nail,
pin, stone, staire, knife, pot, and almost in every feather of a sacrificed
bird could discern, I know not what strange distinct and peculiar Mystery. It
were fat better certainly to remember the Common Canon for exposition of
parables, that their scope is mainely to be attended, and to be taken for our
guide. So in Types the (...), viz. the persons, places, rites, and utensils of
greatest note, should be the subject of such discourses: the lesser particles
being appendant only to the Grandeure and pomp of the Temple. Some whereof
were ordained (as Parisiensis observes) for distinction of the Jews from
Heathens: as the situation of the Oracle at the west end of the Temple, to
distinguish them from the Fanes of the Lybians, Assyrians, Egyptians, and
generally of all Heathens, which looked toward the Vitrvo. Archit. Lib. 4. c.
5. p. 70, 71. Edit. Elz. 1649. fol.
East. Other parts were appointed to carry on and hold forth a general harmony:
others for the preservation of the form and Economy of the Jewish worship; So
that some only, and they the chiefest and greatest materials did hint at
spiritual good things, in a particular manner.

I shall not therefore be peremptory in any thing, but in that which Scripture
it self does directly lead to. As for others, which hold only some Analogy
with the greater, being as several parts and parcels of them, the
intrerpetation whereof may be founded upon common consequences of reason, the
like thereto being insinuated by other similitudes in holy Scripture; such I
shall with all modesty and submission propose to the consideration of learned
and ingenuous persons, not valuing the sick and morose cavils of illiterate and
sordid Tempers; who are like the great boaster in Noct. Attic. Lib. 1. Cap. 2.
A. Gellius that defamed all the sober persons in Greece and Italy, on purpose
to extol his own dull apprehensions: but was seasonably reproved by Herodes
Atticus, out of Epictetus; where let him behold and blush at his censure.

Mean while let us consider, that those Types, which have some countenance from
Scripture it self, for their divine assignation; but are not fully cleared up
out of those sacred pages, and yet seem in their own natures to bear some
resemblance to, and hold some proportion with the thing signified: Satis est
(says Metaph. 80. p. 755.
Calovius) si detur convenientia, in qua ratio Typi salvetur. It Is sufficient,
if there be such an agreement, as whereby the formality of a Type may be
preserved.

The Types of old were the shells; the typified matter, the sweet kernel
within. So that as the fashion of the kernel is within, such is the external
form of the shell without, and accordingly we find it to have bin so in Types.

The ancient Types are frequently compared to shadows: The Typified things then
are the bodies from whence these shadows were projected or cast. So that the
Type is hinted by this similitude, to have bin far inferior to the body or
substance from whence it was derived: and yet herein we may find some dark
similitude and resemblance of that body, whereof it was a shadow. For look,
even as a shadow gives the shape of a body sometimes in equal proportion,
according to the position of the light, by means of which the shadow represents
the intercepting body: So did the Types some of them admirably delineate and
effigiate the shape of spiritual things.

Besides, shadows which attend upon bodies, show forth their motions, either
progressive, or retrograde, the inclining of the whole, or the flexure of any
member according to the various postures of the body it self; or else are
increased and diminished according to the various height of the luminary. In
like manner seeing Christ our mediator is the glorious substance of both Law
and Gospel, we may observe that in the Law his back was upon the Jews; Moses
being admitted to behold the Exodus 33.23.
back-parts of God only, standing in the dark and opacous shadow of the
Ceremonies: whereas in the Gospel we stand before the 2 Cor. 4.6.
face of Christ; the light of the knowledge of the glory of God shining upon
him directly, and from his face upon us by reflection, we being now removed
from behind Christ out of those ancient shadows. Our blessed Lord the Sun of
righteousness began to arise in the Protevangelium, or that ancient promise
given forth to Adam in Paradise, and daily rose higher and higher in more clear
emanations of light upon the hearts of the Patriarchs in fuller promises of his
coming, till at last he ascended up to the Just meridian when he appeared
incarnate upon the earth, and accordingly as the times dre^ nigher to his
apparition in the world in humane flesh, so the shadows began more and more to
decrease, and the apprehen^ions of his incarnation to be more fully cleared up
to their understanding. Even as the higher the natural Sun gets toward the
appointed elevation in his noone time glory: so do the shadows of all bodies
decrease in their stature.

Moreover the nearer they are in their position to the illuminating body, the
more strongly and brightly are they irradiated according to that Theoreme of
Vitellio. Omne corpus umbrosum puncto luminoso propinquius, illuminatur ab illo
puncto fortius corpore plus distante. Optic. l. 2. Theor. 22.

Furthermore, in this resemblance of Types to shadows, if we observe the
situation of the gross and dark body, we find the shadows sometimes cast ab
ante, before, and sometimes a part postica, behind: when the body is fixed and
the luminary moveable. In like manner we may speak allusively of the Jews, as
of old standing in the shadow that was cast from behind the Lord of glory; we
likewise have some shadows, but they are cast ab ante, from before his face as
he is moving forward in his Kingdom of grace: such are the two Sacraments. For
we behold his face in some measure, reflecting on the state of his incarnation,
though palely represented in the layer of baptism, and ruddily in the wine of
His supper. The glory of his Divinity and Mystical headship in heaven, lends us
a shadow of his meritorious work in the Sacramental representations of his
sufferings, by the Symbols of his body and blood. For in these Gospel days
there does rarely or never appear any Placau^ de Typ. p. 8.
shadow of the Lord Jesus without and apart from his Mystical body the Church.
Therefore is it that we read of blessed Paul, Phil. 3.13.
forgetting those things that are behind in the ancient shadows, and reaching
forth to the things, the deep things of the Gospel that were before him in
grace, and above him in heaven.

In all Types there is some obscurity, even as the proper notion of shadows
lies in the absence of light from the place obscured, by the interposing and
eclipsing body: wherefore the greater diligence is to be given in examining the
various parts of the shadow, with the lines of incidence as they fall from the
substance that intercepts the light.

Moreover, it is not extraneous to our purpose to observe that one and the same
body, may give forth many shadows varying in their appearance, according to the
differing postures of its own parts, or of the whole body in general, at
different times; or else in respect to the various aspect of the Luminary, in
its different altitudes, or as the rays may be more or less refracted by the
copiousness or the tenuity of vapors: In like manner, there may be various
Types of the same spiritual Col. 2.17.
substance, which is Christ. There may be several rounds in the Typical ladder,
by which we ascend up into the knowledge of our Lord in the Gospel-firmament:
which does far transcend and surpass all the ancient shadows of him in the
Law. Wherefore as in all similitudes there is some dissonancy or disagreement
from the things which they shadow forth, to excuse them from identity: So here,
we shall find great disproportions and dissimilitudes, wherein the Evangelical
substance does far out-bid the legal shadows.

That we may proceed then Methodically in the examination of these ancient
shadows, (so far forth, as concerns the Temple, the proper subject of this
Treatise: It being not the design of this work in hand, to launch forth into
the vast Ocean of all the Mosaical and old Testament Types) I shall first prove
from holy Scripture, that the Legal Ceremonies were shadows of Evangelical
truths, and afterward treat in some measure about the method and manner of our
enquiries into these deep Mysteries, laying down some Canons or rules, as the
Basis or foundation of our progress.

As to the first particular, if the several expressions of the holy Spirit, be
seriously weighed, sober persons (I hope) will find just satisfaction. To this
purpose the Apostle to the Hebr. 1.1.
Hebrews acquaints us, that in ancient times God was pleased to speak to the
Fathers by the Prophets (...), in several parcels and after various manners,
delivering his mind in set portions unto the Church. But in the Lord Jesus is
made manifest and brought to light, Ephesians. 3.10.
(...), the manifold or multiformous wisdom of God; or, to speak with
reverence, the opus Phrygionicum the embroydered needle work of his wisdom: In
a word, the opus Spartian in Pescennio. p. 215. Edit. Lug. Bat.
Musivum or (that we may allude to Moses in his Types) the Mosaic pictures and
images of his glory. For by Moses came the Law, and that not only in its
moral, but also in its Ceremonial part: whereas Joh. 1.17.
grace and truth came by Jesus Christ: grace, to supply our defects in respect
to the Law Moral: Truth, in fulfilling and exhibiting the chief substance of
the Ceremonial part in Himself.

We read in the holy Scriptures concerning Typical persons, as well as things
representing the state of the Evangelical Church to the ancient Fathers. For in
one place we may observe, that Adam (the head of all mankind in respect to the
covenant of works) is called by holy Paul Romans 5.14.
(...), the figure of him who was to come. In another place we read, that the
Children of Israel and Moses their Lawgiver, the Red Sea and the Cloud, the
baptizing of the Israelites unto Moses, the Manna that rained from heaven and
the rock gushing forth with water in the wilderness, 1 Cor. 10.6, 11.
(...), that they were Types or Figures of us under the Gospel. Again in
another Epistle the Apostle having treated about various meats and drinks,
about the ancient Solemn feasts, as New Moons and Jewish Sabbaths, argues
expressly their vanishing nature from their being but shadows of good things to
come, whereas Col. 2.17.
the body itself is of Christ. Furthermore the Author to the Hebrews ( Paul
most probably according to 2 Pet. 3.15.
Peter and the sense of the ancient Church in the time of Homil. 9. in Exodus.
p. 96. Edit. Basil. 1545.
Origin) does plainly assert that the Priests under the Mosaical Law did serve
unto the Hebr. 8.5.
example and shadow of heavenly things. Nay, in that Epistle, which might well
be Styled a Commentary upon the Leviticall Ceremonies, he does almost in every
Chapter, give ample testimony to this point in hand: yet I shall instance but
in a few more, as where he does aver that the Tabernacle of Moses was a
figure of more perfect and complete services: It was but Heb. 9.9.
(...), a parable during for the present time, whose moral and interpretation
is to be taken out of the New testament. We must plough with our spiritual
Sampsons heifer, or else we shall never expound the Riddle. For they were but
Heb. 9.23.
(...), subindicationes, dark patterns of heavenly things. Nay, the whole Law
it self, ( viz. Ceremonial) contained in it Heb. 10.1.
a shadow of good things to come, and not the very image of those things. Hence
it is, that the ancient Ceremonies are termed Heb. 7.18, 19.
weak and unprofitable, making nothing perfect; in another place, Gal. 4.3.
Elements of this world, or worldly Elements Col. 2.8.
and rudiments of the world, as otherwhere the Sanctuary is termed Heb. 9.1.
worldly in opposition to its divine and spiritual antitypes: otherwhere its
Ceremonies are called weak and Gal. 4.8.
beggarly Elements: by which a man cannot be enriched unto salvation. In which
sense we may allude to that place where Gods Majesty is pleased to tell the
Elders of Israel, by the mouth of his Prophet Ezekiel; that he gave their
Fathers in the wilderness Ezekiel. 20.25.
Statutes that were not good: that is, in themselves nakedly considered, they
were such as whereby they could not live: for unless they diligently kept and
observed them, and looked through them, to the bringing in of a Heb. 7.19.
better hope, they could not draw nigh to God with any confidence. For by the
28th verse following, the Prophet seems to intimate that by Statutes we are to
understand the Ceremonial Ordinances. The word also in the Hebrew (...) which
is here used, is the same with that in the Psalm. 89.31.
Psalmist, which Musculus expounds of the Statutes of the Ceremonial Law,
distinguishing between Judgments, Statutes, and Commandments, as if the former
reflected upon the Judicial, the next upon the Ceremonial, the last upon the
Moral Ordinances enjoined by Moses from God: But whether more judiciously then
acutely, I shall refer to others.

Seeing then the ancient Ceremonies are Metaphorically termed shadows, it is
requisite to have some light, even to compare them with the body from which
they are cast, as it is observed by Optic. l. 2. Theor. 57. p. 63. Edit. Basil.
Alhazen [Umbra percipitur e lucis unius absentia, alterius praesentia] that
shadows are discerned by the absence of one light and the presence of another.
The direct Rays of the Suns body are absent from the place darkened, by the
interposing body: but the Circumambient air that is illuminated with other
Rays of light, helps us to discern the shadow. In which sense, give us leave
to compare at present, the Ceremonies to the shadows, the Gospel to the
substance, and Christ to the luminary, and then divine Revelation inlightning
the Churches horizon helps our eyes to discern those ancient shadows, which
proceed likewise from him who is both Job. 8.12.
light and truth: whom we discern refracted in the Law, by a ray of reflection
in the Gospel, but by a direct beam, when we come to behold him 1 Cor. 13.12.
face to face.

Furthermore, as a shadow does but in a dark and obscure manne^ represent only
the external form or shape of a man, with head, arms legs, and the trunk of
his body in an erect posture, helping us only to distinguish (...) from the
figure of a beast or a tree, etc. So did the Law in a dark and obscure manner
hint out the excellencies of the Gospel, and the figure and shape of our Lord
in special. But when a man has his representation given forth in a more lively
way by a picture, we then know it to be the Icon of such a particular person,
whose feature we are well acquainted with. Or yet more fully, by a glass
reflecting his very face upon us. Or most completely and absolutely by a carved
Image, or a Statue of marble or brass, wherein he is modelled, not only
according to the true figure of his face, and the exact proportion of his
limbs, but also the bulk, crassitude, and dimensions of every member. In such a
manner does the Gospel express the Lord Jesus to his beloved Church, even like
a picture drawn to the life, like an (...), or looking glass, like an Image
perfectly suited and symmetrically correspondent to its lively prototype.
Insomuch, that when the day break of the Gospel began to appear; then did the
ancient Jewish Cant. 2.17, and 4, 6.
shadows flee away, as the Spouse does joyfully express it at the approach of
her endeared Lord and Savior. While the Church of God was confined to
families, she walked in the light of the seven Stars only: I mean the 7
precepts (commonly so called) of Noah; and now and then enjoyed some created
Stars of revealed promises concerning the Messiah. But when increased to the
dimensions of a Nation, she was a little more illuminated with the Jewish
Moons. At length the glorious light of heaven, the Lord our righteousness, did
arise with healing under his wings, and shined over the walls of Bethlehem;
irradiating the people of Jewry, who before sat in Luke 1.79. Mat. 4.16.
darkness, and the Gentiles a far off, that walked in the shadow of death.
Who now do with open face behold as in a 2 Cor. 3.18.
glass the glory of the Lord, and are become the 2 Cor. 3.3.
Epistle of Christ written [(...)] or depicted by the spirit of the living God.
in the fleshy Tables of the heart: Nay, in a word they do bear or set forth in
open view the very 1 Cor. 15.49.
image of the heavenly Adam. The period of all the ancient Ceremonies being
fixed by our Lord upon the Cross, when he said, joh. 19.30.
IT IS FINISHED. They were intombed in his grave, and the seal of the best Act.
15.24.
council that ever was, impressed upon the stone which was laid on the mouth of
the Sepulcher, and afterward confirmed by the Tertullian. Contr. Indaeos Tom.
1. Origin Cont. Cells. Cantabr. p. 261. Cyprian. Contra Indaeos ad Quirin. p.
29. Edit. Bas. 1530, etc.
ancient Fathers, and all the Christian worthies of the Church in their several
generations.

By these and many other testimonies, the grounds of our former assertion may
be evidently perceived, viz. That Gospel truths were of old typified by the
Jewish Ceremonies. Concerning the divine meaning whereof, I shall endeavor to
inquire with all sobriety, according to these succeeding Rules or Canons, which
contain the second thing proposed for our discourse, by way of introduction to
the main design. The hints of some things therein contained, I do thankfully
acknowledge, as insinuated by the learned Placeus in the fore-touched place.

The first rule then, for the finding out the nature of Types, or for the
Examination





I hope we may then also, so it be with due moderation, not fearing rigid
asterisms in the margin, give to such an ancient person or thing the name of a
Type: especially since grave and sober men in several ages, have cast in their
concurrent testimony into that interpretation.

Fifthly, When there is some excellent attribute ascribed to a person or Psalm.
89.4, 36.
when it is explained and opened, as for example. The Throne of Solomon is
promised to be eternal: which did neither agree with Solomon personally, nor
his posterity; they being cast out of the Royal seat above 2000 years ago: So
that it cannot be applied to Solomon but Typically as being a peaceable King
for a great while; but to Jesus Christ only really of whose Dan. 3.44.
kingdom there shall be no end. In this case there will be no need to write,
Type, over the head of such a thing; the matter is obvious and clear enough,
that we may without hesitation insert it among the rest of its kindred.

Sixthly and Lastly, When the holy Sctipture does plainly nominate vena cava of
the larger pieces of the Temple. For, unless such a smaller material be
admitted to commence the degree of a Type, (especially when some Gospel truth
may properly and without straining be applied to it, in concomitancy with the
greater) there may possibly appear some chasm or widening deficiency in the
main material; to be challenged by the captious for a blemish, and imperfection
in the designment of it, for a typical signification of spiritual matters.

Yet herein, it is not my intention to be critically and anxiously inquisitive,
into every minute and inconsiderable particle, prying through the microscope of
fancy into the knop of every spoon, the fashion of the slaughter knives, the
thickness of each cauldron, the situation of each vessel, or the cubital
dimensions of each material, as if some rare Mystery were laid up in their
numbers: In which Ribera, and some others, are too curious in finding out
Mysteries, where most probably none were intended, and dividing most subtlely
((...)) their small cummin into nice portions, showing themselves (if I may so
speak) to be overmuch wise, in the phrase of Solomon. I had rather consider
those lesser parts (ut Typo ministrantia) as only subservient to the main Type,
as In Exodus Cap. 26. p. 1127. in folio.
Dr. Rivet conceives in his exposition upon Moses his Tabernacle.

As to the work then in hand, I shall in the first place implore the divine aid
of heaven, and the assisting presence of the holy spirit, in the illumination
of my mind, by the Lamps of the Sanctuary, and beg that my eyesight may be
washed and cleansed with those waters that issue from under the Ezekiel. 47.1.
threshold of the sacred Temple; That he who bears the key of David, would
graciously please to open a door of entrance for me: that so I may rightly
understand, and properly express my conceptions in reference to these
Mysterious affairs. Secondly, I shall cautiously endeavor to proceed in this
business, generally, according to the 6 forementioned Canons, as to the
explication of the nature of these excellent Types. Yet herein I shall not need
in the unfolding of their meaning, to allege and apply the aforesaid rules:
which will prove tedious and useless: seeing common reason is a sufficient
Cynosure or load-starre in that particular. Thirdly, It shall be my study and
care to give diligent and deep intention of spirit to the things in hand, and
yet I desire to propose them with all modesty and sobriety; not challenging any
determinate assertion, unless where Scripture proves exceeding plain and
evident: Entreating the Courteous Inquirer to pardon my infirmities, and not to
pass too precipitant a censure upon the expositions, before he have conferred
the explications with the preceding Canons, and the opinions of learned Divines
both ancient and modern: to whose apprehensions I freely and humbly submit my
self. Fourthly, I shall crave leave to acquaint my ingenuous Reader, that it is
not the design of this work to enlarge most amply upon all the significant
parts of the Temple; much less upon all the ancient Types and Ceremonies, they
being a subject matter fit for persons of deeper insight and knowledge then I
have arrived to. Who having bin much entreated by a near Relation, (somewhat
concerned in this piece as at whose cost all the figures were cut in brass) to
contrive one Chapter concerning the Temple-Mysteries: I was in a good measure
unwillingly drawn to this work in particular, as indeed to the whole by a
strange overruling Providence, as may possibly somewhat more appear in the
prefixed Epistle. Wherefore I humbly and most earnestly entreat the kind
interpretation of my poor labors, and the passing over my weaknesses by all
learned and sober persons: hoping that this so thin and slender an Essay may
quicken and incite some abler quill, taken from some Seraphims wing, to pierce
deeper into the heaven of these divine Mysteries, dictated by the all wise
Majesty of God himself.

As to some moderate explication whereof at present, that I may proceed in a
Methodical path: Let me first in general treat a while, concerning the time and
place of its erection together with the Famous builder King Solomon, who
undertook the care and charges of that Excellent work; and then descend to
speak to the several particulars in six Sections: that so the Temple-Mysteries
may be digested according to the method of the several preceding Chapters, in
the Compilement of its History: So far fotth, as there is any thing of
spiritual signification in them. All which may be very Commodiously reduced to
these 6 heads following, whereof I shall endeavor to discourse with all
perspicuity and convenient brevity.

1. Of the covered Temple, and its several included divisions. 2. Of the Courts
and buildings round about it. 3. Of its various Utensils and Ornaments. 4. Of
the several divine Officers. 5. Of the solemn services in the Worship of Gods
Majesty. 6. Of the beneficial Endowments, wherewith the Officers were
encouraged in the performance of their several duties incumbent on them. Which
particulars when I shall have handled with all expedition and succinctnesse
possible for such a work, through divine permission and assistance: A close
shall be then affixed to this Chapter, whose subject is the most choice and
excellent, most rare and difficult of all the rest.
Concerning the Mysteries of the holy Temple, respecting the Time of its
Erection.
IN this Paragraph, containing an enquiry of what Mystery might possibly be
wrapped up in the Circumstance of time, wherein this glorious Edifice was
erected; I shall only mention some apprehensions of others, who delight much to
converse with numbers in the School of Pythagoras. In Heptaplo. Lib. 7. c. 4.
p. 35.
Picus Mirandula, a Learned man, yet deeply affected with such kind of
Mysteries, conceited that the 6 days of the worlds Creation did prenote 6000
years of the worlds continuance, each day being put for a thousand years.
Moreover, that in each thousand years continuance, there was somewhat notably
correspondent with the Created works of each particular day. So that as the
waters were distinguished into their several seats on the second day, even so
within the compass of the second interval of a thousand years, the great
overflowing deluge covered the face of the Earth. In like manner, as the fourth
day produced the glorious luminaries: So within the compass of the 4th
interval of a 1000d years, did Christ the Mal. 4.2.
Sun of Righteousness arise in the world; and the Church signified by the
Cant. 6.10.
Moon, and the Rev. 12.1.
12 Star^s of the Apostles, shined in her Horizon. Nay the Temple, which
prefigured Christ and his Church, was completely finished in the three
thousandth year of the world, and fasted a whole millenary of years, viz.
through the whole fourth day of the world, bating the intercision of a few
years, during the Captivity of Babylon, which was supplied by its continuance,
about the same quantity of years after our Lords birth, till its dissolution by
the Roman armies.

There be others, who considering that the Temple was fully finished in the
3000th year of the World, (according to Bishop Ushers Calculation, and other
nice Chronologers) being just a 1000d years before our Lords incarnation and
precisely in the middle point of the World's apprehended-duration, viz. of
6000d years according to the received tradition of the sons of the House of
Eliah, mentioned by the same Ibid. page 36.
Author in the very words of the Jewish Talmud; would out of these Rabbinicall
flints extract some choice Mystical Oil, to supple the Wheels of their fancy.
As if so be, a glorious external visible Church must needs from thence be
evinced to continue upon the Earth 3000 years, even just as many as the world
had before continued without it, and that this admirable beauty of the
Church-militant, commenced with the Temple's complete erection. Besides, as the
Temple did continue, though not without some fatal concussions for the space of
a 1000d years: So in like manner a glorious Evangelical Church thereby
typified, should endure also for a 1000d years space: after the 6000 years of
the world in general, shall be consummated and ended, when the rage and power
of her enemies shall be extinct; when the Saints of the most High shall Live
and Reign with Christ a Rev. 20.4.
1000d years. And all this must be accomplished (say they) before the 2d and
most glorious coming of our Lord in the Clouds, to pass sentence of
condemnation upon the World of the ungodly, and to put an Ultimate period to
its duration. Now forasmuch as the Temple suffered many hard things during its
long continuance: we must not think (according to them) that the Saints Reign
shall have any sad Chasm of affliction: seeing the Antitype must always
out-vye and excel its prefiguration in glory and excellency.

But for my part, holding it sufficient to have recounted these things to be
left or entertained at pleasure, seeing there is no solid basis or foundation
(for these superstructures of fancy,) revealed in holy Scripture: I had rather
resolve the Mystery of the Time of the first fixed state of the Temple, (if
there be any couched under it) into the good pleasure of God, whose Majesty, if
he had intended any such rare signification in the time of its building, would
have delivered the meaning thereof more clearly to us, had it seemed good in
his holy eyes. What is secret belongs to the Lord: but things revealed to us
and our Children. Wherefore I shall proceed to a more material inquiry,
concerning the place of its situation.

Concerning the place where the holy Temple was built.
IN this Section I mean not to tell long stories of Gods choosing the people of
Israel above all Nations to serve Him: or of Canaan above all Lands for his
people to dwell in: or of Jerusalem above all Cities, to place his name there:
seeing the Lord loved the Psalm. 87.2.
gates of Zion, more then all the habitations of Jacob. But shall rather
descend immediately to treat of the holy mountain Moriah, it self: So
frequently called in the holy Books, the mountain of the House of the Lord:
wherein he has promised to make unto all people Isai. 25.6.
a feast of fat things, a feast of Wines on the Lees, of fat things full of
marrow, of Wines on the Lees well refined, whereby (no doubt) the holy Prophet
in the name of the Lord does insinuate the mountain of Moriah to be a most
sublime Type of the Gospel Church, exalted even to heaven by the means of grace
and salvation: when he assures us in so many words, that all Nations should be
feasted in that blessed mountain: which of it self was not sufficient to
entertain within its circuit, no, not the one only Nation of the Jews at a set
banquet, whereof more in succeding lines.

In reference to our present work, the denomination of this mountain may yield
us some light and information in this matter, seeing the very name of it
probably was imposed by God himself: when he commanded Abraham to get him into
the Land of Genesis 22.2.
Moriah; whose manner in the imposition of names is to read a Lecture worthy
the attention of Men and Angels. As to the signification whereof there are
various Conjectures, offered by Learned men, and many of them are summed up by
an Eminent Nic. Fuller. Miscell. l. 2. c. 12.
Critique of our own Nation. Some (it seems) derive it from (...) Myrrh, as if
this tract of ground had bin anciently famous in bringing forth that curious
rarity, conceiting withal, that the mountain of Myrrh mentioned in the Book of
Cant. 4.6.
Canticles, is to be interpreted and understood of this fragrant place. Others
would fetch it from the Syriack word (...) Mara, which signified [the Lord] as
if it noted out the Grand holiness of that piece of ground, as being by
peculiar designation, The Lords mountain. Others deduce it from (...)
signifying fear, hinting forth to us a place destinated to the fear of the
Lord, such as is expressed by his heavenly worshippers, in their solemn
attendance upon God, according to the ancient Mosaical injunctions. Whereas, in
truth, the most genuine derivation of the word, seems rather to be taken from
(...) to see, declaring it to be the Land of vision. Wherefore some translate
the former text in Genesis, (Vade in terram excelsam] get thee to the high or
hilly Country: Aquila turns it (...), that is, perspicuous, shining or
illustrious: Symmachus by, (...) the Land of vision, which is therefore
interpreted, illuminating and irradiating, according as Learned Edit. Ludg.
1530. Vol. 3. p. 216.
Jerome in his questions upon Genesis. Others apprehend it to have bin so called
from the Eminent conspicuousnesse of the place, being by reason of its height
seen by travelers at a very great distance, and from whence by such as stood
upon it many rare and lovely prospects, presented themselves to the covetous
eyes of delighted spectators. Whereby is shadowed the rare beauty and
comeliness of the Church, the spouse of Christ, when she is Enammelled with
the Ezekiel. 16.14.
glory of her Lord and Husband, and when presented to the view of others that
pass by, in so much that they have bin inamoured with her beauty; and have
turned in to her habitation to gain acquaintance with her: or else in respect
to the profound and deep Mysteries, the delicious and pleasant prospects of
mercy and grace, which have bin presented to the view of such persons, who have
stood upon this holy mountain. There be, that apprehend it to have bin termed
the Land of Vision, from the apparition of that holy Angel, who accoasted
Abraham at the intended sacrifice of his only son. But the Learned man
forecited, conceives some Typical hint of the Lord Jesus, to have bin involved
in the very name, and accordingly expounds it of the apparition of 1 Timothy 3.16.
God manifest in the flesh, viz. of our blessed Savior, who was born,
conversed very frequently; and at last suffered in this tract of mountains
known of old by the name of the Land of Moriah or of Vision. In this particular
ridge, being the mount it self precisely, whereon the Temple stood, some
Breidenbachius.
have blessed themselves with a conceit that good Jacob saw in his dream the
ladder reaching up to heaven; and moreover that he called it Bethel, by an
Historical prolepsis: whereas it is certain, the good Patriarch was then
passing on in a journey, at a good distance from this place toward Syria. But
the true place of the sacrifice of Abraham indeed was here, being frequently
called in Scripture by the name of mount Zion, especially in the writings of
the Prophets; where, by a Synecdoche, the name of one little hill is given and
ascribed to all the mountains thereabout, and so Moriah in a more laxe
acceptance of Zion, is frequently termed by that name: whereas in a more
strict sense, Zion was properly the name only of the neighboring mount,
whereupon King David dwelt: whose entertainment of the Ark, within the verge of
his own house has caused this denomination to be given to all the sacred
places thereabouts; where the Ark of Gods presence was afterward seated. The
constant residence whereof, by the appointment of God, and the care of Solomon,
was upon the hill (strictly so called) of Moriah, within the walls of the City
Jerusalem: where it was encompassed with a beautiful Temple, instead of the
Mosaical Curtains. The glorious Majesty of heaven, chose a mountain rather then
a valley for the habitation of his holiness, thereby giving us to understand
the excelsity, and dignity of the Gospel Church in a figure, which was of old
prophesied of, to be Isa. 2.2. Mic. 4.1. Dan. 2.44.
exalted over all the Mountains and Kingdoms of the Earth. It was set upon a
lofty mountain to shadow forth the visibility of the Evangelical Church in all
ages, to such as have spiritual eyes to discern it. Mat. 5.14.
For a City that is set on a hill cannot be hid. Besides, as buildings which
are fixed upon mountains, enjoy a more pure and defaecated air, therefore
several of the ancients have accounted such places as most proper for those
persons, who study and consult their health more then their profit. In
particular In Geoponic. p. 31. Bas. 80.15.38.
Didymus has these words in his advice to this purpose. [(...)]. It behooves
to build your houses on the highest places. For such are most commodious both
for health and prospect. De re Rust. Lib. 1. Tit. 8.
Palladius also gives counsel, thus; [Ipsius Pratorii situs sit, loco
aliquatenus erectiore and sicciore, quam catera, and propter injuriam
fundamentorum, and ut laeto fruatur aspectu]. The situation of the Mansion it
self, let it be in a place more lofty and dry, than of the others, to prevent
injuries to the foundations, and that you may enjoy a refreshing prospect.
Lastly, L. 1. C. 4.
Vitruvius says, Primum, electio loci saluberrimi, is autem erit excelsus.
First of all, ye must design the most wholesome place for your dwelling, even
such as is higher than Ordinary. In like manner the wholesome and healthful
situation of the Temple of old, did decypher and mark out to us, that the
health of our souls is then most prudently consulted, when we live in such
places, where we may suck-in the sweet air of the Gospel Ordinances, in the
assemblies of Zion. For as much also, as the mountains in their stately and
elevated position are nearer to the Stars, than ordinary Champion plains or
depressed valleys: we may thence conceive, that the noble exaltation of this
place, where the Temple stood, might denote the Churches vicinity to heaven,
whither all its fervent devotions must be directed: It being observable in
Scripture, that the usual seats of divine worship were constituted in such
places, as were very high, shadowing forth the heavenlinesse, which is required
in the minds of divine worshippers. Besides, as it was usual of old to build
their fenced Cities and Castles upon hills, that were precipicious and most
inaccessible: So it was Gods good pleasure that the Temple of his presence
should have the like secure situation, to note the impregnablenesse of the
Church, which is set upon Psalm. 2.6.
mount Zion. Furthermore, It is recorded in the sacred Volumes to have bin
built upon the threshing-floor of Araunah or Ornan the Iebusite, to manifest
(says P. 58.
Ribera) that in time to come, the Gentiles should be admitted into
consoederation with the Jews in divine worship: not unlike to what Vol. 1. page
125.
Jerome had before observed in his letter written (as Erasmus conceives) in the
name of Paula and Eustochium to Marcella in these words, Angelus, etc. in Orne
Jebusaorum regis area Templum Domini designavit, jam tunc significans Ecclesiam
Christi, non in Israel, sed in gentibus consurgentem. The Angel, etc. designed
the Temple of the Lord to be in the threshing-floor of Orne, the King of the
Jebusites, even then signifying the Church of Christ arising, not in Israel,
but among the Gentiles. Further, the Temple was built on a mountain to note its
perennity and duration of the Church. They that trust in the Lord, shall be as
mount Zion, which cannot be removed, but abides for ever, Psalm. 125.1. He also
that does the will of God is promised to abide for ever, 1 John 2.17. Finally,
it was built in a mountain, possibly to set out the glory of heaven it self;
even as our Savior represented the radiancy of heaven to some of his Apostles,
when he was transfigured before them in the exceeding high mountain, (as is
generally conceived) of Tabor. His glorious ascension also into heaven, took
its rise from the mountain of Olives.

Concerning the Builder of the Temple, King Solomon.
SOlomon the most Famous and Peaceable King of Israel, was 1 Chronicles. 17.12.
appointed by God to erect this Royal Structure, who as to his name,
disposition, and reign (for the grand serenity of his times) was a pregnant
Type of the Prince of peace. Who being entered upon his Government, made Zadok 1
King. 2.35.
High Priest in the Room of Abiathar. The name of Solomon signifies
peaceableness; the name of Zadok righteousness; even as Christ was a Priest
after the Order of Melchizedeck, being Clothed with Royal Righteousness, and
styled also by Isaiah, the Prince of peace, Isai. 9.6. hinting to us that at
the entrance of Christ our Lord into his Royal Dignity, and glorious work of
framing his Gospel Church, that Psalm. 85.10.
righteousness and peace kissed then each other, that truth should spring out
of the earth, and righteousness look down from heaven. Solomon then was the
Act. 7.47.
Architect of that ancient and famous Temple: But behold a Luke 11.31.
greater then Solomon is here, the true Iedidiah, or beloved of the Lord, who
coements the living stones of his Church together, with his own blood.

It has bin usual of old at the building of some famous Palace or Cathedral,
that the Royal Founder should lay the first stone with his own hands, having
his own name engraven on it. It Is lost time to humor a Jewish fancy, in
determining the truth or falsehood of a Rabbinical Relation, that King Solomon
did Sh^ringham in Joma. p. 106.
insculp the Tetragrammaton or the unspeakable name of Johovah upon the first
stone, laid in the foundation of the Temple: But this I am sure of, that the
Father of mercies acquaints us in one place by an holy Isa. 28.16.
Prophet, that he himself laid in Zion for a foundation, a stone, a tried
stone, a precious cornerstone, a sure foundation: which the Apostle Peter
assures us was no other then Christ himself, as I shall manifest hereafter.
Concerning whom, under the name of an Angel, the Lord is pleased to charge his
people by Moses in these words, Beware of him and obey his voice, provoke him
not; For he will not pardon your transgressions, Exodus 23.21.
for MY NAME is in him.

We read concerning David, that he gave to Solomon his son the pattern of this
house, with an example of all the choice accoutrements. In like manner our Lord
and Savior under the Type of Solomon, being called the 2 Samuel 7.13, 14.
Son of God; elsewhere from his own holy mouth assures us, that the work, which
he had to do, Joh. 5.36, and 13, 3.
he received of his Father. So that as Nathan was sent of a message from God to
acquaint David that his son Solomon should build a house for the name of his
divine Majesty, and that his sons Kingdom should be established for ever,
parallel to another place in the Psalmist, assuring us that his throne should
Psalm. 89.29.
endure as the days of heaven: Even so does the Prophet Zachary inform us in
the name of the Father concerning that man, whose name is the Zach. 6.12.
Branch, that He should build the Temple of the Lord, that is, the spiritual
Temple of his Church. Wherefore our blessed Lord, when compared with Moses, is
preferred before him, as being the Son of God; and is reputed faithful as a Son
over his own house: whose Heb. 3.6.
house are we, if we hold fast our confidence, etc. to the end. But before I
conclude this present Section, I shall endeavor to compare our blessed Savior
with Solomon, as the Temple builder, in several respects.

Solomon prepared many costly materials, buying them of the Tyrians, Sidonians,
Arabians, and other Nations: So did our Lord redeem or buy anew his living
stones for the materials of his spiritual Temple, out of every Rev. 5.9.
kindred Tongue, and Nation.

Solomon employed many skilful and laborious Artists, both of the Children of
Israel, as well as of Phoenicians, and of the Egyptians, as it is related by
Eusebius: So did Christ our blessed Lord employ in ancient times many Priests
and holy Prophets of the Jewish Nation, to gather in the people of those times
to the knowledge of his truth. Afterward upon his Ascension (or Coronation day)
he instituted and gave forth likewise Apostles, Evangelists, Pastors and
Teachers, Ephesians. 4.11.
(...), for the edifying or building up of the Church, which is his body, unto
the day of glory.

Solomon did not only procure and hire these fit persons to carry on the work,
but he proceeded actually to the building and completing that famous House at
Jerusalem: so does our holy Savior by the instrumentality of those his
faithful Laborers, employed by him constantly, manage this great design of
finishing his sacred Temple. For as the workmen of Solomon did hew down Cedars,
Fir-trees, and Algum-Trees in Lebanon for the service of the Temple, and caused
them to be brought in flores by water to Joppa, and thence to Jerusalem. So
does our Lord employ such as shall Hos. 6.5.
hew his people, and take off the ruggedness of their dispositions: workmen of
John the Baptists temper, that need not be to ashamed, when they Mat. 3.10.
come with the Axe of conviction, and lay it to the root of the tree. He uses
in this excellent work some Boanerges's, Sons of Thunder, to hew down the
chosen and mark trees of election, out of Lebanon; the proud mountainous and
rocky Lebanon of nature: out of the Mountains of self-conceit, pride, natural
righteousness, or liberty of will, (falsely so conceived) to close with divine
proffers of mercy, without an immediate power from above; of civility also, and
common morality. In this manner does learned Jerome seem to apply two places of
the Psalmist, where wicked men for their lofty pride, are compared to the
Cedars of Lebanon. In Psalm. 37.35.
one place, where we read [a green bay tree] the text of Jerome runs thus Tom.
8. Edit. Erasmi. Lugd. 1530. page 36.
Vidi impium superexaltatum and elevatum sicut Cedros Libani; I have seen the
wicked exceedingly exalted and lifted up like the Cedars of Lebanon. The other
place is that, where the Psalm. 29.5.
voice of the Lord is said to break the Cedars; yea the Lord breaks the
Cedars of Lebanon. Both which, are hinted by him in his Tom. 5. p. 277.
Comment upon the 60 of Esaias. In so much that our blessed Lord seems most
sweetly to say to his Church upon this account (if leave may be granted to
allusions) Cant. 4.8.
Come with me from Lebanon (my spouse) with me from Lebanon: for the Cant. 1.17.
beams of our house are of Cedar, and our rafters of Fur. Such as being cut
down out of the proud and towering mountains of nature by the Axe of the Law,
were brought in flores of repentance to Joppa, (indulge the continuation of the
Allegory) it being a place famous for this, that one of the first
Gospel-miracles, Act. 9.36. etc.
which Peter did, was performed there. Nay the choice evidence of the vocation
of the Gentiles, into the fellowship of the Mystical Church, was here exhibited
unto Act. 10.11. etc.
Peter in a trance: where he received from God in a Vision, a Sheet let down
from heaven, filled with all sorts of living Creatures, some whereof were
unclean according to the ancient Law and institution of Moses; Peter being
thereby taught that the unclean Gentiles were now also to be taken up to
heaven, as that V. 16.
Sheet was in that divine Vision.

Furthermore, as to these our workmens proceeding in their Temple-labours, As
we read that all the stones of the Temple were wrought with Iron tools by the
Art of Masonry, before they were brought and laid in order and coemented
together in the walls of that sacred House: In like manner the stones of the
spiritual building are hewn and squared by the Preaching of the Law, which, as
the Apostle tells us, is a Gal. 3.24.
Schoolmaster unto Christ, to fit and prepare us for the heavenly 2 King.
22.14.
College at the Temple. If we shall accept it for a Type of heaven, as
sometimes it is: then may we learn, that as the Stones and Timber were
completely fitted to fall into their several places without noise of Tools and
Instruments, even so in this life does the Gospel-Ministery fit and prepare the
Saints for that Celestial place, Rev. 21.4.
where sorrow and crying shall be heard no more. If we shall understand by the
Temple, the worship of the Gospel, as Scripture does frequently insinuate: this
preparative work for the Temple-buildings may possibly shadow forth and allude
to the Spirit of Bondage, preceding the spirit of Adoption. For our blessed
Savior has sent forth not only hewers with rough garments like John Baptist
and Elijah to prepare; but some workmen of the temper and strain of Barnabas
also, like so many sons of consolation to strengthen and join the stones
together, in the spiritual building with the coement of Faith, Love and Joy. So
that as the word of God is compared to an hammer by the Prophet Ier. 23.29.
Jeremy, to break in pieces rugged hearts: So likewise we find workmen at a
gentle, peaceable and quiet business, laying Judgment to the Isai. 28.17.
line, and righteousness to the Plummet, that the stones of the Temple may be
said in an erect, in an even and regular form: since we hear of the Psalm. 19.4.
line of the Apostles doctrine which is gone out through the whole World.

Fourthly, As King Solomon did solemnly appoint in a set frame and 2 Chronicles.
8.14.
work of every day required, instituting likewise the Porters according to
their Courses, to watch at every Gate: so has our blessed Lord and Savior
ordered by divine institution, the several spiritual Ordinances in his Church:
According to which every Saint is appointed in his station to worship the
Father in spirit and in truth, seeing he is faithful in all his house, beyond
Moses the Lawgiver of the ancient Israelites.

Fifthly, As King Solomon did in most stately and pompous manner, perform
Jerusalem: Even so the blessed Lord of life, and Savior of the world ascending
up on high, Psalm. 68.81.
gave gifts unto men, sending down his most holy spirit in the form Act. 2.1,
2, 3.
of Cloven tongues, noting the variety of Languages wherewith they should be
miraculously endued, and the various Nations, to which they should be sent, as
likewise under the shape and repreentation of fire noting the fervency of zeal,
and the illumination of knowledge wherewith they should shine throughout the
World; at that time sitting upon the Apostles and Disciples, assembled together
in one place at Jerusalem. By which plenary manifestation of the Spirit they
were consecrated, anointed and initiated into the several glorious Evangelical
Offices, to be then undertaken by them, and discharged in the Primitive Church.

Sixthly and Lastly, This glorious King conversed in this Stately and Reu. 2.1.
seven Golden Candlesticks.

Yet herein we must observe, that, though King Solomon declined, in his latter
days, to show that he was but a man, although a most glorious and admirable
Type of Jesus Christ: Yet herein our blessed Lord as he did far out-bid all
other prefigurations of himself; so also this personal Type of King Solomon, in
this particular, that he never forsakes the assemblies of his Saints, but is
always Mat. 18.20.
in the midst of them: For whom he once loves, Ioh. 13.1.
he loves unto the end, or ((...) as some expound it) even to the death; Nay
continuing his love beyond the term and period of his meritorious passion, he
has graciously promised to be Mat. 28.20.
with them always even to the end of the World.

Hitherto let it suffice to have treated thus largely concerning the prefatory
matters respecting the Time, Place, and Architect of the Temple: Now I shall
proceed to the main design in the 6 following Sections, according to the
method, which I have before laid down: not without most humble imploration of
divine aid and assistance to be yielded and afforded to me in the further
prosecution of these abstruse and profound Mysteries: craving moreover a gentle
and favorable connivence, and remission of my failings, by all serene spirits,
who possibly may please to converse with these so rude and impolite discourses.

SECT. I. Concerning the Mysteries af the Covered Temple, and its included
Rooms.
AS to the management of this present Section, I shall crave leave to treat in
the first place of the Mystical significations of the Temple in general; and
afterward to descend to the most material particulars of the covered Building,
whereof it may be requisite to discourse more largely.

In general, the holy Scriptures do frequently insinuate the Typification of
three things by the Temple, when taken in a more laxe and ample signification:
as for example, Our blessed Lord himself personally considered. Secondly, the
Church or body of Christ mystical: And thirdly, every Saint also in particular.
At least (I hope) it may be safely said, that the sacred writings do in all
these 3 respects frequently allude to the ancient Temple of Solomon: it being
no unusual thing for the self same Type to hint at various Mysteries under the
Gospel, as may more amply and evidently appear out of the divine pages of
Scripture by this ensuing discourse.

1. Some would have the Temple in general to prefigure and Typifie the blessed
body of our Lord and Savior, grounding their apprehension upon that famous
place, where our Lord speaking concerning the destruction of the Temple in
three days, is interpreted by the Evangelist John (who was the beloved
Disciple, and lay in his bosom) Ioh. 2.19, 21.
to have meant it of his own body. Upon which account, Tertullian, Hieron in
Script. Ecclesiastic. Edit. Erasm. Ludg. 1530. Tom. 1. p. 287.
who lived under the Emperous Severus and Antoninus Caracalla, and is placed by
Jerome in his Latin translation of Ensebius his Chronicles as flourishing P.
172. Edit. Scallig. 1658.
in the 208th year of our Lord) expounding that noble place of the Isa. 2.2.
Prophet Isaiah, treating of the mountain of the Lords House, whereunto all
Nations should flow in the days of the Gospel, reflects upon our blessed Lord
in these following words, [ Contr. Marcion. l. 3. p. 348. Ed. Par. 80. 1566.
Utique Christus Catholicum Dei Templum, in quo Deus colitur] Christ is the
Catholic Temple of God, wherein he is worshipped. Athanasius moreover, citing
this very place of holy John, affirms that our Lord Christ was the Contr.
Arianos. Orat. 5. p. 323. Edit. Commelin. 1600.
(...), that true house or building, and that therefore Solomon's structure
being but the (...), the image or Type of this spiritual Temple was destroyed,
to manifest it to have bin but a mere Type, when as this true Temple had once
appeared. In this point likewise does holy and learned Ierom concur asserting
as much in these words [ Ad Marcellam. Tom. 1. 126.
ideo Templum Subrutum, ut typica historiae tollerentur] that therefore the
ancient Temple was ruined, that so the typical Histories might be taken away.
Neither is Origin herein to be left our, speaking somewhat to this very purpose
in his 7th Book against Celsus. P. 349. quarto Edit. Cantabr. 1658.
(...), etc. He destroyed the City, and the Temple and the worship of God,
consisting in sacrifices, and other constituted services in the Temple, etc. to
that end that the Gospel and its more divine services thereby signified might
be more firmly established. But to what purpose should I bring in a heap of
Authors setting their seals to this ancient truth: Seeing it is every where
obvious in the writings of the Ancients, attended likewise generally with the
suffrages of modern times, especially of such, who delight not in carping at
the Fathers. Wherefore according to the 6th Canon, before laid down in this
Chapter, let the Temple be accomodated to our Savior under the notion of an
excellent Type. For as our blessed Lord is declared by holy John, Ioh. 1.14.
(...), to pitch his Tabernacle and dwell among us: So the fullness of the
Godhead is affirmed by the Apostle Paul Col. 2.9.
(...), to inhabit bodily in Jesus Christ, as in a Temple: The John Gregory
notes in Scrip. c. 31. Edit. Oxen.
Shecinah of the divine presence, being unspeakably manifest in the Messiah.

Strange and uncouth is the fancy of Villalpandus Templ. Solom. descrip. ex
Villalp. per Cappell. page 20. in proaem. Bibl. Polyglott. Walton.
stating the Temple's Typical similitude in proportion to and with the body of
our blessed Lord upon the Cross, with his arms stretched out, and his legs
conjoined together in such a manner: as that his head should possess the
Sanctuary, his breast the Altar, his feet the Eastern gate: his two hands the
two gates on the North and Southside of the Temple. So that as the passage or
way to the Altar and Sanctuary lay open through those three principal gates: In
like manner should the path to the true Sanctuary be madk plain and easy,
through the wounds of his feet and hands. Whence it is that the brazen Sea,
which was situated on the Southside of the Temple near the Altar, should
prefigure the water and blood issuing out of the right side of our blessed
Lord, for the washing away of our sins, and our spiritual sanctification. But
these things (says Lud. Cappellus) though acutely and ingeniously invented by
Villalpandus, yet are not a little strained and forced, favoring more of the
sharpness and subtlety of humane wit, then of the solid wisdom and teachings
of the holy Spirit. Wherefore I shall seek to accommodate some principal parts
of the ancient Temple unto Christ personal, by way of allusion rather then by
direct assertion, and afterward remove to the next inquiry.

In as much then as the Temple is reported to have bin built with pure white
marble: thereby may be shadowed forth the unspotted purity, and Candid
innocence of our blessed Lord; that, well might the heavenly Angel say of him
to the Virgin Mary Luke 1.35.
(...), that Holy thing which shall be born of thee, shall be called the Son of
God: So that when the Prince of this World came near to him in a way of
temptation John 14.30.
he found nothing in him of impurity and unholinesse as any fit matter or
foundation for his malicious design against him. Who is declared by the Apostle
Peter 1 Pet. 2.22.
to have committed no sin, neither guile to have bin found in his mouth.

We read further concerning the Temple, that it was adorned with Planks and
Boards of Cedar; Fur and Olive which by their unctuous and resinous matter do
not easily yield to putrefaction. In like manner, the body of our Lord had such
an aequilibrium or excellent poise of the humors in its temperament and
constitution, that he was never sick in all his life, as generally is conceived
from the silence of Scripture in that point: But that his body was in the same
habitude of freedom from sickness and death, as the bodies of our parents in
the primitive garden, by the free donation of God and his manutenency, or
conservation of them in such a state of equality, that the tetrachordon or the
four strings of the humors, being choisely and divinely touched by the hand of
heaven, should warble forth the most pleasant and melodious harmony of
immortality. Now although our blessed Lord did undergo the pain of death, being
Isa. 53.5.
wounded for our transgressions not his own, yet did not the Father of our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ, Psalm. 16.10. Act. 2.27.
leave his blessed body under the power of the grave, nor suffer his holy one
to see corruption.

Again, as all those forementioned materials framed of the wood of choice
trees, and being most curiously carved, were overlaid with the purest gold, the
most incorruptible and precious among metals: So may we observe in holy
Scripture many of the excellencies of Christ compared to Gold. Wherefore the
inamoured spouse describing her beloved to the Daughters of Jerusalem, conferrs
his head with Cant. 5.11.
the most fine gold; which some refer to the divinity of Christ, others to
his headship over the Church, especially since John in his Revelation-visions
beheld the son of man sitting on a Cloud, Rev. 14.14.
with a golden Crown upon his head, as being King over his mystical body the
Church.

In ancient times, Gods majesty was pleased to utter his divine Oracles from
out of the most holy place within the Temple: But in these last days He has
Heb. 1.2.
spoken to us by his Son: who is expressly called Dan. 9.24. Rev. 19.13.
the most holy by the Prophet Daniel, and was the person through and by whom
the Father has opened his mind to the World: For the only begotten Son,
which is in the bosom of the Father, Ioh. 1.18.
he has declared him. He is Ioh. 1.1. called the word of God, the Interpreter
of the divine will in all ages; neither Mat. 11.27.
knows any man the Father, but the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will
reveal him. It was the 1 Pet. 1.11.
spirit of Christ in the Prophets of old, testifying before hand of his
sufferings, and the glory that should follow: By the same spirit 1 Pet. 3.19.
he went and preached to the spirits of the old World, which are now in prison,
by which also he taught 2 Cor. 13.3.
the Apostle Paul, and continues to inspire the hearts of his faithful
Ambassadors to the end of the World, having upon his Ascension-day Ephesians. 4.8,
12, 13.
given gifts unto men, for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the
Ministry, and the edifying of his Body; till we all come in the unity of the
faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the
measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ. Whereby is evidently declared
that the Gospel-Ministery divinely taught by Christ the Supreme Prophet of his
Church 1 Pet. 2.25.
the Shepherd and Bishop of our souls, ( Ioh. 7.46.
who spoke as never man spoke) must endure till all the Elect be gathered and
built up into a holy Temple in the Lord, which shall not be fully and
completely finished till the end of the World.

Moreover, As in the Temple of Solomon there was an Ark made of Shittim-wood,
containing the Tables of stone, (whereon the ten Commandments were engraven)
and preserving them as a lively memorial of Gods Covenant, with the Children of
Israel, to protect and defend them in case they kept and obeyed those precepts
of God. So Jesus Christ our blessed Savior is declared to have Mat. 5.17.
fulfilled the Law, not only as it became a just and righteous person so to do,
but on the behalf of the elect, that so by the Romans 5.19.
obedience of one many might be made righteous. Which he performed with so much
alacrity and willingness of spirit, that he speaks of himself, that Psalm. 40.8.
he delighted to do the will of God, yea the Law was within his heart; as a
more excellent Cabinet then that which lay of old within the Oracle.

To contract: As the curious veil in the Tabernacle or Temple kept off the
overcomming Majesty of divine glory, from the eyes of those persons, who entered
the Sanctuary: so the Heb. 10.20.
veil of Christ's flesh was drawn over Him as a Curtain, to obumbrate and
shadow the radiant divinity of his Godhead, that rested in him in the days of
his Incarnation.

As the Golden Altar of Incense was the seat of those fragrant Odours, which
perfumed the holy of holies: So are the prayers of the Saints offered up by the
Lord Jesus upon the heavenly Rev. 8.3.
Altar of his intercession, which stands before the Throne, where our High
Priest perfumes them in the golden censer of his own merit: and makes them
acceptable to his Father.

As the Table of shewbread did exhibit food to the Priests that ministered
before the Lord, after the Cakes had stood their limited time within the
Sanctuary: So the Lord Jesus John 6.32.
descending from heaven, is that true bread of Life, whereupon Saints do feed,
who are consecrated for Rev. 1.6
Priests under the Gospel unto God the Father.

As the Golden Candlestick did yield a beautiful light within the Temple
continually before the Lord: Accordingly, does our Lord Jesus term himself Ioh.
8.12.
the light of the World, that whoever follows him, and works by that light,
shall not walk in darkness; but enjoy the light of eternal life. The seven
lamps likewise of that Candlestick, did signify the various and excellent
graces Rev. 4.5.
of the holy Spirit, wherewith our Lord was adorned above his fellows, who took
great delight in Rev. 2.1.
walking in the midst of those 7 golden branches.

As the brazen Altar received the sacrifices which were offered up for the
people's sins, to make an atonement on their behalf before God: So upon the
Altar of the Cross did the Lord Jesus Heb. 9.26.
put away the sins of his people by the Sacrifice of Himself.

As the Gate of the Temple gave admission to the Priests into those mysterious
places, where they executed their offices, and performed services acceptable
unto God. So the Lord Jesus is the door of the new Testament-worship, through
which we must enter with our Gospel-sacrifices to perform our spiritual homage
to his divine Majesty. In all our prayers we must have a special eye to Christ
and his mediation: Even as Daniel in the Land of his Captivity kneeling upon
his knees, prayed when the Dan. 6.10.
windows of his Chamber were open toward Jerusalem; and as Jonah, though Ion.
2, 4, 7.
cast out of sight, his soul fainting within him, yet looked toward the holy
Temple: so must we in our deepest exigencies, and the most fainting fits of
distress look toward Christ our spiritual Temple, and through him only expect
audience at the throne of grace.

In these and many other particulars, I might proceed to amplify upon this
point: but shall reserve them to a more copious enlargement in the succeeding
treatise.

2. Let us go on in the next place to show briefly, how the Church also, the
mystical body of Christ was signified by that glorious building. Wherein I
shall but succinctly mention some few things, recommending the more large
explication to their more proper and convenient places.

As the Temple was the material house, wherein God was worshipped under the
Jewish administration: So is the Church under the Gospel, the spiritual 1 Cor.
3.16.
Temple of God, wherein his holy spirit dwells. Nos enim sumus Templa dei,
and altaria, and luminaria, and vasa. We are (says Tertul. de Cor. mil. p.
753. Edit. Par. 80.
Tertullian) the Temples of God, the Altars, Lamps and Vessels. [ Every
Christian Church Dr. Ed. Reyn. on Hos. Ser. 5. p. 131. quar.
(as a most Reverend and Learned Dr. of our own Nation) is the Israel of God,
and every Regenerate person born in Zion, and every spiritual worshipper the
Circumcision. Now Christ is crucified in Galatia, and a Passover eaten in
Corinth; and Manna fed on in Pergamus, and an Altar set up in Egypt: and
Gentiles sacrcified, and stones made Children unto Abraham, and Temples unto
God.]

The Ark of old, contained the stony Tables of the Commandments; But now the
Church of Christ preserves within her bosom the holy Scriptures: God having
graciously promised Jer. 31.33.
to put his Law in their inward parts, and to write it in the fleshy Tables of
their hearts.

To be short, the Cherubins on the walls of the Temple signified the protection
of Angels, who now Psalm. 34.7.
encamp round about them that fear the Lord, as commissionated Guardians for
their comfort, preservation, and deliverance,

The shewbread in the Sanctuary did set forth the bread of life under the
Gospel; the Lamps, the pure doctrine of the Church's Teachers; the Altar of
incense, their ardent prayers; the Pillars in the Porch, their constancy and
perseverance; the Laver, the washing of Regeneration: and the brazen Altar with
its appendant Rites, their confission of sin and expiation made on their behalf
by the sacrifice of Christ.

Thirdly and Lastly, I come to speak of the Typification of each particular
Saint, as shadowed forth by that holy Temple: Even as the Apostle Paul does
expressly declare, making it strange that they should be ignorant of this truth:
1 Cor. 6.19.
What know ye not, that your body (says he) is the Temple of the Holy Ghost?
To which may be added the assertion of Tom. 1. page 105.
Jerome to Paulinus, [Verum Christi Templum anima credentis est, illam exerna,
illam vesti, illi offer donaria, in illa Christum suscipe] that the soul of a
believer is the true Temple of Christ, adorn and cloth that, offer gifts to
that, entertain Christ in such a building.

Wherefore craving leave to compare them by way of resemblance, desiring that
these parallels may not be strictly interpreted: The foundation of this Temple
may be laid in humility and contrition of spirit, wherein the inhabiter of
eternity Isa. 57.15.
delights to dwell. We may refer the Porch to the mouth of a Saint: wherein
every holy Jacob erects the Genesis 28.18. etc.
Pillars of Gods praise, calling upon and blessing his name for received
mercies; when songs of deliverance are uttered from the Psalm. 141.3.
doors of his lips. The Holy place, is the renewed mind; and the windows
therein may denote divine illumination from above, cautioning a Saint to beware
least they be darkened with the smoke of anger, the mist of grief, the dust of
vain glory, or the filthy mire of worldly cares. The golden Candlesticks, the
infused habits of divine knowledge resting within the soul. The shewbread, the
word of grace exhibited in the promises for the preservation of a Christians
life unto glory. The Golden Altar of Odours, the breathings, suspirings and
groanings after God ready to break forth into Gal. 4.6.
Abba Father. The Veil, the righteousness of Christ. The Holy of Holies may
relate to the conscience purified from dead works, and brought into a heavenly
frame. The Ark to the heart of a Saint, Romans 7.22.
delighting in the Law of God after the inward man: The mercy seat, to Christ
dwelling therein Col. 1.27.
as the hope and foundation of glory. The two Cherubins to Faith and Love: from
between whose wings the Father of mercies utters the glorious Oracles of
assurance, by the Romans 8.16.
witnessings of his own Spirit. The pot of Manna may be resembled to that food
Rev. ^.17.
of hidden joy, unknown to the World, which is the Quintessence of divine
assurance laid by, for a Saint to feed upon and refresh his spirits in his
deepest and darkest agonies. The rod of Aaron budding and flowring within the
Oracle of their hearts, shows the ardent affection which the soul beats to, and
the profitable fruit it receives by the Gospel-ministery; when having accepted
the Law from the mouth of God by his Ambassadors, Job ^2.22.
he lays up his words in the secret recesses of his heart.

Finally the Laver is repentance: the brazen Altar is a broken and a contrite
spirit, the fire holy zeal, the sacrificing instrument is the two-edged sword
of the Spirit; and the beasts to be slain, are the various lusts of the flesh:
which we are to drag before the Altar by holy confession; to mortify, by
constant hatred; and offer up in a heavenly renewed conversation, as sacrifices
acceptable and well-pleasing in the sight of God. To which purpose in some
measure does that famous Maull of Pelagianism speak in these words. [ Austin de
Civ. Dei. l. 10. c. 4. and more c. 5. and 6.
Ejus est altar, cor nostrum, etc. et sacrificamus hostiam humilitatis and
laudis in area cordis igne fervidae charitatis.] Our heart is his Altar, etc.
we offer up to Him the sacrifice of humility, and praise on that Altar of the
heart, with the fire of fervent Charity.

Thus far may it suffice to have insisted on the more general significations
of the Temple, humbly craving a favorable pardon (of what infirmities have
hitherto passed) at the hands of such Learned and Ingenuous persons: who may
countenance my further endeavors after more clear satisfaction, in descending
to the several particulars, which, by divine permission, I shall proceed to
handle.

The Mysteries laid up in the Foundation of the Temple.
IN the first place I shall search into the Foundations of the Temple, it being
most proper to tread in the steps of the foregoing History of its erection; and
endeavor with all diligence to turn over those ponderous and 1 King. 5.17.
costly hewn stones, wherewith it was laid of old in the days of Solomon, to
see what mystical treasure ^as hidden under them.

Vain and futilous are the feavourish dreams of the ancient Rabbis, concerning
the Foundation-stone of the Temple. Sheringham in Jomae. p. 104. etc.
Some assert that God placed this stone (usually mentioning but one principal
stone) in the Center of the World, for a firm basis and settled consistency
for the Earth to rest upon. Others held this stone to be the first matter, out
of which all the beautiful visible beings of the World have bin hewn forth, and
produced to light. Others relate that this was the very same stone laid by
Jacob for a pillow under his head, in that night when he dreamed of an
Angelical vision at Bethel, and afterward anointed and consecrated it unto God.
Which when Solomon had found (no doubt by forged Revelation, or some tedious
search like another Rabbi Selomoh) he durst not but lay it sure, as the
Principal Foundation stone of the Temple. Nay (they say further) he caused to
be engraven upon it, the Tetragrammaton or the ineffable name of JEHOVAH. All
which stories are but so many idle and absurd conceits, yielding thus much of
wonder, that any persons should be so besotted as to think ever to find such
stupid and blind proselytes, who would endure to be imposed upon by such
fopperies, wherewith of old they did pollute the Jewish Religion: Even as brain
sick Monks since the Primitive times have endeavored to corrupt the Christians
worship with their lying wonders and revelations, so often recited in their
wodden Legends.

Wherefore to let them pass, not without Solemn praise to God, who has
conferred upon us more clear light in the face of his dear Son; let us proceed
while we enjoy that light to do the work that is required of us, and by the
benefit of those blessed rays to look more narrowly into the spiritual
foundation of the Gospel-Temple.

To which purpose, considering, that the foundation of an house is properly
that materia substrata, or underground matter, on which the building rests,
and whereby it is sustained and upheld; and furthermore, that Gods building or
house in the World is his Church, which being constituted in our first Parents
at the beginning, upon the Primitive foundation of righteousness and true
holiness, according to the Covenant of works, was assaulted by the storms of
the Devil's malice and power; and falling from that excellent foundation (which
Gods Majesty had laid in paradise with his own hands) has ever since groaned
most bitterly under the sad pressures of sin and temptation, complaining in the
Language of Cain, that their deserved Genesis 4.13.
punishment is greater then can be born by humane shoulders, and therefore
earnestly beggs the divine support of some new and more firm and unshaken
foundation, whereupon to rest for ever, without danger of inward mouldering, or
external storms.

Now for as much, as the Foundation of every building is twofold: The first
external and natural, being no other then the Earth it self, Heb. 3.4.
made and framed by God: The other, internal and artificial consisting of
stones; brick or timber, according to the nature of the super-imposed building:
So has the Church likewise a twofold foundation. One whereof may bear some
resemblance with the natural earth: accordingly as our Lord is pleased to speak
of his Church under the notion of a similitude differing from this in hand,
that the Mat. 13.38.
field is the world wherein his Church and people are placed.

The other may be termed Artificial: (granting indulgence to the prosecution of
the present Metaphor) The Heb. 11.10.
(...), builder, maker or framer whereof is God in a more special manner. Then
which foundation 1 Cor. 3.9, 11.
no man can lay any other, than what is laid, even Jesus Christ. He is that
precious cornerstone Ephesians. 2.20.
^^ by the Father in the heart of mount Zion. Isa. 28.16.
In whom all the building being fitly framed together, grows to a holy Temple
in the Lord. 1 Pet. 2.4, 5.
To whom coming as to a living stone, the Saints are built up a spiritual
house, wherein to offer spiritual Sacrifices acceptable to God by Jesus Christ.

So that neither the pretended and usurping-head of the Church at Rome, nor the
Canons, constitutions, or traditions of that Apostate body, nor humane reason,
though never so much concocted, digested, refined by the wit, art, or industry
of man, can be owned for this foundation. It Is Christ alone, who must be
received and acknowledged for this fundamental-rock, (the Basis of Apostolical
confession) whereon to build the Church, Mat. 16.18.
against which the gates of Hell shall never prevail.

Our blessed Lord and Savior then, is the whole and only foundation for the
Church to rest upon, excluding Peter and all his imagined successors, together
with all the Apostles from being Corrivals with Christ in this great work of
sustaining the spiritual building. Now although the Pontificians plead hard for
a Secundary and Ministerial foundation: yet can we by no means admit any such
distinction, which is so far from being grounded on Scripture, that it does
directly oppose the very express terms of the holy word, declaring that there
can be 1 Cor. 3, 11.
no other foundation laid than our blessed Lord. Besides it is repugnant to
found reason, to introduce any Secondary and ministerial foundation, that
performs not the true and native duty, and cannot undergo the weight and burden
of a proper and genuine foundation. For either Christ is the only, whole, and
sufficient foundation of his Church, or not. If he be, as the Scripture holds
it forth, more evident then the Sun at noon: then what is the meaning of that
other foundation? which certainly, if it be not the primary and main
foundation, then it cannot truly and properly be called a foundation at all,
that does not sustain the building: but must be a part only of the building.
For if it be a true foundation, it must subsist of it self, and not be laid
upon another; as its basis or bottom. But if not, besides the flat denial of
Scripture by these builders, Act. 4, 11.
who have set at naught the head-stone of the Corner, woe must needs befall the
Church, if their faith and hope of salvation, should lean upon such Lev. 14.45.
Leprous stones, which God has commanded to be carried out of the City, into
an unclean place, But this point is most excellently and nervously handled by
the famous Tom. 2. de Romans Pontif. Contr. 4. qu. 2. p. 551. fol.
Dr. Whitaker, most amply, in his Controversies about the Pope of Rome, to the
terror of the dark Conclave.

Happy is the Church of Christ in having so glorious a person as the Son of
God, to sustain and bear the weight and pressure of their sins, and to be the
choice foundation of their faith to rest upon, in respect to eternal life: who
is so termed by a Metaphor taken from material buildings, wherein the
foundation does uphold all the Rooms and Stories built upon it. In like manner,
all the members and parts of the sacred and Mystical structure, laying the
whole stresse of their happiness upon Jesus Christ are carried on, till the
top-stone of glory shall be brought forth. Which things are mentioned in many
places of divine record, and prosecuted by an Allegory or continued Metaphor.

Christ himself is by diverse of the holy penmen called the cornerstone of
the building, that is, of the foundation of the building: In which expression
the main and principal part of the foundation is taken for the whole by a
Synecdoche: Seeing the chief and most serviceable part of the foundation is
that strong and large hewn-stone, which the Architect lays at the
bottom-corner of each square of the building. Further, as a building is
compared by Scripture and other writers, sometimes to an humane body: the
foundation in such a sense may very aptly be expressed by the denomination of a
head. To which purpose we may observe that our Lord Col. 1.18.
the head of his Church, is often styled by the name of that prime stone, which
is laid at the head of the Corner: as may fully appear from these following
places of Scripture, Psalm. 118.22. Mat. 21.42. Mat. 12.10. Luke 20.17. Act.
4.11. and 1 Pet. 2.7.

This excellent foundation-stone (thus laid in Zion, the holy mountain by the
hands of God himself) has also many rare and choice Epithets annexed to it, in
the sacred writings. Whereof it will not be (I hope) amiss, to discourse
awhile, referring to those various places, wherein they are dispersed.

1. He is called an elect or chosen-stone: disallowed indeed of men, but 1 Pet.
2.4.
1. ^
chosen of God, says holy Peter: who good soul would blush, had he bin alive
in after-daies, no less, then the picture of Paul, (as I remember) at Rome: In
which the ingenious Painter being taxed for making his face too ruddy, replied
in his defense, that it was for shame of some things done in the Roman Church.
Blessed Peter disowns himself, and looks upon Christ only, as this chosen stone
carved by God himself, out of the Quarry of mankind, and receiving a Heb. 10.5.
body prepared by the Father, for the service of this spiritual building. He is
styled therefore Isa. 42.1.
the Elect of God, in whom his soul delighted, being instituted for this very
work by the eternal purpose and designation of his heavenly Father. Who Gal.
4.4.
in the fullness of time appeared in humane flesh, that is, at the period and
compleatment of those days, which God had pitched upon from all eternity; and
had revealed and foretold Luke 1.70.
by the mouth of his holy Prophets ever since the World began. After which
gracious manifestation of the Son of God in flesh, he was hewn and polished by
his sufferings and torturing-death upon the Cross, that he might be fit for
the use of the wise Master Builder, as a foundation stone to support the new
and glorious building of his Gospel-Temple.

2..
2. He is called a precious stone, by a Metaphor taken from gemms and stones of
great value. Ten thousand times more precious then that natural diamond-rock,
on which Tintaegel in Cornwall.
an ancient Castle of our Nation once stood, now groaning under its deplorable
ruins. Whereas this rock of ages shall never behold corruption. More precious
indeed! as being of a supernatural essence, and cut out Dan. 2.45.
of the mountain of eternity, without hands in respect to his Divine nature:
which is free from the least shadow of a flaw, or any tincture of blemish
shining most oriently with all the sparklings of divine perfections. Precious
is this stone upon the account of its admirable qualities, and most efficacious
virtues. Infinitely beyond the force and power of the famous Haematites, for
stopping the bloody flux of our souls. Which would have bled to death through
the gashes received in Paradise, had not Luke 6.19.
virtue issued from Christ for its restraint. Beyond the fiery Carbuncle, in
resisting the flames of his Fathers wrath, that are ready to suck up the vital
spirits of wretched sinners, who dare presume to draw nigh to this Heb. 12.29.
consuming fire, without Christ, or converse with such Isa. 33.14.
everlasting burnings. Beyond the attractive virtue of the Magnetical stone, in
the Joh. 12.32.
drawing of souls after him, and alluring them into union and communion with
himself. Nay more precious then the impenetrable Adamant, whereof some Ancients
report such a quality to be inherent in it, that those who carry it about them,
shall prove Valiant in fight, and unconquerable in their enterprises: Seeing we
are made more then Conquerours Romans 8.37.
through him that loved us, by whose means it is, that we 1 Cor. 15.57.
receive the victory, when fighting under the banner of this heavenly Achilles.
Who being himself anointed with a more precious unction ( Not. Mythol. p. 817.
then his of Ambrosia) from above, is in every part invulnerable except his
heel, which for a while is bruised in his poor members militant upon the Earth,
till all his enemies be subdued under his feet in the behalf of his dear Church.

Besides, he is a most precious stone by reason of his incomparable rarity:
there being but one of this nature found in the whole World. Who would not turn
a spiritual Merchant, and, selling all that he has, endeavor to Mat. 13.46.
purchase this inestimable treasure? This is that stone (says holy Peter) on
which only our salvation rests Act. 4.12.
. There being no other name under heaven given among men, whereby we must be
saved, than that new name engraven on this Rev. 2.17.
white-stone, Jer. 23.6.
the Lord our righteousness. The Lord Christ is the only Sun, which by his
bright and fulgent rays dispels the darkness of the Chambers of death and of
the bottomless pit. He is the only Phoenix, out of whose perfumed ashes does
arise the curiously plumed progeny of the Church, whose wings are Psalm. 68.13.
covered with silver, and her feathers with yellow gold. This is the only
Stone, the Rock of Ages, 1 Pet. 2.7.
so precious to them that believe, on which alone our feet can be steddily
fixed, Psalm. 40.2.
that our goings may be established.

3. He is termed a Isa. 28.16.
tried stone. Jesus of Nazareth,. 3.
(as the blessed Apostle Peter affirms) a man Act. 2.22.
approved of God by miracles, signs, and wonders. Who when tried by the divine
Majesty in the fire of his wrath to melt away the dross of imputed sin, did
nec dissilire nec dissolvere, neither fly in pieces for want of radical Oil,
nor melt under that terrible calcination for want of tenacity and consistence.
Though all the sins of the elect were put into the crusiple of his humane
nature; yet he came out of the furnace inviolable, and was therefore Crowned
with the diadem of a glorious triumph. Although he were so Isa. 53.5.
sorely wounded for our transgressions, and bruised for our iniquities by the
hammer of the Law, and pierced by the sword; which was used by the right hand
of him Zech. 13.7.
who was his fellow, yet this Royal stone did neither shrink out of his fixed
place in the Corner, nor sink under the weight of divine anger.

The Prince of this World made toward him with the infernal three-tined fork
of Mat. 4, 3, 6, 9.
tentations, to try the strength of this Cornerstone; but Joh. 14.30.
found nothing degenerous in him, or in the least wise malleable by all his Art
and fury. That great Goliath of Hell came marching up against him in his coat
of maile, his helmet of brass, and a weavers beam in his hand: But was so
disma^ly smitten in the forehead of his bold designs, by the mighty force of
this Cypr. p. 277.
stone taken out of the Psalm. 110.7.
brook of Kidron, that he fell down on his face to the Earth, which afterward
proved like a sharp and fatal, Exodus 4.24.
Circumcising stone in cutting off the head of that uncircumcised Philistine,
who had defied the armies of the Living God.

The gates of hell and all the powers of darkness were presently in an
uproare; and (Junctis umbonibus) with their united forces, assailed him in a
most cowardly manner even then, while he was exercised under the frowns of
heaven: but he prevailed most victoriously, and carried them all Captive;
(being chained to his Chariot wheels) to the Capitol of glory. Even as Sampson
of old laid the gates of Gaza Judge. 16.3.
on the Hill before Hebron: So did our unconquerable Champion triumph openly
over all Principalities and Powers, laying their gates upon the top of mount
Olivet, the hill before Heaven, in the day of his glorious Ascension unto the
Father, having fixed his immortal, and never to be unhinged Trophies in the
Jaws, nay in the very Bowels of the kingdom of darkness. In so much that
what was said of old concerning the stone that was brought from Scone Abbey near
St. Johnston's in Scotland by our warlike King Edw. I. and placed under the
Coronation-Chaire, in Edward the Confessors Chapel at Westminster, may be more
abundantly verified in this Prince of life, being alluded to with some small
variation. Ni fallat fatum, Christus quocunque locatum
Inveniet lapidem, regnare tenetur ibidem.
If heavens decrees shall firmly stand,
The stone that is laid by Gods right hand;
Bethel. Genesis 28.18.
With fragrant Oil shall be anointed,
And for a holy house appointed.


This King of glory being solemnly inaugurated into his Royal Office, by his
perfumed unction upon mount Zion, must Reign in every place and territory
throughout the World; according to the Prophetic pen of Daniel interpreting
the vision of the Dan. 2.35.
mystical stone, which shall at length grew into a great mountain, and filled
the face of the whole Earth. In Lysandr.
We read in Plutarch of a stone reported to have fallen from heaven, and
therefore worshipped by the inhabitants of Cherronesus: Nay by a more infallible
pen it is related concerning Act. 19.35.
the Ephesians, that they adored (a (...)) an image which they credited to have
bin dropped down from Jupiter. In which and the like impositions (of the old
Serpent) upon poor deluded mortals, there may lie hid some A pish imitations of
that divine truth of Christ's coming down from heaven; and represented in the
sacred Scriptures, by the Metaphorical expressions of a stone, which we are now
handling.

The Heathens and their (...), ( De Err. relig. p. 284. cum Hyg. 80.
mentioned by Firmicus) whether made of stone, and uttering from those Statues,
or out of rocky Caves, their (...), their ambiguous and doubtful tortuous
Oracles, fearing lest they should mistake in the issues and events of their
predictions, and so lose the honor of assumed deities, shall be dashed one
upon another against the walls of divine fury. The Zeph. 2.11.
Lord shall be terrible to them, and famish all the Gods of the Earth:
providentially guiding the hand of a poor Grecian, ignorant of the truths of
God, to write a Treatise [ Plutarch. p. 149. Tom. 2. Francof. 1620.
(...),] endeavoring to give an account of the defect of Oracles in his days.
Wherein he shows that some infernal spirit from the Island Paxae, now Ericusa
between Corcyra, and Leucas, in the Ionian Sea, declared their silence to
proceed from the death of Christ; which is shadowed in the dark words of
Heathenish canting Language, (...), The great Pan is dead, reflecting upon
Christ most truly, as the great Bishop and Shepherd of souls. Who when arisen
from the grave lead, Captivity Captive, and stopped the mouths of deluding
spirits in a great measure, inverting the tripus of the Delphian cell upon the
mouth of that rank and putrid den of the old Dragon.

But as to our blessed Genesis 49.24.
Shepherd, this stone of Israel, his Oracles are infallible: the rock on which
he sits is impenetrable, as to the impression of any external violence: In all
ages hitherto it has stood inviolable; so shall it stand unmovable against
the force of the choicest Engines of the wit^lest and refinedst Archimedes of
Hell, and triumph most gloriously against all opposition like Psalm. 125.1.
mount Zion which cannot be removed abiding for ever. For the Psalm. 16.8.
Lord was on his right hand, therefore this Holy one never saw Corruption.
Hence is it that the Saints of the most High, who are built upon this sure and
tried foundation, shall find themselves fixed upon such a Rock, that no ages
can violate, no soaking showers can cause to moulder; no floods can dash upon,
with the least sensible impression: although themselves by this their allision,
shall be broken into a thousand flashes: no winds can shatter or so much as
shake it, having stood impregnable against all the impetuous forces; that
heaven (in just and righteous indignation against imputed sin) or earth in a
foolish rage, or Hell in a malicious fury, has ever yet mustered or brought
into the field against it. In so much that the holy Apostle (in opposition to
the quaking fits of mount Horeb and the frightful leapings of Sinai, the
Bellon. Observat.
twin-tops of that trembling mountain in the wilderness of Paran in the day of
Gods thundering out his fiery law from a midst the thick darkness) might safely
infer that we have Heb. 12.28.
received a kingdom which cannot be shaken, which cannot be moved.

To conclude, As this imperial stone has undergone the full weight of Gods
just and deserved wrath in respect to sinners, whose burden our dear Lord was
pleased to sustain on their behalf; having also courageously and triumphantly
repulsed all the furious rage of spiritual wickednesses in high places: so has
it likewise proved to have bin a tried stone in respect to the Saints of the
most High, who upon constant and experienced trial have found it to their great
comfort and inexpressible joy, to have bin a most solid foundation for their
grieved and burdened souls to rest upon, in their saddest distresses and
perplexities.

This experience of it had good Jacob in that sad night, saying it for a Genesis
28.11.
pillow (the softest that ever he had, being lined with choice promises) for
his troubled and musing head, when he was hastening on in a journey toward
Padan-Aram, from the menacing brows of his angry brother. Then was it, that
this holy man received the promise of the Messiah, that should come from his
loins, when God told him in a dream, that Ver. 14.
in his seed should all the families of the Earth be blessed. When awakened in
the morning he set up that stone Ver. 18.
for a Pillar and powered oil upon it. Austin de Civ. Dei l. 16. c. 38.
Neque enim adoravit cum lapidem, vel ei sacrificavit: sed quoniam Christi
nomen a Chrismate est, idest, ab unctione; profecto figuratum est hinc aliquid,
quod ad magnum pertineat Sacramentum. For (says Austin) he neither worshipped
that stone, nor sacrificed to it: but because the name of Christ is from
unction; verily there is something figured by it, which pertains to a great
Mystery. Another likewise of the Ancients speaks to the same purpose, Cyprian.
l. 2. Contr. Judaeos. p. 277. Edit. Bas. 1530.
Lapidem consecravit and unxit, Sacramento unctionis Christum significans. He
(viz. Jacob) consecrated and anointed that stone, hinting at Christ by the
Mystery of unction. To mention no more, evident is the testimony of one more
ancient then either of the former, who when speaking concerning the present
work of Jacob at Bethel, has these words in his dialogue with a Jew Justin
Mart. dial. cum Tryph. p. 244. Edit. Commelin. 1593.
. (...). We have in like manner manifested, that Christ was figuratively set
forth by a stone in many Scriptures. The holy Patriarch sleeping sweetly on
this blessed stone, saw him at the top of the ladder in a vision, who supported
him beneath; which was no other then the Id. ibid. lin. 40. 41. Joh. 1.51.
Son of God: teaching us that the secret support which a Saint enjoyes, is
sometimes illustrated with radiant visions of assurance from heaven. If we
repose our souls in their saddest agonies upon this anointed stone, we shall
enjoy sweet silver-slumbers, gilded with Angelical visions of divine love,
reaching down the ladder of assurance from heaven, by which we may ascend into
the bosom of God: when we are terrified with the frowns of a threatening and
persecuting World; while we are traveling toward Bethel, the house of God,
the mansion of glory.

This was the stone: which blessed Joseph, when sold by his unkind brethren,
found to be his help; Genesis 49.24. Rivet Exerc. 185. p. 696. Fol.
even the stone of Israel (accordingly as his dying father did dictate in that
solemn blessing) whereby his head was elevated aloft beyond the rest of his
kindred, and raised up to the second place of state and dignity in the kingdom
of Egyyt.

Moses, another Eminent servant of God; sat upon this stone on the top of the
Hill, when his hands were held up to heaven in prayer; while Joshuah was
fighting with Amalek in the valley: Cyprian ibid p. 278.
and sacramento lapidis and stabilitate sessionis Amalech superatus est ab
Jesu, id est, Diabolus a Christo victus est. When under the mystery of that
stone (says a holy Martyr) and the stability of Moses session, Amalek was
overcome by Joshuah, that is, the Devil was vanquished by Christ. So Tom. 3. p.
46.
Jerome to Fabiola, speaking of Rephidim the 11th mansion of the Isralites, has
these words, sedet Moses super lapidem dictum a Zacharia, qui septem habebat
oculos: that Moses sat upon the stone spoken of by the Prophet Zechariah,
which had seven eyes. In the clift of this Exodus 33.22. Dr. Reynolds on Psalm.
100. p. 166. quar.
rock was Moses placed by God himself, when the Lord passed by him, and
proclaimed his glorious name, Exodus 3.4, 6.
THE LORD, THE LORD GOD, merciful and gracious, long-suffering and abundant in
goodness and truth, etc. This was the Deuteronomy. 27.2, 3. Cypr. p. 277.
stone, on which Moses commanded all the words of the Law to be written, when
they were passed over Jordan into the land of promise.

Joshua likewise the Captain of the Lords Armies, when he had given the
possession of the Land of Canaan, to the tribes of Israel; convenes them before
the Lord at Shechem a little before his death, and sets up this Mystical Josh.
24.26.
stone under an Oak near the holy Sanctuary, and having adjured them solemnly
to the fear and service of the Great God, he said unto all the people, Behold,
Cyprian ibid Jul. Firmic. Mat. de Err. prof. rel^g. p. 27. Lug. Bat. 1652.
this stone shall be a witness to us. For it has heard all the words of the
Lord, which he spoke unto us.

When the Ark was brought back out of the Land of the Philistines, it rested
upon this 1 Samuel 6.15, 18. Cypr. p. 278.
stone in the fields of Bethshemesh: which is alone able to sustain the symbol
of Gods presence among his people, and give forth the infallible dictates of
his will concerning divine-worship, and the management of holy Ordinances.

This was the rock of ages, in a Cavern whereof 1 King. 19.9, 13.
Elijah the Prophet once stood, being in the same mount of God, viz. Horeb,
wherein the Lord had before manifested himself unto Moses, and now passes
before Elijah in the still and gentle voice of mercy. And why do we find such
gracious revelations of his Majesty to the holy Prophets in mount Horeb, a
place so dreadfully shaken by the thundering dispensations of the Law: a place
that yielded the two Tables of stone, wherein the Commandments of God were
engraven with his own finger? But to show, that as the positive Law of God was
graven in pieces of stone taken out of that rock which signified Christ: So we
might be comforted under the infirmity of our flesh since the fall, seeing
Christ alone can retain and conserve the true impressions of the divine will
upon his heart, and fulfill that law (which we had broken) by his perfect and
entire obedience. With which, God being fully and completely satisfied, is
pleased in that very place to declare himself a merciful God to poor sinners,
in a covenant of grace promulgated both to Moses and Elijah, in that very
mountain with the gentle, sweet and melting voice of Gospel love. They being
the very same persons which afterward appeared with our Lord in the mount of
Transfiguration, in the days of his flesh.

The penman of a famous Psalm; so often cited by the spirit of God in the new
Testament, as yielding a very divine Oracle concerning Christ, whom though the
builders had refused, yet he esteemed as the Psalm. 118.22.
head-stone of the corner, having had great and sweet experience of the
strength and power of God connexed with mercy in the preserving of his soul
from sinking in the horrible pit, and in the miry clay, by setting his feet
upon that solid Psalm. 40.2.
rock of salvation.

Noble Daniel being under a prophetic Ecstasis, when his soul was taken up by
a very sublime rapture, rejoices in the vision of this living and growing
stone, which was cut out of the Dan. 2.45.
mountain without hands: out of the mountain of eternity according to his
divine nature; or the mountain of the Jewish kingdom (as Matthiae Theatr.
hist. part. 4. p. 6.
others take it) according to his humane nature without hands, (...) Justin.
Mart. Tryph. p. 235.
(...). Seeing it is not the work of man, but the counsel of God; the Father of
the Universe, who produced him: that at length he might swell into a vast Ver.
35.
mountain, filling the whole Earth.

This is that famous stone, with the vision whereof Zechary comforted
Zerubbabel, and the people of Judah when returned out of Captivity, that the
stone laid before Joshua the High Priest, should have Zeph. 3.9. Cypr. ibid. p.
277.
seven eyes engraven upon it by the Lord of Hosts, who replenished his Son with
the fullness of the Godhead, with abundance of all spiritual gifts and graces;
especially with a singular watchful care over the Church in all its Calamities
and distresses. Nay, all the Saints of God following blessed Samuel, may with
joyful shoutings pitch this happy stone, in the valley of vision, and call it
their 1 Samuel 7.1. Cypr. p. 278.
Eben-ezer: For hitherto has the Lord helped us: seeing our Lord Jesus is the
Isa. 28.16.
(...) fundamentum fundatum, the fixed, established and sure foundation laid in
Zion by God himself, for his people to settle thereon all their hopes and
expectation of glory.

4. He is styled a perilous stone,. 4.
a dangerous rock of offense to all them that shall stumble at it. In himself
indeed 1 Pet. 2.7.
he is precious to them that believe: but (per accidens) to them that refuse
and reject him, he proves a stone of Isa. 8.14. Romans 9.33.
offense and passive scandal. Nay all that burden themselves with it, shall
find it to be an active and Zech. 12.3.
burdensome stone, yea a sharp stone to cut them in pieces; though all the
people of the earth should be gathered together against it. It will be found
worse then any Tarpeian precipice, upon which such shall fall headlong
(whosoever they be, that presume to deal with the Act. 1.18.
rewards of iniquity) and bursting in sunder in the midst, shall present the
gushing forth of their bowels to astonished spectators: He that falls upon it
(says our Mat. 21.44.
Lord himself) shall be broken, but on whomsoever it shall fall, it will grind
him to powder. Here indeed, upon earth, the Lord Jesus is a foundation stone,
lying low and obscure, during the exinanition of his state incarnate: but
hereafter in heaven, he shall be brought forth, as the Zech. 4.7.
headstone of his Temple, with shoutings of Saints and acclamations of Angels,
crying Grace Grace unto it. Here below, the great and proud Dons of the World
being offended at his depressed and mean condition do impingere, stumble at and
break themselves against that blessed stone; all their designs and
machinations against him being broken in pieces like a potter's vessel: But if
they shall persist in their rebellion and contumacy, finally to the last; At
the great day of Judgment, this stone shall fall upon them to their fatal and
utter ruin, when all power shall be committed to the Son, who then shall break
them to powder. At that time, Blessed shall all be, who have not bin offended
in him: when those that have hardened themselves against this munition of rocks,
and have run their vessels against him; shall suffer a most dreadful shipwreck.
Then those, who have presumed to spit against this glorious heaven, shall find
their shameful spewing to return upon, and to cover the face of all their
glory: Then those, who have dared to shoot their keen arrows (dipped in the
malignant poison of enmity toward him) against this radiant Sun, shall deeply
bemoan more sharp darts fiercely retorted upon their own bosoms, and piercing
through their very hearts.

5. He is termed a cornerstone in many places of holy Scripture.. 5.
From which expression, became he is called by the name of one cornerstone,
only, (seeing that under the building there are not only four corner-stones;
but many others laid in the several sides and middle of the supporting
foundation: all which do make up but one full and complete substruction for the
superior building to rest on) we are not to infer that Christ is not the
whole and entire foundation of his Church, needing others to hold Copartnership
with him in this great work: But therefore is the Lord Jesus called the
cornerstone by way of eminency: seeing it is such a stone as does excel in
strength, and exceed in quantity, all other stones that are laid togeth^r with
it in ordinary foundations. The corner-stones are the main and chief supports
of the building, and therefore most usually are of the largest cize, and cut
out of the stout^st vein in the Quarry. Wherefore our Lord for his admirable
strength in bearing the weight of the Churches sins, and preserving the state
of their graces, and the hopes of their glory from ruin, is denominated by the
Cornerstone: whereas indeed the expression is figurative, the chiefest part
being taken for the whole foundation. But besides this, I shall humbly crave
leave to present a new conjecture in reference to the point in hand, and
earnestly beg a Candid acceptance thereof from ingenuous spirits, which is
this; That seeing our blessed Savior is indeed the only and complete
foundation of his Church, and yet being mentioned in Scripture under the name,
of a cornerstone in the Singular: I have entertained some thoughts, that
although generally other buildings have many stones laid for their foundation;
yet this spiritual and mystical building of the Church may be conceived not to
be unlike that admirable Temple of Lat^na in Buto a City of Egypt, near the
Sebennitical mouth of the River Nile: concerning which Herodotus (attesting
that he was an (...), and saw it himself) relates, that it was made and framed
Enterp. seu Lib. 2.. 155.
(...), of one vast and entire stone. In like manner we may conceive the
foundation of this spiritual Temple to have bin made of one, great, vast,
foursquare stone, supplying the whole extent of the bottom of the building.
Which by reason of the chiefest and choicest office of a foundation, ( viz. to
support all the angles or corners) is termed by the Apostle Peter and others,
(following the Septuagint in that renowned Isai. 28.16.
place of Isaiah, so often mentioned) (...), the cornering stone: or such a
stone, which in its four Angles respects and supports all the four corners of
the building, and is therefore expressed by a collective term: Although, in our
translation and according to the ordinary and common conception of the term of
an Angular or cornerstone, whereby the word is turned; we usually apprehend of
it, as it were placed in one only corner of the foundation of this spiritual
building. But at present (with the favor of the Learned) I shall crave leave
to accept of the signification of Peter's words in such a sense, as may hint to
us a large entire stone, that lies flat at the botome, and extends to all the
four corners; bearing and underpropping the whole building both in the middle
and all the four Angles thereof: which noble and stately stone being endued
with admirable strength, by reason of the greatness and immensity of its body,
to undergo the burden imposed upon it; we cannot apply and resemble it in a
spiritual sense to any thing better than to the infinite strength of the merits
of Jesus Christ our Lord (on whose almighty shoulders there is laid help
sufficient, for our faith to lean on) to support and preserve us from sinking
under the direful weight of our sins into the crude, raw, indigested and boggy
ground of our polluted righteousness, when oppressed by the impetuous storms
of temptation, and when mourning under the ponderous pressure of Gods wrath,
righteously imposed upon the backs of sinners. Hence is it, that they who
believe shall not need to make haste away from it, as men do from boggy
grounds; as the noble Prophet expresses it in the forecited place: seeing it is
firm ground, wherein the Angular stone of our help and salvation is laid. The
Isa. 9.6.
government rests on the shoulders of an omnipotent Atlas, supporting Heaven
and Earth, from falling under the leaden talents of divine wrath and justice.
So that the foundation of our spiritual house is not laid in the sandy desert
of our impotent and lubricous natures, or in the soft and shaking bogs of our
filthy works; but the help and stresse of our happiness is settled upon One,
who is mighty to save. For (behold) a hand of grace and mercy descending from
heaven, and fixing a most sure foundation: on which our souls may find a safe
and secure repose from all their fluctuations and disquietments.

Now for as much as the Apostles of Christ are termed also Ephesians. 2.20. Rev.
21.14.
foundations of the Church: Nay, seeing that even the Church it self is said to
be 1 Timothy 3.15.
(...), the pillar and ground of truth: we are to understand the former Noyes
Temple, meas. p. 31.
of a doctrinal foundation: the Apostles having bin such, as did edify and
build up the Church upon the head-stone of the corner: So Paul speaks of
himself, who like a wise master builder, had laid his Corinthians upon Christ;
as the 1 Cor. 3.10.
foundation of their faith. By the latter concerning the Church, we are to
understand the promulgation and conservation of that truth (once delivered unto
it by our Lord himself and his holy Apostles) inviolable and indelible to the
day of Christ, throughout all generations. But of this, possibly, I may speak
more fully in another place of this Treatise.

Wherefore to conclude this present paragraph about the cornerstone: let us
also remember, that as this stone has respect unto both sides of the building:
so it may fairly represent that sacred function and office of our Lord in
knitting and uniting both Jews and Gentiles in one Temple of his mystical body.
Ideo etiam De cessat. legal. p. 153.
(says our famous Grostest sometime Bishop of Lincoln) utriusque testamenta
sacrificia peregit Christus, ut in se angulari lapide continuaret duos parietes
aedificii culturae Domini. Therefore did Christ also perform the sacrifices of
both testaments, that he might join together the two walls of Gods worship in
himself being the cornerstone. That so he might become the foundation Jud. 3.
(...), of the salvation, common both to Jews and Gentiles. For through him
Ephesians. 2.18.
(...), (says holy Paul) we both, that is, of the stock of the Jews, and of
the gentile race have an access by one Spirit unto the Father. Others there
be, who interpret this cementing or uniting of the cornerstone to be
understood in respect to Saints and Angels: Seeing the Father is related by the
same Apostle, Ephesians. 1.10.
(...): to gather together unto a head all things both in the heavens (that is,
Angels and Saints triumphant) and also such as are upon the Earth (that is,
Saints militant) in Christ, the head stone of the corner.

6. In the sixth and last place, he is termed 1 Pet. 2.4.
a living stone.. 6.
To which purpose we may observe; that such stones which still remain in their
native place within the Quarry, not yet dugg up, or removed out of their
natural situation, are by the ancients, whether Poets, Orators, or
Philosophers, called living stones. At present one shall suffice for all, (it
being a thing commonly noted) in the poems of the Virgil. Aen. lib. 1. v. 167.
Mantuan muse, which describing the seats of the Nymphs, in a rock upon the
African shore, sings thus; Intus aqua dulces vivoque sedilia saxo,
Nympharum domus, etc.
Where waters sweet, with gentle murmurs slide
The Nymphs on seats of living-stones abide.
Whereas on the other side, stones hewn out of the Quarry and translated into
stately Fabrics, do moulder away by the forcible impressions of stormy
weather, and impetuous winds; and may be styled dead stones, though it be an
unusual and harsh expression: when those that remain in their native seats
decay not, but are rather increased and augmented, and in some sort said to
grow. The common determination is, that these subterraneous bodies are enlarged
in their quantity, by the petrification of adjacent matter. Cont. Cardan.
Exerc. 108.9.4.
Scaliger holds that they are increased by certain exhalations, that sweat out
of the stones themselves, like as gummes out of trees; which by the astringent
and indurating quality of cold, do admit of concretion in their exterior parts,
and so augment their quantities. The acute Principo Philosoph. p. 231.
Amsteled. 1644. quarto.
Renatus Des^cartes differs from the former, teaching, that there are many
sharp spirits, volatile salts, Oily exhalations and vapors of a Mercurial
nature, that ascend out of the bowels of the Earth toward its surface: which
according to various and different mixtures cleave together, (when the more
lubricous, fluid, and aereal parts are evaporated and flown away) producing
such various sorts of stones, both common and precious in the upper parts of
the Earth. The last that I shall mention is the opinion of our Countryman De
orig. font. p. 233. Land. 1605. 8^.
Lydiat, who conceives upon many probable grounds that there are great
subterraneous fires, actually burning in the bowels of the Earth; from which
there ascend great quantities of spirits, and manifold vapors differing in
moisture, or dryness according to the inflamed matter beneath. The moyster
parts of such exhalations are resolved into water, near the surface of the
earth, by reason of the cold air condensing these vapors into drops; (as is
ordinarily seen in the art of destillation) which are the originals of springs
and fountains. Whereas, on the other side, the more dry exhalations being
contained within such compact parts of the circumambient earth, as do not
easily yield channels and passages for their transpiration; (even as it is in
ovens well stopped) do in length and continuance of time, as it were bake
together into that firm solidity, which we see in stones: being also by new
ascending vapors continually increased more and more. Now hence it is, that
generally there is found plenty of waters in all mines and quarries, which
being of near kind to the lapidescent quality (by which stones are generated)
do supply the veins of those quarries with constant moisture, thereby assisting
them against that gritling friability, which exposes them to corruption, when
taken forth of their native places.

As to the point in hand (craving a favorable permission at the hands of the
learned to speak in an allusive way); In like manner, the Lord Jesus is not
only a solid rock, but a living rock, a rock that has a fountain of living
water in it, and Exodus 17.6. Number. 20.11.
flowing from it. He is that spiritual, living rock, which 1 Cor. 10.4.
followed the Israelites in the wilderness: so called by a metaphor taken from
living creatures, that have a loco-motive faculty: In which place the Apostle
is to be understood of the water which issued forth of the rock, that in a
constant stream flowing from it Mede. Vol. 1. p. 558.
followed them in their several mansions, as they passed through that howling
wilderness. The first time that we read of water issuing out of a rock, was at
Rephidim their 11th mansion, which satisfied their thirst and extinguished
their present murmurs. Now it is evident that the water came gushing forth out
of a rock in Deuteronomy. 9.21.
mount Horeb, Exodus 17.6.
and yet that mountain is the place of their 12th station; at which place also
the Law was given, and the powder of their golden Deuteronomy. 9.21.
Calf was cast into the brook of water that descended out of that Moun^. But
herein Bellonius in his Itinerary observations (who carfully searched those
parts) does help us, in that he acquaints his Reader, that in this wilderness
of Sinai, there is a large tract of mountains called by the same name;
extending themselves a great length, and in one place arising into two craggy
tops (like Parnassus in Phocis): one whereof is called Sinai particularly,
giving denomination to the wilderness; and the other, Horeb: by both which the
range of hills are promiscuously and interchangeably called. He relates also
that at this day, there is a ^ill of water sliding down from that hill: which
whither it be the same that was opened by Moses at Gods appointment, who can
tell? But we see by Scripture, that the water which Moses fetched out of the
rocky mountain of Horeb, for the people in Rephidim the 11th station; is
recorded to have drunk-in the golden powder of their image in the 12th station,
which stations possibly might be but little asunder. But if Alush, the 10th
station should be Ptolomies, (...), and Jerome's Elusa, in his Hilarion; or if
Rephidim should be Ptolomies, and De bell. Jud. l. 5. c. 14. ser. Ruff. p. 903.
Josephus his (...), or Massah his (...), there will prove a very great journey
for the Israelites to march, before they came from that side of the Sinai
mountains westward whence the water flowed, to the great and ragged rock where
the Law was given in their 12th station. All which I have hitherto suggested, a
little to further the sense of that place of Paul before-cited, which according
to the insinuation of our Reverend translators (adding [them] to followed]
seems to carry this sense, That a stream of waters from the first smitten rock,
followed them in that dry, sandy, and barren desert to refresh the congregation
of Israel.

But to let that inquiry pass at present: we are sure that our blessed
spiritual rock, the Lord Jesus does supply the living stones of his building,
with living water flowing from his blessed side. Who, though taken out of the
Quarry of humane nature, and placed at the bottom of the sacred building of
his Church; is inspired with a divine vitality, and has received this gift
from the Father Joh. 5.26.
to have life in himself, and to communicate of this life unto his members,
Joh. 10.10.
that they may have it more abundantly.

On this living rock, as on the head of the corner, is the Church of God
founded, and all the members do come to him as lively stones, so called by
Peter in the forecited place; by reason of a new form, life, or virtue infused
into them, and flowing from their union with Christ. Therefore is it, that we
read in the Prophet Ezekiel, that from under the Ezekiel. 47.1.
threshold of the Temple, even from this foundation-stone there said, that holy
man of God did see in a vision, waters issuing forth in great abundance: which
are to be interpreted of the Spirit, which Christ, after his departure out of
this world, Joh. 7.39.
would send down among his Disciples. So that these Temple-stones being drawn
out of the Isa. 51.1.
pit of nature, and hewn by a gracious hand out of the old rebellious rock of
Adam, are become Ezekiel. 11.19, and 36, 26.
fleshy and living stones, and are situated upon Christ, the grand foundation
of his Church. Who though they have most happily lost that native vitality unto
sin, which cleaved to them in the quarry of corrupt nature; yet now by their
implantation into Christ, receive a new and spiritual life. The stones, which
Deucalion and Pyrrha cast over their heads, after the great deluge, are called
by Comment in Iliad. 1. Romae 1550.
Eustathius (...), quickened or enlivened stones. The weaving instruments also
feigned by Homer, to be made of stone, whereon the Nymphs did make purple webs
within their cave, are expounded by De antr. Nymph. Romae 1630.
Porphyry to be meant of bones and flesh, which by these goddesses were framed
into living bodies, in that Den which mystically represented the Universe. But
yet allowing these fables, or at least the truths shadowed by them, the stones
spoken of are animated only with humane or mortal life: whereas the stones that
we are treating of, which are laid upon Christ, and fixed in him the head of
the Church, do receive from him a life which is spiritual and eternal.

Seeing then, the Lord Jesus only is the foundation-stone of the Churches
welfare, both in grace and glory: which God has laid in mount Zion, at the
bottom of this sacred building: let us esteem it a vain thing to seek him in
any place upon Earth, but in his Temple, the Church; wherein he dwells and
converses with his people by his Spirit. Luke 2.27.
Simeon and Ver. 38.
Anna with Mary the Mother of our Lord, according to the flesh; where do they
meet with Christ but in this holy place? The two former having bin long
expectants, and waiters for the consolation of Israel, at last found Him whom
their souls loved, when presented before the Lord in his Temple. The Virgin
Mary likewise having sorrowfully sought him in other places, for three days
together, at last met with him in the Ver. 46.
Temple, doing his Father's business. He that was the Hag. 2.7.
desire of all Nations, through whom alone both Jews and Gentiles, can expect
restoration to the favor of God, would then more fully perform the promises
of the new Covenant of grace to his people, when he should Mal. 3.1.
come into his Temple. The Dove-like spouse, finds her safest and sweetest
repose in the Cant. 2.14.
Clefts of this rock, in the secret places of the stairs of the Temple-Tower.
Nay, the Sparrows and Swallows of the Gentiles, who formerly were Ephesians. 2.12.
without Christ and without God in the World, have now found an house, yea, and
nests for themselves, where they may lay their Psalm. 84.3.
young; even thine Altars O Lord of Hosts, our God and our King. The kingdom
of heaven from a grain of mustard seed, is shot up into a Luke 13.19.
great tree: so that those birds, which formerly lived according to the course
of this World, according to the Ephesians. 2.2.
Prince of the power of the air, do now lodge and sing in its branches.

But to retreat to the former Metaphor: This is the noble stone of the corner,
unto which the Church and all its particular members are fastened by the cement
of Faith and Love. The union whereof is undiscernable by common and carnal
eyes, not unlike the stones of the Typical Temple, which Josephus reports to
have bin so admirably laid, and fastened with such rare artifice, that the
junctures could not be perceived: as if the whole building had bin made one
entire stone, and that not unlike to the Helio-Selenus, a precious stone
mentioned by Art. Mirab. l. 4. c. 45. p. 694.
Gregory of Tholouze, that shows the Synod or Conjunction of the two great
luminaries, the Sun and the Moon: Christ the Sun of righteousness, and the
Church the Moon of the Gospel-heavens.

Whosoever then erres in respect of this 1 Cor. 3.10.11. etc.
foundation stone, must of necessity err likewise most grossly in the whole
super-structure. We may observe then, that the builders of this World, who own
an other Head, laying aside this Cornerstone, do consequently err in the deep
and profound doctrine of election, seeing we are Ephesians. 1.5.
predestined unto the adoption of Children by Jesus Christ. The foundation of
God remains sure, having this seal, 2 Timothy 2.19.
THE LORD KNOWS who are his, even that such who name the name of Christ,
should depart from iniquity. Those will err also in the doctrine of Baptism,
seeing we are to be Act. 19.5.
baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus. They will err further in the doctrine
of holy and spiritual-good works, which flow only from the principle of a new
nature, united unto Christ by Faith. For Joh. 15.5.
without him we can do nothing. They err likewise in the doctrine of the
Resurrection. For this is the belief that we are to hold firmly and
inviolably, that if Romans 6.8. etc.
we be dead with Christ, we shall also live with him: who will Joh. 6.40, 54.
raise us up at the last day. Finally, such will err in the excellent doctrine
of eternal salvation. For it is Act. 15.11.
through the grace of the Lord Jesus, that we shall be saved.

The Mysteries of the body of the Covered Building, called The Temple, in a
strict sense.
HAving finished the inquiry about the Foundation in some measure, in the
foregoing discourse: It is high time now to work upon the Body of the Temple it
self, or the covered building which was extant above ground; endeavoring with
all sobriety and submission, to search out the mysteries contained within those
famous walls. Concerning which, I shall crave leave to speak a few words in
general, and afterward descend to treat of the three particular parts, included
in it.

The immensity of the Divine Essence, and the most radiant excellency of Gods
glorious Majesty, which no creature can behold in its full purity and live;
cannot be contained and immured within Act. 17.24.
Temples made with hands. Wherefore it is observable that holy John relates
that he saw Rev. 21.22.
no Temple in the new and heavenly Jerusalem, that is above: For the LORD GOD
Almighty and the Lamb, are the Temple of it. Yet it was his own good and holy
pleasure, that Act. 7.47.
Solomon should build him an House, wherein as to his manifestative presence,
he was resolved to dwell more especially among the Children of Israel, his
chosen people.

In these Gospel-dayes (under which we live through divine goodness) when the
worship of God is far more spiritual, though his Majesty has not appointed a
peculiar City, wherein to place his name: yet is it not unlawful even in these
times (but very commendable and useful) to erect material Temples, wherein the
solemnities of Gospel Ordinances may be celebrated, and the congregations of
his faithful people may more commodiously meet together. Without which persons
(you read the words of Comment. in Act. 17. part 2. p. 31.
Streso) being there assembled, they have no more holiness in them, than a
Court or Palace: neither is the Joh. 4.21. etc.
Prayer, or the Congregation less holy, though convented together in a field,
than in such a building, if necessity should so require. Of old indeed, Mat.
23.17.
the gold was sanctified by the Temple, and the Ver. 19.
gift by the Altar. But now 'its the 1 Pet. 1.7.
gold of Faith, and Heb. 13.15.
the Sacrifice of Praise; which must sanctify the Temple: If so be there is
any metaphorical or Mede's holiness of Churches. p. 46.
relative holiness, which may safely, and without danger be ascribed to it.
Especially at such a time, when the cloud of Gods gracious and evangelical
presence shall fill the Tabernacle, where his Saints and people are assembled
in his name and fear.

But as to the ancient Temple, there is no scruple or doubt to be made of a
degree of sanctity formerly attending it, different from that of ours, wherein
we meet for the management of divine services. Though for certain we ought to
conceive so heartily and charitably of all men that bear the honorable name of
Christians; that there can scarce be a person found so stupid and senseless,
as to think that there was any real inherent holiness in those beautiful
stones of King Solomon's building: It being most absurd, and irrational to
place so divine a quality in Subjects inanimate and artificial. But if we
understand the holiness to be ascribed to it, upon the account, and under the
notion of consecration; as things or persons which are separated from profane
or civil use and dedicated to God: we may then safely allow of that famous
place, that it was in the most solemn splendid and heroic manner imaginable,
devolved over to Gods holy Majesty by King Solomon.

If again, we shall consider that place, as which God himself did choose, and
pick out from among all the dwellings of Jacob, to be the 1 Chronicles. 28.2. Psalm.
99.5, and 132, 7. Lam. 2.1.
footstool of his holy presence among his people, and in which he was pleased
to dwell for many generations, smelling a savor of rest in their sacrifices,
and delighting in communion with them; so long as they kept up the beauty and
luster of his divine worship. If we consider moreover, that this was the very
place, whither Psalm. 122.4.
the tribes went up, the tribes of the Lord, unto the testimony of Israel, to
give thanks unto the name of the Lord, three times in the year: and that there,
the choicest and most fragrant flowers of legal worship did smell most sweetly,
even in the Courts of that most famous building: We may safely hence apply to
it the words of holy Jacob concerning Bethel. Genesis 38.17.
This was none other then the house of God, this was the gate of Heaven.
Finally, when we seriously call to mind the admirable divine Mysteries, which
were engraven upon its stones, enammelled upon its gold, carved in its Cedar,
infolded within its doors, retired behind its veils, and laid up in its most
holy Ark: we must not, we cannot, but break forth into solemn and joyful songs
of its praise. Seeing that this Mountain of holiness was not only Psalm. 48.1, 2.
beautiful for situation, the joy of the whole Earth; but that God himself was
also known for a refuge within her stately Palaces, and sacred Chambers: The
divine signification whereof, I shall proceed to explain with all submissive
reverence, and adoration of the Divine Majesty, residing within those Mystical
walls, most ardently imploring that Dan. 2.28, 29, 47.
God of gods, and Lord of Kings, (who is the only revealer of secrets) to
cause the Act. 9.18.
scales of ignorance to fall from the eyes of my understanding, and to grant me
graciously the visions of truth within his Sanctuary.

The covered body of this Sacred Building, I shall then proceed to treat of in
its three members, or divisions following. 1. The Porch. 2. The Sanctuary or
holy place. 3. The Oracle or holy of holies. Of each in their distinct order.

Concerning the Mysteries of the stately Porch of the Temple.
BY the Porch is to be understood that stately forefront of the Temple, which
sacred mount Olivet, and the Eastern parts of the World.

The situation whereof toward the East was therefore enjoined by God, as Molin.
de Altar. and Sacrif. p. 94.
some apprehend to distinguish the Jews from the manners and customs of the
Heathens; whose Temples generally were so built, that the Adyta or more sacred
and inward parts, where their idols stood, were in the East end of their
buildings, and the entrances or gates were westward, that their Gods might
appear to them, as arising out of the East: and therefore the Prophet Ezekiel
receiving a vision of the Idolaters in his days, beheld 25 men Ezekiel. 8.16.
with their backs toward the Temple of the Lord, and their faces toward the
East, worshipping the rising-Sun. Hence is it, that the Christians of old did
worship toward the East, not in imitation of the Heathens whom they abhorred,
but in hatred to the Jews their other fatal enemies; who constantly worshipped
toward the West, according to the site of the Mosaical Tabernacle, and of this
Temple of Solomon. But to enlarge upon this point any further, I shall defer
till I am arrived to the East gates of the Courts of the Temple, whereof in
their due place hereafter.

As to the Mystical signification of this present part of the building, (now
before us); The holy Scripture does no where inlighten us in distinct and
express terms: we must herein therefore speak only by permission and
allusion; not willing to pass it over in silence, because of its Connection to
the Sanctuary, and upon the account of its extraordinary magnificence, being a
grand Ornament to the whole building.

For if the Sanctuary (which I shall endeavor to clear up in the next place)
did signify the Church of Christ, and Gospel-communion with God in his holy
Ordinances: then may this part of the edifice, as yielding admission into the
Sanctuary, be expounded (according the 6th Canon beforementioned) of some
Gospel excellencies.

For as much then, as the Porch gave access to those, that were to enter into
the Sanctuary or Holy place: who were all to pass through this previous
building which was set before the other. We may thence learn that men ought not
rashly and rudely to rush and press into participation in divine Ordinances:
but must be stopped a while by the intermediation of a Porch, for the preparation
and setting their hearts in frame for such holy communion.

We read of a mysterious Inscription upon the Gates of the Delphian Temple,
situated under the famous Hill Heliodor. Aethiopic. l. 2. p. 106. Edit. Franc.
1631. 8o.
Parnassus, in the Country of Phocis in Greece: mentioned by Plutarch in a
distinct Commentary upon it. Where after the recension of 7 several opinions
concerning that famous [EI.] He fixes at last upon this definitive sentence of
Ammonius, Plutarch (...). Edit. Hen. Steph. 1572. moral. Vol. 1. p. 697.
[(...), etc. (...).] It is the self-sufficient compellation and denomination
of GOD, which together with the word settles in the mind of the pronouncer; a
true notion of the power of God, etc.] After a few words he goes on to tell us,
that those that use it, do attribute a true, unerring and sole appellation of
essence, competent to him alone. For there is nothing of essence really to be
ascribed to us. Which together with many admirable and divine passages
concerning the fluid nature of man, and the stable and unchangeable essence of
God, gives a rise for a conception, that the ancient Heathens (before the World
was totally involved in the mists of darkness and stupid idolatry) did retain
some memorials of the Revelation Dickins. Delph. Phaen. p. 97.
of Gods name to Moses in that famous place of Exodus, where the Lord commanded
him to tell the Israelites that (...) Exodus 3.14.
I am that I am, etc. had sent him to them. Ehejeh, or as Plutarch afterward
calls him, (d) (...), Iejus as the one and only God. Plut. ibid. p. 699.


Besides this Title at Delphos, There was anciently likewise at the Porphyr. de
abstin. l. 2. p. 155.
Temple Epidaurus, an inscription in these words, (...) He to this fragrant
Temple hastes in vain,
Who does not in his breast chaste flames maintain.
(...). And that is Chastity befitting a Temple (says Porphyry in that place)
when our thoughts are only exercised and busied about holy matters.

But whether or no there were any such like inscription on the front of this
famous Porch of the Temple, though I am not able to resolve by reason of
Scripture-silence [where as Josephus relates of pillars standing in one of the
walls of the Temple in latter ages of 3 cubits high, engraven with certain
letters declaring De bell. Judaic. l. 6. cap. 6. sec. Ruffin. p. 916.
(...), that no stranger might be admitted within that holy place.] Yet this I
am sure of, that the counsel of Paul is most safe and wholesome, that he that
comes to God, and draws nigh in a way of holy worship Heb. 11.6.
should believe, (...), that HE IS, and that he is a rewarder of them that
diligently seek him. Whether no the ancient Temple had any such inscription of
an Ehejeh upon it or not, to bring to mind the unutterable essence of God,
whose face they sought that drew nigh to him in his sacred services; it is not
much material, seeing now it is not in the mountain of Samaria, not in
Jerusalem that God will be worshipped: but we must endeavor to preserve the
memorials of his fear, and the indelible Characters of his infinite essence
upon our hearts; when we come to worship him in spirit and truth. For the Joh.
4.23.
Father now under the Gospel seeks such to worship him.

We must remember to cast a watchful eye upon the Eccl. 5.1.
feet of our affections, before we approach to the house of God and seriously
consider, whether we have taken straight steps in the paths of his
commandments: and whether they are set in due order, and cleansed 2 Chr. 30.19.
according to the preparation of the Sanctuary. For we must Heb. 10.22.
draw near with a true heart in full assurance of Faith, having our hearts
sprinkled from an evil conscience, and our bodies washed with pure water, viz.
our conversations cleansed with the water of the spirit in the laver of Tit.
3.5.
regeneration: as the ancient Priests of the Temple did wash their bodies in
the water of the brazen-sea, that stood in the inward Court, before they entered
the Sanctuary to officiate in their sacred functions.

We are to observe further, that there were several steps, by which they were
to ascend into this Porch; before they could enter the holy place: to show the
divine elevation of the souls of spiritual worshippers, even as Jacobs ladder
had several rundles; which the ascending Angels were to climb before they could
arrive Genesis 28.13.
near to God, who stood at the top thereof in that mystical Vision: In like
manner, in respect to our drawing nigh to God in divine worship, Soul-exalting
humiliation, deep and serious Meditation, searching Examination, self-judging
condemnation by reason of our infinite unworthiness to converse with so holy a
Majesty, together with ardent Ejaculations of our hearts in prayer, toward
heaven his holy place, are the several steps by which we mount up into the
Porch of Praeparation, that gives us admission into fellowship and communion
with God, in his Sanctuary-worship.

We read concerning Peter and John, Act. 3.1.
[(...)] that they ascended or went up, to the Temple at the hour of prayer,
(grant leave to an allusion) thereby to shadow forth the elevation and lifting
up of our minds in the heavenly Climax or Scale of praeparation, for the
spiritual worship of his Majesty, in the assembly of his Saints.

These Stairs or steps, in their extent from North to South, were of sufficient
length to admit many Priests in a joint ascension up to the Porch, and so into
the Sanctuary, if the occasional Service did so require, (as at the time 2 Chr.
26.17.
of King Uzziah's intrusion into the Priestly function, we read of the
High Priest and fourscore of the inferior, at once with the King at the
Incense Altar): The convenient copiousnesse of which Ascent, may hint to us,
that in Gospel days many, with the voice of gladness, shall say one to
another, Let us Ps. 122.1.
go, yea, Isa. 2.3.
let us go up to the Mountain of the Lord, to the House of the God of Jacob,
and He will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his Paths. Which places,
together with many other in Scripture, may reflect upon all the spacious and
stately ascents at the several Gates of the Courts, and of the Mount Moriah
itself, where the legal Services were performed.

This Porch (into which we have now brought our devout Reader) is generally
conceived to have been open and without doors on all sides on which it was not
annexed to the body of the Temple, possibly intimating to us the
open-heartednesse of God's Grace and Mercy under the Gospel, the freeness of
his Goodness, inviting all poor distressed Sinners to draw nigh to Him, so be
it they make their addresses in a holy and pure Evangelicall manner. For Prove.
9.1, etc.
Wisdom has hewn out her seven Pillars, has built her House, has slain her
Beasts, has mingled her Wine, and furnished her Table of Shewbread within the
Sanctuary, has sent forth her maidens of honor, the Virgin-Embassadours of
her pleasure, to cry with a loud voice, Whosoever is simple let him turn in hither?
Isa. 55.1.
Ho, Every one that thirsts, Rev. 22.17.
The Spirit and the Bride say COME. For the Gates of the Temple of the Rev.
21.25.
new Jerusalem are never shut, yielding constant admission for those that are
saved out of the Nations to walk in the light thereof.

The costly and beautiful gilding, that adorned this holy Entrance, denoted
the Splendour and admirable Excellency of divine and spiritual worship, even at
our first initiation into Society with God in his blessed Ordinances. Oh! how
much of God does a humble and holy Soul find within him, when he does but set
his heart aright toward his testimonies? What sweet experienced tastes of God's
goodness has such a Soul enjoyed? With what divine irradiations upon his
understanding has he been enlightened and enlivened, when coming (sensible of
his own emptiness and unworthiness) to hold spiritual converse with his holy
Majesty. The very Psalm. 119.130.
Entrance of his Word gives light and a blessed understanding to the Simple.

The fear of the Lord is the Psalm. 111.10.
Beginning of Wisdom, when we approach near the Footstool of his holiness in
solemn Worship, even in the very entrance of this blessed work. The great God
having declared, that he will be sanctified by all them that Lev. 10.3.
draw nigh to him, and by all the people he will be glorified.

The extraordinary height of this stately and pompous building, (the Porch of
the Temple) arising even to an 120 Cubits, as we have heard before in the
former description, so famous for its pleasant and capacious Prospect before
remembered; shows forth to us the excellent sublimity of divine contemplation:
Wherein the Souls of heavenly Worshippers being intensly conversant, look down
upon the Earth as beneath a Saint, and contemn Mat. 4.8.
all the Kingdoms of the World and the glory of them. The Heart of a Saint is
most humble and lowly, who though exalted into divine communion, yet is the
most noble, heroic, high-minded person in the whole world: being such a one as
whose heart cannot be filled with the vast Empire of the whole Globe, or the
Dominion of all the conceited and imagined worlds in the Universe: Col. 3.1.
He whose affections are set upon things above, is like unto the Church that
treads Rev. 12.1.
the Moon under her feet.

Upon the Top of this stately Tower (which the side walls of the Porch
sustained), called by the Evangelist Matthew Mat. 4.5.
(...), The Pinnacle or wing of the Temple, the blessed body of our Lord
possibly was D. Lightf. Temp. p. 58.
arrived, when he triumphed over the Devil, there tempting him to presumption.
He was now it seems raised by the power of Satan (permitted to him by God)
above the place of the Solemnities of sacred Worship: which may yield us this
glance by the way, That it is a diabolical Tentation, a hellish delusion, when
any poor Souls are elevated and lifted up in their hearts above the instituted
Ordinances, wherein God has appointed that we should worship him under the
Gospel. Besides, it exhibits to our consideration the extreme danger of
spiritual Pride, when we are even exalted to heaven by the means of Grace. Our
dear Lord, in his transaction with, and conquest over Satan, yielded us an
Example, that as he himself did not, so neither might we dare to presume upon
the protection of, or communion with Angels, unless we walk in all the Psalm.
91.11.
ways of God, who has promised therein to keep us; and because he has set
his love upon us, Ver. 14.
he will deliver us, and set us on high, because we have known his name.

The Mysteries of the Sanctuary or Holy Place.
NOw let us enter the Gates of the Sanctuary, Ps. 118.19.
the Gates of Righteousness, Let us enter Ps. 100.4.
his Gates with thanksgiving and praise, let the Ps. 24.7.
everlasting Doors fly open, that we may see the King of Glory in this his
sacred Palace, that we may Ps. 27.4.
behold the beauty of the Lord and enquire in his Temple. Angelical words
(though pillar'd, with the firmest Reason, adorned with the choicest Gold of
Rhetoric, and Cant. 4.10.
paved with melting Affections) are not Chariots majesticall enough to carry
within them those Royal conceptions, which become those Mysteries that sat in
state within these holy Chambers. Incomparably glorious was that place of old,
wherein the unapproachable Majesty of Heaven was pleased to vouchsafe his
presence, of favor and grace, among dust and ashes, to take up a habitation
among Worms, and to receive Homage and Adoration from Creatures, in comparison
with him, less then Isa. 40.17.
nothing and vanity. Yet so pleased it the infinite and incomprehensible God,
so far to condescend to the workmanship of his own hands, as to keep house in
the midst of his people, whom he was pleased to choose for himself out of all
Nations, and within this sacred building to command several Golden Utensils to
be made, and placed there for his use, as if he did indeed dwell amongst them.
Here were the ten Tables of Shewbread set before him continually: There the
Lamps of the ten Golden Candlesticks burned, with pure Oil Olive continually
feeding their radiant flames: Above stood the golden Altar of Incense, sending
forth its fragrant odours, while the King was held in his Cant. 7.5.
Galleries; to whom, while sitting at his Table, the Cant. 1.12.
Spikenard sends forth its rich Perfume. Whoever draws nigh, but to the
contemplation of these rare and profound Mysteries therein couched, let him
pull off the Exo. 3.5.
shoes of his worldly Conversation and corrupt Affections: For the place
whereon he stands is holy Ground: which is the earnest and ardent prayer of the
unworthiest of his Servants, before he enters upon so solemn and sacred a work
as this before us.

In former Lines it has been declared, That the Temple in general signified
the Gospel Church; I hope also it shall appear in succeeding passages, That the
Oracle, or most holy place, did signify and shadow forth Heaven, or the place
and state of Saints in Glory: It rests then, that the Body of the Temple,
called [(...)] in a more eminent and yet usual manner [ 1 Kin. 6.7.
The TEMPLE], but more properly and strictly styled, the Sanctuary, should
decipher and exhibit the Type of the Church Militant upon Earth, and conversing
with God in his divine Ordinances. His Majesty of old had acquainted his people
of Israel, that he would set Lev. 26.11, 12.
his Tabernacle among them, and walk in the midst of them; which was most
graciously performed from the days of Moses to the Reign of Solomon. At which
time he declares himself evidently, that it was his holy will to ^well in a
fixed Temple at Jerusalem, promising that he would 1 Kin. 8.29.
place his name there. Now, that the glorious Fabric of the Temple did
mystically shadow forth the spiritual House of the Evangelicall Church, the
Apostle Paul will come in as a clear witness, in that solemn appeal to the
Hearts and Consciences of his Corinthians, [ 1 Cor. 3.16, 17.
Know ye not that ye are the Temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwells
in you?] Yea further, he makes every particular Saint to be a little Sanctuary
for the Holy Spirit to dwell in, as may appear by that expostulation: [ What,
know ye not, that your Body is the 1 Cor. 6.19.
Temple of the Holy Ghost, which is in you?] Likewise, that the Church of God
in general, is the 2 Cor. 6.16.
Temple of the Living God: alleging by way of Testimony, that place in
Leviticus before cited. In another place the same penman declares, that the
Building being fitly framed together, and fix upon Christ, the choice
Foundation, does grow into a Holy Ephesians. 2.21.
Temple in the Lord. Other where he exhibits the infallible Characteristick o^
the Grand Antichrist to be this, that as 2 These. 2.4.
God he sits in the Temple of God, under the Gospel times, Lording it over the
Church, and usurping the seat of Christ. In fine, giving Instructions to young
Timothy, by an excellent Epistle, he tells him the end of his writing was, that
he might know how to behave himself in the 1 Timothy 3.15.
House of God, which is the Church of the Living God. Other places might be
added, but these may suffice for the present purpose: To which, as a Coronis,
let me subjoyne a passage out of the Learned Jerome to the same effect,
censuring such as doted too much upon material Temples; and were too
superstitiously addicted to Pilgrimages unto the Holy Land. [ Ad Paulinum. Tom.
1. Epist. 13.
Qui dicunt Templum Domini, Templum Domini, audiant ab Apostolo, Vos est is
Templum Domini, and Spiritus sanctus habitat in vobis; and de Hiersolymis, and
de Britannia aequaliter patet aula coelestis.] They that cry, The Temple of the
Lord, The Temple of the Lord, let them hear the Apostle; Ye are the Temple of
the Lord, and the Holy Spirit dwells in you. The Court of Heaven is open to
them that dwell in Britain, as well as at Jerusalem: To conclude, I shall add
the worthy advice of Gregory Nyssen, which he gave to such as conceited some
excellency, and rare merit, or the attainment of some more then ordinary
accomplishment, if they took but a journey to Jerusalem. [ Greg. Nyss. (...).
Cum not. Molinaei Hanov. 1607. p. 14.
(...), etc. But forbearing the transcript of the Greek, I shall give it in
English as follows: [Let not therefore our Example offend any, but let our
persuasion rather find Credit, because we give counsel about those things,
which we have seen with our eyes. For we, both before we came to that place,
and since also, have confessed Christ to be the true God, neither is our Faith
either lessened, or increased by it. We knew the assumption of the humane
nature from the Virgin before we saw Bethlehem. And we believed his
Resurrection from the dead before we saw the Sepulcher; and we have confessed
his real Ascension into Heaven, before we saw the mount of Olives. But this
profit only have we rea^ed by our journey, to know by comparison, that our holy
things are far beyond these external places. Wherefore you that fear the
Lord, praise him in the places where ye live. For change of place does not
effect a nigher approaching unto God: but where ever thou art, God will come to
thee, if so be the habitation of thy soul be found to be such, as that the Lord
may dwell and walk in thee. But if thy inner-man be full of wicked thoughts,
although thou were upon Golgotha, although upon mount Olivet, although thou
were under the moniment of the Resurrection; thou art as far from the
receiving of Christ into thee, as they that acknowledge not the first
principles. Persuade therefore (O Beloved) the Brethren to undertake a
pilgrimage from the Body unto the Lord, and not from Cappadocia unto Palestine.

Having thus treated in general, let us now descend to some particulars, and in
the first place crave leave to speak concerning the stately stones of the
Temple, which were laid in the side-walls of the Sanctuary: concerning which,
it is the common opinion that they were of pure white polished marble, denoting
the beauty, preciousness and durability of the Saints.

The Lowest rank of stones, which were more immediately laid upon the
Foundation, (before spoken of) are conceived to represent the Prophets,
Apostles, and Ministers of the Church. For as in the new Jerusalem, the spirit
of God expressly says, that the Rev. 21.14.
12 Foundations of the City-wall had written on them, the names of the 12
Apostles, of the Lamb: So likewise in the holy Mystical Temple, we read that
the Saints are built upon the Ephesians. 2.20, 21.
Foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief
corner stone. So that, although the Lord Jesus be the maine and principal
Foundation of the Church and all its members, whether Ministerial or others:
Yet the Officers of the Church being compared with those that are to be taught
and instructed in the Principles of Faith, are termed Foundations also: that
is, Doctrinal, not the essential and real Foundation of Saints acceptance with
God: Such is Christ Jesus only. We shall read therefore the Apostles to be
termed Builders in respect to Christ the chief Foundation; So Paul compares
himself to a 1 Cor. 3.10.
wise Master Builder, and then according to that Metaphor, the several Heb. 6.1.
Fundamental Points of Faith may be compared to the principal stones in the
Building. Nay the Saints themselves that confer about the things of God, are
said to Build up, or 1 These. 5.11.
edify one another. But to lay that aside: great is the consolation which the
Prophet Isaiah brings to the Church in that memorable promise, given forth to
her afflicted members, that her Isa. 54.11.
Foundations should be laid with Saphires, her Windows with Agates, her Gates
with Carbuncles, and her Borders with pleasant Stones: For all her Children
shall be taught of the Lord. In another place the Psalmist promises that her
Daughter shall be like Psalm. 144.12.
corner-stones, polished after the Similitude of a Palace. Judicious Calvin
upon the 13th verse of the former place in Isaiah says, that from thence it is
Evident, that by the precious stones there mentioned, the Prophet is to be
interpreted [non de doctrina, sed de hominibus, ex quibus spirituale aedificium
Ecclesiae construitur] not of doctrines, but of men, out of whom the spiritual
house of the Church is framed. This sweet promise does seem to intimate that
God would raise such interpreters, men picked out of thousands, Sons of
consolation, such as know how to speak a word in season to a weary soul; that
the afflicted people, and tossed with Tempests should be enlightened, comforted,
strengthened, and bottomed with strong consolation, by the power of the spirit
of God in their Ministry.

That men should be compared to stones in a Building is not unusual: the former
being the parts of a political, the latter of an artificial house. And therein
likewise principal men are usually resembled to Foundations and Gal. 2.9.
Pillars, as James, Peter, and John, are so set forth by the Apostle Paul. It
is observable also concerning the Nazarites, a sort of people devoted and
dedicated unto God, that by the Prophet Jeremy in his sad doleful Elegies for
the distressed state of the Church, they are compared Lam. 4.7.
to Rubies and Saphires: Nay, the spiritual Nazarites, who have given up their
names to Christ, and by Faith do esteem him the most precious, are commended by
Peter, for coming to him as 1 Pet. 2.5.
lively stones: who like another Amphion does by the pleasant harp of his
Gospel-voice, allure these spiritual stones unto the Building up of the walls
of his Holy Sanctuary. It is fabled (as I remember) by the Poets that the walls
of ancient Troy were built in stately manner by Apollo and Neptune, with
Sonorous or Ringing Marble. The stones of the Sanctuary are situated in such
excellent Method and Order, that it is admirable for spiritual eyes to behold,
their lives do in harmonious anthems reply to God's precepts, and their mouths
break forth into singing to the glory of that God, who Psalm. 22.3.
inhabits the praises of Israel. Insomuch that his servants take pleasure in
these stones of Zion, and favor the very dust thereof: such as God himself
will build up, and frame into a Holy Temple for his honor to dwell in. Indeed
by nature the Lev. 24.40. etc.
Plague of Leprosy is spread over, and has eaten into all the stones of our
Tabernacle: but he purges and purifieth and cleanses them by the blood of our
High Priest that is sprinkled upon them. By nature these stones are as hard and
impenetrable as the Zec. 7.12.
very Adamant, the hearts of men are as inflexible and unmalleable as the Job
41.24.
nether mil-stone: yet out of such does he raise up believing Mat. 3.9.
Children unto Abraham.

Many of these stones, as well as the other materials of the Temple (such as
Fur, Cedar, and Gold) are related to have bin fetched from Tire, 1 Kin. 5.14,
15, 17.
Lebanon and Parvaim: to signify to us that the Lord Jesus should in Gospel
times collect the members of his spiritual Church, from the remotest Islands,
and Kingdoms of the whole World. All these precious and excellent stones that
are thus fixed upon, and joined to Christ the prime Foundation, by the Coement
of Faith, unto the Apostles doctrinal Foundations by the coement of obedience,
and one to another by love, when once they are fitly set and compacted together
by the line and plummet of the Word; do hold communion one with another in the
mystical body, by Jam. 5.16.
mutual prayer, Heb. 3.13.
exhortation, Gal. 6.1, 2.
meek reprehensions, and bearing one another burden, and so do fulfill the Law
of Christ, and obey the new Commandment of Love, whereas a stranger
intermedles not with this their joy.

But whenever it pleases the Author of Faith to hew some others, and make
them fit and square for this excellent Building; this glorious Sanctuary has
diverse doors prepared for the admission of such into their spiritual
fellowship. These Doors we read to have bin made of Firr Tree, and hung upon
posts of Olive Tree; They were likewise curiously carved with Cherubims,
Palme-Trees, and open flowers. Some are pleased to apply these doors to Christ
himself, seeing our blessed Lord is recorded to liken himself to a Joh. 10.7, 9.
Door, by which the Sheep of his Pasture do enter in. He indeed has an
authoritative commission from the Father to give unto the Elect, an admission
unto Holy communion with Himself. Here though we will not exclude this allusive
interpretation of a door, hinted by our Lord himself: yet may we safely apply
the several ends for which doors are erected, in a more general way, unto the
Sanctuary about which we are now treating. The ordinary ends and uses of doors
in Buildings are, 1. To give admission to such, whose propriety in the house
does challenge lodging and mansion within, 2. To exclude all others, who are
strangers to the Family. And 3. To preserve those persons and things in safety
and security, which are contained within the house. In like manner the Church
is compared to an Can. 4.12.
enclosed Garden, a Fountain sealed as well for the secure habitation of
Saints, as for the unacquaintednesse of others with her state and condition.
Isa. 26.1.
Salvation has God appointed for Walls and Bulwarks to defend Her. He has
strengthened Psa. 147.13.
the bars of Her Gates, and bM^essed her Children within her: He has also
commanded her Gates sometimes to be opened, Isa. 26.2.
that the Righteous Nation, which keeps the truth may enter in. These doors
then may signify the initiation of members into communion with the Church,
that are taken out of the World by the mighty Power of God upon their hearts:
together with the exclusion of such as are Ep. 2, 12.
aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, and strangers from the Covenant of
promise. For there shall in no wise Rev. 21.37.
enter, any thing that defiles or works abomination; but such only as are
written in the Lamb's Book of Life. For without are Rev. 22.15.
Dogs, Sorcerers, and the rest of the impure and wicked rabble of the World.
Violence shall not be heard in the Land of Immanuel: but the Church shall call
Her Walls Salvation, and Her Gates Isa. 60.18.
praise.

In ancient times, the Lord is remembered to have come down in a Exodus 33.9.
cloudy Pillar at the door of the Tabernacle, when he spoke with Moses, Aaron,
and Miriam, and afterward at another time, in the same manifestation, when he
Deuteronomy. 31.15.
treated with Moses and Joshua. In following Ages the Temple also was filled
with the glorious 1 Kin. 8.10.
cloud of his presence. As to the first, we read that when ever the Children of
Israel arose from their stations and traveled toward Canaan, Exodus 40.36.
Number. 9.17.
the cloud was taken up from off the Tabernacle: Noting to us, that when ever
the Gospel Church should take its progress toward heaven under its spiritual
Ordinances, that the mystical cloud should be taken away: then are we promised
to behold with open face, 2 Cor. 3.18.
and shall be changed into the same Image from glory to glory, even as by the
Spirit of the Lord. In respect to the latter, the presence of God in the
Temple, we have a most excellent promise, that Isa. 4.5.
the Lord will create upon every dwelling place of Mount Zion, and upon her
Assemblies, a Cloud, and a Smoke by day, and the shining of a flaming fire by
night: for upon all the Glory shall be a defense. A Cloud to comfort his
people, and Exodus 14.19, 20.
to obscure them from their Egyptian Enemies, a Pillar of flaming Fire to
illuminate them in their way, and to keep off the wild beasts of this world
from them. In which respect he has promised to be a Zec. 2.5.
wall of Fire round about Jerusalem to protect and defend them. Of old, none
but consecrated Exodus 35.19.
Priests might enter into this holy Sanctuary, whereof we are now taking a
View: If the King himself presumed to enter, he was 2 Chr. 26.18.
smitten with Leprosy. Josephus in one place bewails the sad and prostrate
S^ate of the Temple, when Pompey, and some of his crew, entered those sacred
Doors, and cast their profane Glances upon those mysterious Ornaments; my, they
were so bold as to enter also into the Holy of Holyes, [ Joseph. de ^ell.
Judaic. l. 1.6.5.
(...) (says he) (...).] In which place it was lawful for the High Priest
only to be present. But it may be observed, that the affairs of that great
Captain did afterward decline toward the evening of his former Splendour, and
the shadows of Envy and Opposition to lengthen upon him, till at length the Sun
of his Grandeur sat in the darkness of Egypt, where Plut. in Pomp.
he was slain, and all his Glory was entombed in Mount Casius in the South part
of Syria, as Geogr. l. 16. p. 700. edit. Casaub.
Strabo and Lib. 22. p. 422. Edit. Lug. Bat. 1632.
Mercellinus testify. Which if true, it is somewhat observable that he should
be buried, as a far off from his own Country, so in the borders of that Land,
where he had committed so great an offense. That profanation of the Temple was
very great, when Persons did enter those sacred walls beyond the Line of their
function; and therefore good Jeremy did sorely lament among other Outrages,
committed by Nebuchadnezzar's Army of old, this particularly, that the Lam.
1.10.
Heathen were entered into the Sanctuary; of whom, God had commanded that they
should not come into the Congregation.

But now God has consecrated to himself a whole Exodus 19.6.
Kingdom of Priests, all the people of God under the Gospel being made a 1 Pet.
2.5, 9.
royal Priesthood, are exalted into the State of Kings and Priests unto God,
to offer up spiritual Sacrifices acceptable to him by Jesus Christ. Not but
that still there remains, even through the whole length and duration of the
Gospel-Age, a distinct ministerial Office, residing in those, who are regularly
set apart unto that excellent function, according to the appointment of the
Spirit of God in the new Testament. Their duty it is to attend upon the sacred
work of dressing the Lamps of Knowledge, of setting forth the Propitiation
bread of Life, and of offering up the Saints prayers in the Church of Christ.
Wherefore, when the Saints in general are called by the honorable name of
Priests, we are, in that appellation, to reflect upon the great measure of
Knowledge, that in the latter days is promised to Isa. 11.9. Hab. 2.14.
cover the face of the Earth, even as the waters do spread themselves upon the
Channels of the vast Ocean. We may further thence likewise meditate upon that
great and sweet Communion, which shall then intercede between Ministers and
People: And lastly, forasmuch as the Services of the Priests of old did shadow
forth some spiritual things, which every Child of God is to perform under the
Gospel: In that sense are all the Saints called Priests, as such who are
continually to offer up to God spiritual Sacrifices in the Temples of their own
hearts; whereof more (with God's good leave) may be spoken in the latter end of
this present Chapter.

To proceed, If then the Doors of the Sanctuary signified and held forth the
admission of Saints into communion with Jesus Christ, by his inward and
effectual Call upon their hearts: Give leave for resemblances in respect to the
materials of the Doors themselves, and the Posts whereupon they turned; the
latter being made of Olive-wood, the former of Firr. The holy Scripture is
pleased to set forth the Excellency of that fellowship which Saints enjoy with
Christ in Ordinances, by participating of the Romans 11.17.
Fatness of the Olive Tree, unto which they are united: and the constancy of
their perseverance by the ever-green fresh Verdancy of Christ's righteousness,
through whose Sap only is the Hos. 14.8.
fruit of Ephraim found, when ingrafted into him by Faith. Spiritual
fruitfulness flows from a principle, contrary to the ordinary course of
nature: wherein the Cyon though it suck its Juice and Nourishment from the
Stock into which it is inserted, yet as to the fruit, it follows the kind of
that Tree whence it was cut. But here the case is altered; for the fruit of
Believers is found of the same nature with the Root from whence their Sap is
communicated, and according to the Stock into which they are ingrafted and
implanted.

In this place I shall at present forbear to speak largely of the nature of the
Firr and Olive: Seeing the Materials and Ornaments of the Doors were coincident
with those of the Sanctuary within: where I shall more copiously enlarge, when
once we are entered into that most sacred and stately Palace. In respect to the
genuine explication of the many excellent Mysteries there laid up, I shall
conjoyn my ardent suit with holy David's unto the Jam. 1.17.
Father of Lights and the Ps. 31.5.
God of Truth; Ps. 43.3.
O send out thy Light and thy truth: let them lead me, let them bring me to thy
holy Hill, and to thy Tabernacles.

Since then we have finished our view of the out-walls and doors, and have
humbly implored a skilful and faithful Guide, Let us be encouraged to enter
with reverence this Holy place, and take a strict notice of all the choice
Ornaments within, on both sides, in the Floor, Windows, and stately Roof above.
Wherein, I shall first speak apart of the Materials themselves, and, after that,
endeavor with all sobriety to search out what Mysteryes (whether Typical or by
way of Allusion) may be couched under them. For as the Sanctuary, the Type; so
the Church the Antitype, is all Psalm. 45.13.
glorious within. As to the ancient Type and its adornment, we read of great
provision made of fragrant 1 Kin. 5.6, 8, 10.
Cedar, for boards to line the walls of this famous house within; Planks of Fir
to lay under the Cedar boards for the Floor; wood of Olive for the Posts and
Doors, and all overlayd with choice Gold, fastened with rivets or nails of the
same Metal, adorned with precious Stones, Sculptures of Cherubims, Palm Trees,
and open-Flowers. Of which, to speak one word in general; If so be the fair
Marble stones (wherewith the sides of the Temple were built up to the Roof on
the outside) have been truly applied unto the Saints or Members of the
Mystical Church, being called living stones by the Apostle Peter, and resembled
to those of the Temple in other places of the sacred writings, penned since our
Lord's Incarnation, as being infallible guides in the Application of the dark
Mysteries of the old Testament: then what can we conceive by Analogy to be more
properly esteemed as the true and genuine meaning of these rare and costly
materials, expended upon the inside of the Sanctuary, than the various
Ornaments of gifts and graces, wherewith the Church of Christ, and every
particular Member, in its degree and station, is most curiously lined, and most
rarely beautified? But first, of the Materials themselves in order, and then of
their particular Application unto Saints.

I shall begin with the Cedar, the first thing mentioned in Solomon's provision
for the Temple, which was received from Hiram King of Tire. A Tree of great
excellency, and therefore desired of all Nations for pompous structures; Fit
for an enduring Temple, for Lib. 5. c. 5.
Theophrastus, in his History of Plants, reports of them in the Catalogue of
those Trees which are [(...)] of an imputrible nature. Archit. l. 2. c. 9.
Vitruvius moreover relates that the Ancients did usually anoint their books
with the Oil of Cedar, on purpose to preserve them from Worms and Putrefaction.
Port. Phylog. inl. 5. c. 1.
Another writes, that the Books of King Numa (wherein were contained many
Dictates of the Pythagoreans) were found safe and whole after the Revolution of
535 years, being preserved by some artificial use of Cedar, or Oil made
thereof. Isid. Hispal.
Others mention that the Temples of the ancient gods of the Heathen had their
beams of Cedar. Nay, the Statues of the Gods themselves were sometimes carved
in Cedar. As to which, L. 13. c. 5.
Pliny reports that one of Apollo, brought from Seleucia, was seen at Rome.
Vitr. p. 35 Plin. l. 16. c. 40.
The Temple of Diana at Ephesus was covered with Cedar. Vitr. p. 35.
The Temple of Apollo at Vtica in Africa, was built with beams of Numidian
Cedar, and lasted 1188 years. It Is recorded also by an ancient and famous
Diosc. de mat. med. lib. 1. c. 89.
Physician, that it preservs dead bodies from putrefaction, by drinking up the
superfluous moisture; and therefore the Egyptians are related, by L. 2. c. 87.
Herodotus, to have used an Ointment made of Cedar in the embalming of their
dead. Nay, anything almost being Plin. l. 16. c. 39.
anointed with the foresaid Oil is preserved from worms, being of such a nature
as wonderfully resists putrefaction. Nay, it helps against the Port. l. 4. c. 7.
stingings of several sorts of virulent Serpents, and cures also the Id. l. 5.
c. 14.
Ulcers of the Lungs. The Tree grows most strongly, and flourishes on rocky and
mountainous grounds, and is held therefore by the foresaid l. 6. c. 20.
Author, (according to that natural signature, being of a penetrating quality)
to be an excellent cure of diseases in the bones. It is reported furthermore by
Syntag. Deor. c. 17.
Gyraldus, that near the times of the Trojan Wars, the Ancients of those times
did perfume their Temples with the burning of Cedar.

It is a Tree of exceeding 2 Kin. 19.23.
tall stature, and always Diosc. l. 1. c. 89.
green, by reason of a hot and clammy viscous humor wherewith it is endued,
thereby retaining its leaves continually upon its branches.

It yields a very choice kind of resine, mentioned frequently by Physicians and
learned Herbarists, there being many admirable virtues by them assigned to it.

As to the Firr-Tree, (another of those Trees, whose wood was used in the
Sanctuary) it is likewise of exceeding great height, when arrived to its full
stature. Which, although it be not of so noble an extract as the Cedar,
manifested by its scent, as not so fragrant; yet is it of a durable,
consistence and, when laid on the fire, yields a resinous Matter, well known to
the Ancients, and not less to the people of Norway in our days, it being a
staple Commodity with that Nation for shipping. To which end it was employed of
Virgil. Aeneid. 2.
old, as well as now, both for Masts and other Uses: and most frequently
improved by the Northern Nations in common and ordinary buildings. Nay, it was
advanced to honor in Plin. lib. 16. c. 10.40, 42.
sacred matters of old, being dedicated to Bacchus: and therewithal the
aeternal fire (so called) at Delphos was fed and maintained, and with no other
Fuel, as De ^a apud Delph. Ed. H. Steph. gr. Moral. part. l. p. 685.
Plutarch has recorded. Concerning its virtues Page 33. Ed. praedict.
Vitruvius has treated concisely. It grows with us in some parts, and thereby
we know it to be ever-green and to endure a very long time, where it likes its
seat. To conclude, that it was used in the Matt. lib. 14. Ep. 84.
preservation of Books, Martial remembers in his Epigrams.

The Palm Tree was used in the Sanctuary also, but in figure only and
Sculpture: not as to its wood at all: but yet does challenge some Lines,
because it was every where an Ornament of the Temple. The most excellent sort
of these Trees are reported to have grown in Judea, according to the Testimony
of l. 1. c. 125.
Dioscorides, and most plentifully near to the dead Sea or Lake of Sodom, in
the Champion plains of Jericho; which therefore is styled, The City of Deuteronomy.
34.3.
Palm Trees, in Scripture: and fully accorded to by Diod. Sic. l. 2. c. 48.
Diodorus Siculus: and therefore, in the Coins of Vespasian, the conquest of
3. Judea is resembled by a Woman sitting under a Palm Tree weeping, with this
Inscription [Judea capta] Judaea conquered. It Is a fruitful Tree, and mentioned
by the Joel. 1.12.
Prophet Joel in the Catalogue of such plants. It bears that fruit which we
call Dates, (...): resembling the Joints of the Fingers, as it is thought the
ancient name was thence taken; but the fruit is used with great benefit, both
for Food and Physic, especially in broths and decoctions, for thin, macilent,
and consumptive bodies. It is a sociable Tree: For some that are very critical
in discerning the Sex of Plants do aver, that the Female will not bear, at
least plentifully, unless it be planted near the Male: which is therefore so
called, because never yielding fruit. It is likewise an Ever-green, as Lib. 16.
c. 20.
Pliny witnesses, and was of old sacred to the Muses, whole President was the
famous Apollo, and is reported by the ancient Poets to have been born under it,
as shall be spoken to, Pign. Men's. Isiac. p. 10. Edit. Franc. 1608.
by and by. Highly prized it was in Egypt, whose Priests used to lie in little
Cottages made up of Palm-branches twisted together, and it is related that the
Leaves were laid under the feet of Isis. It was used also by the Grecians, but
to a different end, to crown the victorious Temples of the Pythian Gamesters.
For it was always esteemed above all other Trees, for a Symbol of Victory, as
yielding less then any other A. Gell. noct. Attic. l. 3. c. 6.
to weights imposed upon it, and after the removal rises sooner to its former
erect posture, it being very Jer. 10.5.
strait and upright. Upon another account it was used of old for an Emblem of a
Pierius l. 50. c. 2. p. 651. 4o.
Year, and of a Month; because (as they report) every new Moon it shoots forth
new branches, and those but twelve: which are but improbable Niceties and
Toys. However it was in great Veneration among the Heathen, for what Homer
has written concerning Latona, Him. in Apol. v. 117.
(...), etc. that she cast her arms about a Palm Tree in Delos when she brought
forth Apollo and Diana, who were worshipped by the Ancients for the Sun and
Moon. But there is a thing more observable concerning this Tree; that whereas
others, which extend many and large branches, grow still narrower toward the
Top; This is very narrow at bottom, where the branches are inserted into its
Trunk; and spreads very broad at Top toward heaven to receive its influences,
while its fruit hangs down humbly toward the Earth, underneath the spreading
branches.

In the next place let us treat in few words concerning the Olive Tree. Whereof
Porph. de antr. Nymp. p. 231.
Porphyry, in his description of the Cave of the Nymphs, gives an account why
it was placed over its entrance, to signify the wisdom of God in the framing of
the world for (says he) (...): The Olive is the Symbol of the Wisdom of God,
for it is the Plant of Minerva, but Minerva is Wisdom: The Country about
Athens, (which City was dedicated to that Goddess) is related to be very
fertile in these plants. But there was a nearer place, from whence the Temple
might be furnished; even Mount Olivet, receiving its denomination from the
abundance of these Trees growing thereabouts. It is remembered concerning
Hercules, that his Club was made of Olive wood, for Apollonius Rhodius calls it
(...), a Branch of Olive; which its thought he used as a Symbol of diuturnity:
For two famous Naturalists, Theoph. de Hist. Plant. l. 2. and 5.
Theophrastus and Pliny, have related that it is very long-lived, and has
great affinity with the Earth, insomuch that its dry stumps being stuck into
the Ground will bud forth afresh, of which the lib. 1. c. 3.
former gives this reason; Because such fat and unctuous Plants do not easily
become dry, but do very tenaciously preserve their vital and genital principle.
Its observed to have a thick Bark, which is the note of Trees that draw much
moisture from the Earth. It loves a Temperate Climate, and the fruit is
accounted to be of a very even constitution, and most proper and genuine for
the body of man, and Port. l. 2. c. 1.
fattens persons that are lean and exhausted with sharp Humors. It is
accounted by some Writers a very beautiful Tree (and possibly it may be so in
warmer Countries than ours, where it grows naturally), and therefore Hom. Ili.
g. v. 53.
Homer compares Euphorbus a comely young man to the green branch of an
Olive Tree, (...). The Plans are Plin. l. 16. c. 26. Port. l. 6. c. 31. Porph.
ubi supra.
ever-green and flourishing, and therefore by the Father of the Poets called
Odys. n. v. 116.
(...), when describing the famous Garden of Alcinous in the ancient Island of
the Phaeacians, now called Corfu. Plutarch rendering the reason of leaves falling
from trees in the Autumn, to be from the cold Air, and the dryness of the
Trees; says, that the Olive, etc. lose nor theirs, because they are hot and
fat, (...), Symp. l. 8. q. 10. Besides, it is a Tree, that, where it takes,
will last to a great Age, and, if Lib. 16. c. 44.
Pliny tell true, will live 200 years. It was (as has been said) consecrated
of old to Minerva the Tutelary Goddess of Learning: and as it was it self the
Emblem of Peace, thereby the Graecians did intimate, that Arts and Sciences do
best flourish in times of Peace; when Minerva and her Proselytes sit under an
Olive Tree. And because that Goddess is represented armed under the Name of
Pallas, they taught thereby that the firmest peace is obtained by the just and
prudent Management of Arms. It seems this Tree has been the Note or Symbol of
Peace in very ancient times; ever since the Dove brought a Genesis 8.11.
Leaf of it to Noah, a fit Messenger for such a Token, viz. of God's being at
length pacified, and giving commission for the return of the Waters into their
ancient Channels. It is observed by some, that it was used of old as the
Tessera or Token of such a Peace that followed after war and trouble, and
therefore Martinii Cadmus.
some from (...), the Olive, do deduce the Greek word (...), that signifies
Mercy. It is reported, that after great Conquests in war, such, among the
Romans, who procured a Triumph for the General, were to be crowned with A.
Gell. noct. Attic. l. 5. c. 6.
wreaths of Olive, in case themselves had not been in the Battle. It Is reported
also (let it lie on the Pier. Hierogl. lib. 53. c. 1. etc.
Authors credit) that if, upon Iron, the Metal whereof warlick Weapons are
formed, when made red hot in the fire, you pour the Oil of Olives, it will tame
the rigor of the Metal, and make it in a good measure soft and pliable. Which
if it be true, a natural reason may possibly be assigned to it, although from
such kind of Experiments the Egyptians, and other of the ancient learned
Inhabitants of the East, did raise most of the significations of their
Hieroglyphical Figures and Sculptures of Plants or Animals, and of the
dedication of any of the Creatures to the Gods, reputing some Mystery to lie
hid in the nature of all things. Accordingly from the several Excellencies of
this Plant, which they had taken notice of, in several Experiences, they have
applied to it many mystical significations: If a man did see it in a Vision or
Dream, or had accidentally met with, or fell down near one of them, when going
about any enterprise, or journey, or expedition in War, it was then a
prosperous Omen to him of Success, and Happiness, Chartar. imag. Deor. p. 210.
or of Pardon, Peace and Mercy, if he went to entreat the diversion of a
Prince's anger; of Meekness, Hope, Joy, Fruitfulness, and the long extent of
his successful proceedings in all Cases. Nay, the Ancients made it the Emblem
of Aeternity.

Hitherto suffice it to have spoken in brief concerning the Trees themselves,
whose wood or carved likeness did adorn the Sanctuary. Now let us make an
Essay of the mystical meaning of them, by way of accommodation and allusion.
Some of the Ancients have thought, that by these excellent Trees the most
eminent Servants of God in his Church were shadowed forth: Forasmuch as we read
often in Scripture of Men noted by Plants and Trees, as judicious Comm. in Esa.
53. fol. p. 808.
Rivet and others have observed. The Parable of Jotham in the Ninth of Judges,
and the 2 Kin. 14.9.
Message of Jehoash King of Israel to Amaziah King of Judah, with many other
places, in the Canticles and the Prophets do evidence it. Wherefore learned
Jerome. Tom. 5. p. 277. edit. Erasm. Lugd. 1530.
Jerome compares Cyprian, and Hilary, and other Holy men in the Church, to
Cedars and Firr-Trees, in his Comment on that place of the Prophet Esaias, where
there is a famous Prophecy, that in the latter days the Glory of Isa. 60.13.
Lebanon should come to the Church, the Firr-Tree and others to beautify the
place of his Sanctuary. The Beams whereof were to be laid with Can. 1.17.
Cedar and its Rafters with Fir. Nay further, it is a very common resemblance,
which both ancient and modern Interpreters glance upon, That, as the twelve
Wells of water at Elim hinted at the twelve Apostles; So the seventy Exodus
15.27.
Palm Trees, at the seventy Disciples. But seeing the several Trees
forementioned, as to their Sanctuary-Use, were employed for inward Ornaments of
the House, and annexed to the stones of the Temple, which signified the living
stones of Saints, in the language of holy Peter: I shall crave leave to apply
them rather to the inward Graces and Virtues of the Saints, wherewith they are
adorned in the sight of God and Man, then to the persons themselves. In which
respect, the extraordinary greatness of their body, and admirable strength,
might possibly reflect upon the Dr. Edw. Reynolds on Hos. 14. Ser. 5. p. 38.
stability and firmness of the Church. The constant Verdancy of their
ever-green Leaves might denote the duration of the Church in spiritual
prosperity, notwithstanding all its storms; and yielding heavenly refuge and
shadow to such as lie under her branches: For the Righteous shall be like a
Tree, whose leaf shall never Ps. 1.3.
wither. Their great procerity and tallnesse, especially in the Cedar and Firr,
might be a resemblance of the growth of the Church, and its approximation to
heaven. Their resinous or unctuo us qualities resisting, Putrefaction, might
hint forth the constancy of the Church, and perseverance in Grace, against all
her inward corruptions and defilements. Their fragrancy, the excellent savor
of holiness and of the evangelical good works of Saints: who shall Psalm. 92.12.
grow like the Cedar, and their Hos. 14.7.
smell shall be like unto Lebanon. Those that be planted in the house of the
Lord, shall flourish in the Courts of our God. The Palm Trees (wherewith the
Sanctuary was every where adorned, as being carved between the Cherubims on the
Doors and Walls of the House, and curiously wrought upon the Veil) were an
excellent Emblem of the flourishing and conquering condition of the Church,
notwithstanding the sorest pressures of her enemies. Her constant Motto in all
Ages having been, that of the Palm, Depressa resurgo. The Church is expressly
Cant. 7.8. See Ainsw. in loc.
compared to this Tree in the Song of Solomon, in whose branches the Lord Jesus
takes great delight. Possibly the Psalmist might reflect upon the Palm Trees in
the Sanctuary, when he brings forth that excellent promise, that the righteous
shall flourish like the Ps. 92.12.
Palm, especially since he mentions their being planted in the house of God,
and bringing forth fruit in their old Age, where they shall prove fat and
flourishing. That this Tree was used as the Emblem of Recovery o^ of trouble,
in ancient times, seems probable by that speech of Job, who foreseeing, by a
divine ray, his future rising out of the dust of Affliction, prophecyes of
himself that he should multiply his days Job 29.18.
as the Sand, says our Translation; but as the Hebrew word (...) is by the
Seventy translated (...), and the vulgar Latin Palma, and by sundry learned
Lexicographers is turned by the Palm, which the following words seem much to
favor, seeing the Metaphor of a Tree is so clearly insisted upon in the
succeeding verse, when he tells us, that his Root was spread by the waters, and
the dew lay all night upon his branch. So that the restoration of Job, to his
former splendid condition, after he had been long pressed under the weight of
sorrow and calamity, seems to be fitly resembled by the Palm-Tree's rising up
to its former erect posture after depression. As it was with Job, so it falls
out with many a Saint; nay, the whole Church of Christ in general: though for a
while it may lie under heavy pressures, yet at length it shall spread most
gloriously, and triumph with greater luster. Wherefore, when Christ the King of
his Church was riding in solemn procession toward Jerusalem, the people cut
down Joh. 12.13. Mat. 21.8.
branches of Palm Trees, and cast them in the highway, where he was to ride:
whence might be raised a most happy presage from the constant and received
Hieroglyphick of the Palm Tree; that, though his Kingdom was but small, and
obscure, opposed, depressed, and injured at first, yet at length it should
recover most gloriously, and fill the whole Earth with its fruitful branches.
We read that the Children of Israel, when celebrating the feast of Tabernacles,
were commanded to make their Booths Lev. 23.40.
of boughs of Palm Trees as well as others: For as the feast was to commemorate
their dwelling in Booths in the Wilderness, after their delivery out of
Egypt: So the branches of these Trees might, as in a Mirror, give them the
reflection of a great Mercy, after deep misery and bondage in the Land of Ham.
But to conclude; Neither was the Palm a token of Victory among the Heathens
only: but also in sacred Scripture, where we may read of the holy Martyrs
triumphing in heaven, with branches of Rev. 7.9.
Palms in their holy and victorious hands.

In the last place, for the Olive Tree; we read, that the door-posts of the
Sanctuary were made thereof; whereby might be shadowed forth, that heavenly
peace which Saints enjoy, when they are admitted through the doors of
Ordinances into communion with God: O! then their Souls shall be abundantly
satisfied with the Ps. 36.8.
fatness of his House! Ordinances do most exceedingly raise and ennoble the
Spirit of God's people, when those golden Pipes do convey the Oil of Grace and
Life from above into their thirsting breasts. When they are inwardly 1 John
2.27.
anointed with that heavenly Oil Olive of the Spirit of Grace, which should
teach them all things. The Disciples had a promise on the Mount of Olives,
(where the door of heaven was opened for the reception of our Lord into Glory,)
that they should receive power after the Act. 1.8.
Holy Ghost was come upon them in his divine Unction, to be witnesses to
Christ, even to the uttermost parts of the Earth.

To proceed in discoursing further on the Ornaments of the Sanctuary: As all
the Cedar boards were laid most exactly, eeven and plain, doubtless with
greatest care imaginable: so likewise the Saints that hold spiritual fellowship
in the body mystical, are full of harmony and union; Ephesians. 4.3, 5. etc.
endeavoring to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of Peace. And as the
Boards were fastened with nails and riverts of Gold: this might exhibit the
fixedness of Saints Ps. 61.4.
abiding in the House of God for ever, and trusting in the covert of his Wings,
their Ezr. 9.6. Eccl. 12.11. Isa. 22.23, 25. Zech. 10.4.
Nails being fastened in a sure place by the Master of Assemblies, even in that
place where God himself has promised to 2 Cor. 6.16.
walk in the midst of his people, and to bless them.

All those things hitherto recited, with several after-mentioned, were
appointed for the Beauty and Ornament of the Sanctuary within, where indeed was
its chiefest luster and glory; So is it with the Church, She is all glorious
Ps. 45.13.
within: Yea, and every Saint, as his joys, so his graces are hidden from the
Eyes of the World. That Is the comfort of the Children of God, that like Christ
our Head, They have meat to eat of, which the World knows not of: places in
the Holy Sanctuary to take therein most refreshful turns, which are invisible
to the world.

But for the further beautifying of this holy place, we read, that there were
Open-flowers carved upon the Cedar, in a very pleasant and stately manner:
which are supposed to have been formed in Lightf. 2 d. Temple p. 81.
this wise: Throughout both the sides of the Sanctuary, there were long wreaths
of bunches of Flowers and Cornucopiaes, carved in the fragrant Wood, running
all along in a Line parallel to the Horizon; and the first row of these flowered
Carvings began probably at the bottom of the Wall near the golden Floor; and,
over them, Cherubims and Palm Trees all along to the end on both sides. Then
another row of bunching flowers, and then Cherubims and Palm Trees again, up to
the top by the roof, in as many ranks as the bigness of the Figures would
permit, and suit with the height of the Sanctuary. Our Inquiry may be, for a
little time, what sort of Flowers these were. To which the Gloss of the
Chaldee Paraphrase proffers some satisfaction, constantly reading the Texts
(where they are mentioned) by these words (...), bundles or wreaths of Lillies.
We have frequent mention of carved and molten works, made like unto Lillyes in
the Temple-stories: as in the Lip or Border of each of the 10 Lavers; In the
turning down of the brim of the Brazen Sea, and in the fair Ornaments which
were added to the heads of the two famous Pillars standing within the Porch
before the Sanctuary. In respect to the present Sculptures in hand, As our Text
calls them Open-flowers, so they might resemble the hope of the heavenly Glory,
which flowers in the hearts of Saints, walking here below in the Ordinances of
the Sanctuary. For as the hope of the harvest lies in the blade, so the hope of
fruit and seed lies in the flowers of a Plant. In that, they were made to
resemble the flowers of Lillyes, it suits aptly with the frequent allusions
made in Scripture unto Lillies, respecting the Church. The Spouse is compared
by Solomon to a Cant. 2.2.
Lilly among Thorns; and the Bridegroom himself is brought in, as feeding among
his Cant. 2.16. and 6.3.
Lillies. It is observable, that our Lord compares Solomon in all his Mat. 6.29.
glorious raiment unto the Lillies, which because of the variety of his
gorgeous Attire, might possibly be most resembled and set forth by that
admirable and curiously colored Flower, which we call the Tulip at this day,
being brought to us originally from Persia, whose chief City was called
Shushan, and a Province within that Empire termed Susiana, from the plenty of
those curious Flowers growing there naturally. But as it passed through Asia,
and the Turks of Constantinople, (whence we received it more immediately); it
gained thence the present name of Tulip, from the Turkish attire about their
heads. Now, if this were the Flower (as it is probable) whose Effigies was
carved in the Sanctuary: although the variety of its colors (for which it is
worthily esteemed the Queen of Flowers) could not be manifested, but by
Enamelling the Gold which was laid upon the Cedar, a thing probably wherewith
the Ancients were unacquainted; yet in consideration of its rare variety, we
may resemble to it the excellent and curious mixture of Graces and Virtues
shining in the hearts and lives of Saints. But if it were no other then the
ordinary tall white Lilly, or perhaps that curious, neat, and fragrant small
flower, of the Lilly Convally, which grows amongst us: then, as whiteness is
many times used for the Emblem of purity, innocence, and chastity; so might
these flowers denote the purity of the Saints Holiness, the unspotted
innocence of their lives toward men; the integrity of their hearts toward God;
the untemerated chastity of their conjugal Love toward Christ: and, as Eccl.
9.8.
white Garments were used of old, in times of Joy and festival Solemnities; so
might these shadow forth the unspeakable Joy of the Spirit, shed abroad in
their hearts, upon the account of those gracious endowments wherewith they are
qualified. But now, although the Church of Christ be thus undefiled, pure, and
beautiful, in the sight of God, like the Lilly: yet shall not her beauty be as
that fading flower; in the morning pleasant and lovely to see to, in the
evening dry and withered; but, as the Flowers in the Temple-carvings were
always open, so shall her Graces and Ornaments be always flourishing, till
their Roots shall be transplanted into the Eden above, at the right hand of
God, where the Rivers of pleasure shall always preserve them from a flaccid
declining, when their Graces, flourishing here in the Garden of the Valley,
shall be curiously tied into a Crown or Garland, which is 1 Pet. 5.4.
(...), 1 Pet. 1.4.
(...), immarcescible and incorruptible, reserved for them in the Heavens.
Besides, because the Lilly is but a tender plant, and of small Roots, lest the
duration of the Church should not seem to be clearly set forth by it, therefore
are her Roots promised to be strong and abiding like the Cedars of Lebanon. So
that as the other similitude did set forth the beauty and pleasantness, this
does denote the perpetuity and continuance of the Church of Christ; as has
been Dr. Edw. Reynolds on Hos. Ser. 5. p. 38.4 to.
observed by a most learned, holy, and reverend Worthy of our Church: Long may
he continue both fragrant and fruitful in our Sanctuaries.

But to proceed; All these curious Ornaments, hitherto mentioned, were overlaid
with most precious Gold, even the Gold of Ophir or 2 Chr. 3.6.
Parvaim, differing names (as Ar. Mon. anti. Judaic. l. 1. c. 9.
some conceive) of the same place, which is apprehended to be no other then the
Country of Peru (so called at this day), in the American Continent: a place
very plentiful of Gold. Now, although the Assertors of this Opinion,) viz. that
the ancient Ophir was the same place with the present Peru) are without doubt
greatly mistaken: yet the Argument which some use against that assertion, viz.
that America was not discovered by the Ancients, no, not till the days of
Columbus as they conceit), is as false. For Biblioth. Hist. l. 5. p. 207. Ed.
Gr. H, Steph.
Diodorus Siculus acquaints us, that the Phoenicians, those most famous Seamen
of old times, were by great storms driven off from the Coast of Africa, far to
the Westward, (...), for many days together, and at last fell in with an
Island (as he terms it, and as America is now almost fully discovered to be) of
great magnitude and vast Extent, (...), lying from Libya many days sail toward
the West: which Story can be fixed upon no place in the World save America, if
the Relation of Diodorus had solid ground for its truth: For the few Islands of
the Atlantic vast Ocean, called the Azores, and some others, are very
inconsiderable in their Bulk. Moreover this discovery of the Tyrians, our
Author does insinuate to have been performed in very ancient times. Concerning
this place (as some conceive) Plato likewise does treat in his Page 24. To. 3.
ed. H. Steph. 1578.
Timaeus, when he says, that beyond the Pillars of Hercules, there was an
Island in the Atlantic Ocean, (...), larger then Africa and Asia put together:
and in more modern times, but a good while before Columbus, Madoc, a Prince of
the British blood, had found it out. Powels Hist. Wales, page 228. But whatever
their actual discoveries were, it is evident and clear that the Ancients were
very skilful in the knowledge and praediction of Eclipses, as is famously known
concerning Thales, Hipparchus, Calippus, and many others, who could not be
ignorant of the Clavis. Com. in cap. 1. Spher. Johan. de sacro Bosco. p. 146.
edit. Lugd. 1618. Metam. lib. 1. Fab. 1.
roundnesse of the Earth, it being demonstrable from the Moons Eclipse, and
might thence infer, that there might very probably be other Lands on the other
side the Globe, within the bosom of the Atlantic Ocean, to give a poize to
the vast Continents of Europe, Asia, and Africa. For as Ovid had observed,
possibly from the writings of some Mathematicians, or some common stories then
abroad in the World, -- circumfuso pendebat in aere Tellus,
Ponderibus librata suis,
That the Earth Job 26.7.
hung within the compassing air, being equally poized with its own weight; the
opposite parts pressing toward the Center, against each other. Which is the
Ground whereupon the Of Languages p. 120
learned Breerwood does most probably infer, that the Terra incognita, or that
part of the Earth as yet unknown to us, lying toward the Antartick Pole, does
equalize the whole Continent of these three parts of the Earth, into which the
ancient Geographers did divide it, to counterpoize the great and vast tract of
Land, which is discovered in the North parts of the World, even as far as 81.
degrees, by William Hudson an Englishman, as Purchase relates in his Pilgrims,
Part. 3. page 464. and before that; to 82 degrees of Latitude, in a place which
the Bert. Ta. bull. Geogra. Contract. Amsterdam 1616. p. 59. and 62.
Hollanders made to, in the year 1596, if Bertius say true, and called it
Spitsberg, from its craggy and mountainous inequality: And, lest any should
object, that possibly the Southern Seas might be shallower then ours: it is
answered by the experience of our own Mariners, who have found it, on the South
of Africa and America, to the contrary.

I am sensible how far I have diverted from the business in hand upon the
pleasantness of this Inquiry: yet shall I crave pardon for one word or two
more, whereby I would show, that we may even out of Scripture gather something
concerning the roundnesse of the Earth. For at first the waters did cover the
face of the Earth, before ever the Mountains were weighed in scales and the
Hills in a balance, which by the mighty power of God's word were taken out of
the body of the Earth, underneath the incircling Waters; and laid on heaps, by
his admirable and infinite skill and power, in such manner as to give an equal
poize, as well as to Arias Mont. Anti. Judaic. p. 13.
yield deep and vast channels and caverns for the waters to subside and sink
into, which were also weighed by measure, Job 28.2. He it is who measured the
waters in the [round] Isa. 40.12.
hollow of his hand. So in the book of Job, where we read, He has Job 21.14.
compassed the Waters with bounds, the Text is (...). His appointment or
constitution (as Arias translates) has he described with a Compass upon the
face of the Waters, and so to the same purpose the Seventy, (...), He encircled
the waters according to his appointment. In like manner speaks the Spirit of
God in the book of Proverbs; that Christ, the Wisdom of the Father, was with
him, rejoicing always before him, when he set a Pro. 8.27.
Compass upon the face of the Depth. Whereby we learn that Solomon had
probably some Knowledge of the circularity of the Earth and Water in one Globe.
That the Earth was sphaerical, the Prophet Isa. 40.22.
Isaiah seems to insinuate, when he brings in the Majesty of God sitting [(...)
super Globum Terrae, Montanus: (...), the Seventy] on the Circle of the Earth:
Lastly, that the Heaven which environs this Globe on all sides, is also round,
Eliphaz the Temanite observes, when he mentions God's walking upon [(...)] the
circuit of the heavens. So that although Scripture most frequently speaks
according to the apprehension of the vulgar, as in the Earth's station; of the
ends and sides of the Earth, the Sun and Moon as being the two greatest lights,
the measure of the brazen Sea, (whereof before) and in such like: yet there are
very excellent hints of true physical Notions in the sacred Leaves, as in that
of the Ps. 132.7. Jer. 10.13 and 51.16. Eccles. 1.7.
winds coming out of the Earth, and the rivers proceeding from the Sea, and
many others; So in this particular of the roundnesse of the Earth and Water in
one body. But, to conclude, (with an entreaty of pardon for this digression)
whether or no the Tyrians had discovered America, before or so soon as
Solomon's days; or whether Solomon himself had by Scripture Light, or natural
speculation of the frame of the World, known the roundnesse of the Earth, and
thereupon employed Navies to search out the World and its rarities, is not to
be known; because of our defect in historical Writers of those times,
especially of the Tyrian Annals, and others of Egypt, mentioned by Josephus: We
cannot apprehend by the relics and fragments of stories that remain of those
times, or the neighboring Ages when History began to be riper, that they had
such extraordinary skill in sailing upon the vast Ocean as has been obtained
since the rare invention of the Mariner's compass: but that their discoveries
were attained either by reason of impetuous storms driving them beyond their
purposes upon unknown Regions, or else in coasting slowly by the reaches and
Promontories of several Countries. In which manner, no doubt, Solomon's ships
did trend upon the Asian coasts, till they came to the habitation of Genesis 10.29.
Ophir the Son of Jocktan, in the South-Easterly parts of Asia: concerning the
punctual place of which Country near the Golden Chersonese; Stuckius upon
Arian's Periplus of the Erithraean Sea; Purchase, in the first Part of his
Pilgrims; Sir Walter Rawleigh, in his History of the World; and above all the
learned Bochartus in his Phaleg will give satisfaction, to such as please to
peruse them, while we speak to this excellent Metal which Solomon brought from
thence in great abundance, and employed it most bountifully in the adorning and
enriching of the Temple.

Gold, the choicest of all Metals, and the finest of that kind, must be used
about the Sanctuary. The Apostle Peter compares Faith to 1 Pet. 1.7.
Gold that is tried in the fire, and therefore some do accordingly expound that
place, of Faith, where our Lord exhorts the Angel of Laodicea to buy of him
Rev. 3.
Gold tried in the fire. There be who expound it of the Word of God, which the
Apostle would have to dwell Col. 3.16.
richly in the Saints, and is more to be desired then Ps. 19.10.
Gold, yea then much fine Gold. Others, interpret it of the righteousness of
Christ.

But I shall enlarge a little more particularly concerning this excellent
Metal of Gold, and insert those Observations in their due place. It may be
observed from Scripture, that many things are resembled to Gold; as saving and
heavenly wisdom, though preferred before it: Receive Pro. 8.10.
knowledge rather then choice Gold: for Pro. 16.16.
how much better is it to get wisdom then Gold: seeing Pr. 20.15.
the lips of knowledge are more precious then Gold. Sometimes Pro. 22.1.
loving favor is compared with, but greatly to be valued before, Gold.
Sometimes the purity of Christ's Government in the Church is shadowed by his
Delrio in Cant. 5.11. fol. 196. Par. 1604.
head of Gold. Sometimes the Glory of eternal life is set out by it, when the
City of the new Jerusalem is said to be of Rev. 21.18.
pure Gold. Several times the word of God is hereby set forth, to show the
estimation that is due to it. For so does the sweet Singer of Israel intimate,
when he says that the Judgments of the Lord are more Ps. 19.10.
to be desired then Gold, he acknowledges Ps. 119.72.
the Law of his mouth was better to him then thousands of Gold, and professes
that Ver. 127
he loves his commandments above Gold, yea above fine Gold. Accordingly some
have explained that place of the Apostle Paul, where he speaks of some that
build 1 Cor. 3.12.
Gold upon the foundation, holding it to be meant of the Word of God, Christ
doctrinal being built upon, Christ the essential foundation of the Church. It
is true, that an eloquent light of his Age, treating upon that place, after
several words, concludes thus Chrysostom. Tom. 3. edit. Savil. page 298. lin. 8.
(...): whence it is manifest (says he) that the [Apostle's] speech is [to be
understood] concerning actions. But what are the actions of spiritual builders
(as such whom the Apostle does elsewhere call Gospel Ministers) but their
doctrines and teachings, which according to their nature shall either be
rewarded or destroyed. In this very sense does learned Jerome expound that
place, as may appear by these his expressions at large, in his Comment on the
Prophet Haggai: Tom. 6. page 280.
[Ego argentum, quo domus Dei ornatur, existimo eloquia Scripturarum, de quibus
dicitur, Eloquia Domini, eloquia casta, etc. et aurum, quod in occulto
Sanctorum sensu et in cordis versatur arcano, and splendet vero lumine Dei.
Quod and Apostolum de Sanctis, qui super fundamentum Christi adificant,
sensisse perspicuum est aurum, argentum, lapides pretiosos: ut in auro sensus
occultus fit, in argento sermo decens, in lapide pretioso opera Deo placentia.
His Metallis illustrior fit Ecclesia Salvatoris, quam quondam Synagoga fuerat;
his lapidibus vivis aedificatur domus Christi, and pax ei praebetur aeterna.]
"The Silver wherewith the "House is adorned, I take to be, The words of the
Scriptures: of which it is said, The words of the Lord are chaste words; and the
Gold, that which is laid up in the hidden meaning of holy things, and the
secret place of the heart, and shines with the true light of God. Which it is
clear, that the Apostle did understand of the Saints, who build upon the
foundation of Christ, Gold, Silver, precious Stones; that the hidden meaning is
set forth by the Gold; comely Speech by Silver; works pleasing to God, by the
precious stones. The Church of our Savior is more illustrious by these Metals,
then the Synagogue was in times past. The House of Christ is built with these
living stones, and eternal peace is granted to it.

But to let that pass: Gold in Scripture is thought by many to be a
comparison, whereby to set out the excellency of Faith, true saving Faith in
Jesus Christ. As, where we see, upon the right hand of this Prince of Might,
the Queen to stand in Gold of Ophir, the learned Rivet does apply it to Faith
and other Graces, as the Golden Ornaments of the Spouse of Christ: So, where we
find her neck to be adorned with Can. 1, 10.
chains of Gold, it may be applied to the beautiful chain of Faith and other
spiritual Graces, being her choice Ornaments in the eyes of Christ. In another
place, we read of three Kings from the East, believing in him whose star they
had seen, and presenting our Savior with Mat. 2.11.
Gold, Frankincense, and Myrrh; which Grotius interprets of Faith, Prayer, and
Repentance: We hear likewise of Rev. 5.8.
golden Vials, in the book of the Revelations, full of odours; which some have
conceived to be the faithful hearts of Saints, sending forth the fragrant
odours and sweet-sented breathings of their Souls in prayer toward heaven. But
above all, that singular place is to be remembered to this purpose, where the
Apostle Peter acquaints his dispersed Brethren 1 Pet. 1.7.
that the trial of their Faith is much more precious then Gold, being such as
is Rev. 3.18.
tried in the fire, and is to be bought of Christ alone, whereby, though poor
in this World, we may be made Jam. 2.5.
rich in Faith. Of all Metals Gold is the most excellent, most beautiful, and
refers its original (as the Chemists have written) to the influence of the Sun,
the chiefest of the Planets; it is the most durable and solid, it is the most
malleable of all, by reason of its vigorous tenacity, which two things were of
old observed by In Tract. (...). page 347. Gr. Par. 1552.
Philo Judaeus, speaking of the golden candlestick, (...) (...)^ One thing is,
that it does not admit rust: another, that being drawn or beaten into very thin
Membranes, as leaf-gold, it remains unbroken. Besides all this, it is esteemed,
by eminent chemical Physicians, to be a great restorative to the vital parts,
if duly prepared and fitted. What should I speak of Vitruv. lib. 9. cap. 2.
its gravity, by which Archimedes found out the Imposture of the Syracusian
Goldsmiths, in the make of Hiero's Crown. Its great estimation in all Ages,
insomuch that A. Gell. noct. Attic. lib. 5. cap. 6.
Mural, Naval, and Triumphal Coronets were made of it. Or lastly, Its
convenience for commerce, by reason of its deserved value and estimation, as
being generally rated in its proportion to Silver, as 1 to 12, besides its
duration and continuance beyond all other Metals. It were an endless thing,
and here improper, to insist long upon the nature and excellency of Gold, a
Metal so much known and thirsted after: our Inquiry must be rather that of
Persius, -- In Sancto quid facit aurum? Sat. 2. v. 69. Rivet in Exodus p. 116.
Certainly the immediate end of it was for the beautifying of the House of God.
Not that his divine Majesty needed or cared for any such Ornaments considered
barely in themselves, or that the worshippers by any such dedications were the
more acceptable to God: but good reason that the hearts of those who draw nigh
to him, should be manifest, in consecrating the most precious of all their
enioyments and substance unto him; whose name and presence he was pleased to
place among, and afford to his People, at that house in Jerusalem. If therefore
Wood be useful; the Cedar, Firr, and Olive, must be brought, the choicest: If
Metals, Silver and Gold, the most durable and of greatest esteem: If of Stones,
the most precious: of Liquors and Gums, the most aromatical and fragrant: and
so in the rest.

Besides the Ornament of Gold, which was laid upon the Cedar boards, we read
likewise that the House was garnished and set out with 2 Chapter 3.6.
precious stones; but what kinds, the Scripture is silent: therefore we can
only mention them. The last things which beautified the House were engraved
Cherubims: the form and figure is not perfectly known; but probably of the same
kind with those in the Oracle: whereof I shall speak more largely in the third
Section.

Now then to recapitulate and recollect what has been said and to apply all
briefly to the Mystical signification intended by them.

Some hold, that by all those curious materials the Saints themselves were
signified, who differ one from another in gifts and graces. But seeing (as has
been before spoken to) the Marble stones of the Temple are, by the holy
Scriptures, alluded to, when the Saints and People of God are called living
stones, making up the glorious spiritual Temple of the Gospel: it seems more
apposite, to apyly these inward Ornaments of the Sanctuary to the inward
virtues, graces, and divine qualifications of the Saints.

If leave may be permitted to Allusions, I shall only compare some divine
Qualifications of the People of God, with the chiefest and most material
excellencies of the fore-described Ornaments. The Cedar, Firr, and Olive Trees
being always green, may note the never-dying nature of Grace; where once it is
planted, it never decaies. The exceeding high stature of the Firr, and Cedar,
may shadow forth their continual growth till they come unto the perfect Man,
Ephesians. 4.13.
unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ. As the Olive Tree
is exceeding fat and fertile, yielding Berries of great use for man, both in
food and Physic; together with the Oil, Jud. 9.9.
wherewith both God and Man is honored: God in the frequent use of it in
Sacrifices of Meat Offerings, and in the Lamps of the Sanctuary: Man in his
Unction to Offices both sacred and civil, Ps. 104.15.
making his face to shine; it being called the Oil of joy, exhilarating the
spirits, suppling of wounds, refreshing the feet after weary travels. Hereby
insinuating the fertility and fruitfulness of Saints, the joy of Spirits in
their service of, and communion with God, nothing so much refreshing their
hearts, as the fellowship which they hold with his Divine Majesty, and one with
another in holy Ordinances. Furthermore, the fragrancy of the Cedar, notes the
savory smell of the holy Life of Saints: As the Gold was likewise another
principal Ornament, It may signify the preciousnesse, the purity, the Zech.
13.9.
tried and experienced excellency of all their graces, as having been often in
the furnace of affliction, and the fire of tentation and persecution, and have
come forth in their Faith, Love, Patience, and other graces, more pure then
Gold, most glittering and glorious: the great end being to purge Isa. 1.25.
away their dross, and take away all their tinn, that they may be 1 Pet. 1.7.
found unto praise, honor, and glory, at the appearing of Jesus Christ.

The precious stones likewise did most admirably set forth the oriency of their
graces, together with their durableness, seeing stones of all things are least
subject to impressions. Precious stones shine in the dark, so do Saints graces
in dark times, they are beauties to the places where they live and inhabit. The
fiery Carbuncle darts forth a resemblance of zeal; the blew Sapphire, of
heavenly mindedness; the impenetrable Diamond, their constancy and courage; the
clear Crystal, their unspotted innocence; the Red Ruby, their hot persecutions,
and the like: Whereof more may be spoken, when we arrive to the stones in the
High Priest's Breast Plate: but of the particular application of them to
distinct graces, I desire to be interpreted (...), in a laxe sense. Too much
curiosity and niceness being things I design most to avoid, having constantly
thought that these things do but generally hint at the Churches excellencies,
and probably carry not in them any particular reflection. Wherefore I entreat
that I may always be construed according to this sense here laid down, as not
indulging a private fancy: nor being any thing positive in these points, only
speaking by way of allusion; unless hints from Scripture do fortify and uphold
them. Wherefore to proceed (according to this entreated construction): In like
manner the prominency or standing out of the precious stones (for so they are
conceived to have been bunching out in squares) might declare the visibility,
the exemplarinesse, and the radiancy of the Saints.

The sides of the Sanctuary had three principal, great, and large ornaments;
the Palm Trees, the bunches of open flowers of Lillies, and the Cherubims. The
Palm Trees might denote the Saints patience, and the emergency of the people of
God out of trouble and persecution: who, though depressed, yet are not broken;
though cast down, yet not destroyed; 2 Cor. 4.9.
and that if they persevere, unto the end, they shall walk with Rev. 7.9.
Palms of Victory in their hands after the Lamb, whithersoever he goes.
Besides; as the Palm Trees stood upright with bunches of pendulous fruit: It
might show that Saints have Joh. 4.31.
meat to eat in the Sanctuary, which the world knows not of.

As there were open flowers carved in Cedar, and covered with Gold: So the
Saints, in the State of their conversing here below in Church-Ordinances, are
filled with the hopes of Glory; Christ in them (the true Lilly Cant. 2.1.
of the Valleys) the Col. 2.27.
hope of Glory. As they are pure white Lillies, noting the impolluted ground of
their hopes: so does this hope 1 John 3.3.
purify them more and more, even as he is pure.

Finally, As we find Cherubims on the walls, they might denote the constant
communion of the Church with Angels. For even those pure Spirits do desire 1
Pet. 1.12.
to pry into the Mysteries of the Gospel. To the intent that now unto Ephesians. 3.10.
Principalites and Powers in Heavenly places, might be known by the Church the
manifold wisdom of God. To note likewise that we should do the will of our
Heavenly Father, as the Angels in Heaven do perform it with constant alacrity
and cheerfulness. Therein might likewise be exhibited the constant protection
of the Church; which God affords, not only by his own immediate presence: but
by the subserviency of Angels, who are made ministering Heb. 1.14.
spirits for them, who shall be heirs of salvation. Wherefore because of their
presence at Church-Ordinances, Paul charges Timothy not only before God, but
also the 1 Timothy 5.21.
Elect Angels: Women likewise that they should have 1 Cor. 11.10.
Power over their heads: that is, Vailes upon their faces because of the Angels
presence in their Church Assemblies, as some have interpreted that obscure
place.

Thus much let be sufficient to have spoken of the inside Ornaments of the
Sanctuary, a little of the Windows, Floor, and Cieling; and I shall then lead
you into the sacred Oracle.

The Windows were made to let in the Light of the Sun into the Sanctuary; I
will not say there was any particular thing thereby typified, but give me leave
to allude in conformity to, and harmony with the rest, so that as the other
Ornaments showed the various graces of Saints adorning the Church within: so
these might signify a divine irradiation shining from heaven upon their
understandings. Or, what if Christ's Gospel Light should be noted by Cant. 2.9.
it as shining through the windows, who is represented showing himself through
the Golden Lattesses. Besides, since that windows in Scripture are sometimes
taken for the Eccles. 12.3.
eyes: and finding that Prophets are termed Kin. 17.13.
Seers; Why may not these windows of the Temple typifie the Gospel Ministers,
that receive Visions from Heaven? For it is by the Psalm. 36.9.
Light of Heaven only we that can see and enjoy the true Light. John the
Baptist is termed by our Lord himself Joh. 5.35.
a shining Light, and otherwhere the Apostles are called the Mat. 5.14.
Lights of the World; not as if they were immediate Fountains of Light, but as
Stars and Candles that shine with a borrowed Light: or like Diaphanous, or
pellucid bodies that transmitt Light, which originally flows from Heaven it
self, teaching us that we must receive no Light from Teachers in Church, but
such as comes through them from Heaven. Wherein we see the difference betwixt
them and other Saints: Ministers being capacitated to convey light to others:
as being endued with clearer capacities, and irradiated with Heavenly Visions.
As glass, Crystal, the Lapis Specularis, so much used by the ancients for
windows; and indeed all perspicuous bodies having Basso Cont. Arist. stotl. p.
546.
straight and direct pores are fitted for transmission of rays of Light:
although all Diaphanous bodies do not perform it with equal luster; but
accordingly as they are thick or thin; or as the pores are more or less
obstructed by those material atoms, as of sand in the glass, and the like,
whereof they consist: For indeed none of these pelluicd bodies, be they never
so thin, but admit of some small Lydiat. prael. Astr. p. 24. Gassend. Epicur.
Philos. Christ. 1. p. 302.
refraction, although indiscernable to the eye; as has bin observed by curious
inquirers. We may from the mention of the Temple-windows, although we cannot
learn that they were adorned with glass: yet herein alluding unto holy
Prophets and Evangelical Ministers, look upon them as fitted by God with
clearer apprehensions, the pores of their understanding being made more direct
for the drinking in of the beams of divine Light, and transmitting them to
others. Whereas the Capacities of ordinary Saints are commonly distorted with
cares, and obstructed with the sorrows, troubles, and businesses of this World.

But let Prophets take heed that (as the beams of Light, receiving tinctures
from red or green glasses, accordingly do distaine the ground) they suffer not
the Light of Heaven, of its self pure and uncoloured, to be mixed and polluted
with private passions and affections.

It is to be observed besides, that as those win lows were narrow without and
broad within, to yield an expansive light into the Sanctuary: It might denote,
that all the understanding which Gospel Ministers receive from heaven, must be
employed for the benefit of the Church of Christ. These Windows were high
likewise, as being above the side-chambers, appendant on the out side of the
Temple; noting the end of the Ministry only to present divine and heavenly
Objects, but nothing of terrene and low concernment. If we take them to signify
the medium or means of the particular illumination of each Saint, or the power
and faculty of discerning, whereby Saints look up to heaven with an eye of love
and desire, and on earth with holy scorn and contempt: we may take notice from
the narrowness of the Windows externally, and the breadth inwardly, together
with their elevated situation, how little Saints do or should meddle with
others conversations: looking principally into their own breasts.

The Floor of the Sanctuary (which was laid with planks of Firr, overlaid with
Cedar boards, and plated with Gold) the place designed to be walked on; might
show the humility of the Saints, their meekness, lowly-mindednesse, and
prostration of spirit before God's Majesty; who was pleased to 2 Cor. 6.16.
walk in and out among them, such Graces being more fragrant then Cedar, more
beautiful then Gold. The Ornament of a meek and quiet spirit 1 Pet. 3.4.
being in the sight of God of great price. We see the Ornaments of the very
Floor were the same for matter with those of the insides of the house; to show
possibly that humility and lowly reverence of heart, as befitting best divine
Ordinances, is of as high regard with God as other Graces: nay in some sort of
higher esteem. For the humble shall be Jam. 4.10.
exalted by him, and receive more Grace from him: for as the person walking is
in more conjunction to the Pavement or Floor whereon he stands, than to the
other parts of the building. Thus the Lord, the high and the losty One who
inhabiteth aeternity, professes that he will dwell with him and look on him
with an eye of favor that is of an Isa. 57.15. and 66.2.
humble and contrite spirit. Although humble and meek spirits are counted fools
by the World, and quickly insulted upon, by every proud and insolent spirit;
yet (as holy David, sitting by the rivers of repentance, and harkening to the
sighs of the groaning Willows, under the storms of divine anger, sweetly be
moans himself) a Ps. 51.17.
broken and a contrite heart O God thou will not despise.

Happy is the humble person, who lying upon his back in a prostrate posture,
and helpless condition as to himself: yet always is looking up to heaven!
Even as the lowly Floor did constantly face the cieling of the Sanctuary, which
was all filled with Cherubims, a heavenly Host dispatched from heaven, and ready
at hand for their aid and comfort. Besides, the Roof of the Sanctuary, which
was laid upon those Cherubims, held forth the constant divine protection of the
Church, that rests on all the Assemblies of the Saints, when feasting in that
secret communion, which the true Members of the mystical and invisible body do
maintain in their hearts with Christ. Isa. 4.5, 6.
The Lord will create upon every dwelling place of Mount Zion, and upon her
assemblies a cloud, and smoke by day, and the shining of a flaming fire by
night, for upon all the glory shall be a defense. And there shall be a
Tabernacle for a shadow in the day time from the heat, and for a place of
refuge, and for a cover from the storm and from rain. God will be a Isa. 16.4.
covert to his people from the face of the spoyler, Isa. 32.2
a covering from the Tempest and a hiding place from the Wind. Our second
Solomon having made his Church like a Chariot as well as a Tabernacle or
Temple, of the wood of Lebanon, etc. and the Cant. 3.10.
covering thereof of Purple: even his own righteousness, to shield us from the
danger of his Father's wrath. Nay, his banner over us is love, in this Cant.
2.4.
banqueting house of the Sanctuary. Where the people of God having satiated
themselves with divine love, and fully satisfied with the curious views of all
its unparalled rarities; It Is now high time for them to enter the Holy of
Holyes, with adoration.

The Mysteries of the Oracle.
BEfore we set foot into the Oracle, strict notice should be taken of the
curious Vail embroidered with Cherubims, which hung down to the ground, cross
the Temple, and before that most sacred place. But although in the Tabernacle
there was no other division between the Holy place, and the Holy of Holyes; yet
in the Temple there was a partition of stone which divided betwixt them, and
Doors in the midst of the patrition. Therefore we shall consider the Walls
without the Oracle, and then the Door; and after that, the Vail: and so proceed
to give some account why probably there were no Windows; and then descend to
the Floor, the Roof; and after that, to the side-Chambers of the Temple.

To speak first, in general: There be some (as Rivet on Exodus p. 1129.) that
say, The Oracle noted the Gospel Church. However that be for certain It was the
Type of Heaven; as it is clear, by the Apostle's acquainting us, that the Heb.
9.7, 8.
High Priest entered into it alone once every year, the Holy Ghost thereby
signifying, that the way into the holiest of all was not yet made manifest,
that is, while the first Tabernacle was yet standing. The meaning whereof may
be this, Cloppenb. Schol. sacrif. p. 68.
that so long as the sacred ceremonies were performing in the former part or
room of the Tabernacle, which was called the Sanctuary, the entrance into the
more secret part, or the Holy of Holyes, (called the second Tabernacle) was not
yet made open. So that while the state of the old Law endured, and the rites
and ceremonies of the Sanctuary continued in their vigor, till Christ appeared
for the putting of a period to the Mosaical worship, there was no entrance or
admission into Heaven, the Holy of Holyes. But when Christ had once offered up
himself, and was expiring upon the Cross, then the Mat. 27.51.
Vail of the Temple was rent in twain, to give notice that the Door of Heaven
was now opened by virtue of his blessed sufferings: who, Heb. 10.11.
after he had offered one sacrifice for sins for ever, sat down on the right
hand of God. For the Apostle ver. 11. opposes this to a Tabernacle not made
with hands, i. e. the heavenly: into which by his body and blood entrance is
made, ver. 13.

In the Oracle we read of the Ark of the Covenant, the Cherubims, and the
Session of the divine Majesty upon their wings. In like manner, when the Temple
of God was opened in heaven, Rev. 11.29.
there was seen the Ark of his Testaments whereof more hereafter, when I arrive
to that mysterous Utensil. The place of God's glorious presence is in heaven,
whither all our prayers are to be directed, accordingly as David prays to be
heard in his supplications, Ps. 28.2.
when he lifted up his hands toward his holy Oracle.

This divine place was a perfect Cube, hollow within, shadowing the perfection
of happiness; as the great Philosopher says, that he that bears the shocks of
Fortune valiantly is Ethic. l. 1.
(...), he is truly good and of a square posture without reproof. Besides, as a
square figure is the most firm, in building; so it may denote the constancy,
duration, and perpetuity of heaven. Wherefore Jerusalem, or the heavenly City
that comes from above, is described to lie Rev. 21.10.
four square, that figure being a Plut. de defect. Orac. p. 662. and de E I
Apud. Delphos.
sign of rest. But in these things we speak by way of allusion. Between the
Sanctuary and the Oracle there was a thick wall interposed, noting a great
separation between the Church Militant and Triumphant. In this wall there was
placed the door of the Oracle, giving admission into it through the Sanctuary:
to show that the only way to Heaven is through the Ordinances of divine
worship.

Of the Sanctuary-doors, the posts only were of Olive, whereas the doors were
made of Firr, but here they were both 1 King. 6.31, 32.
of Olive, showing the perfection of the Saints peace with God when they enter
Heaven: whereas before in their state in this World there are mixtures of
infirmity and imperfect peace: out reconciliation though, fully purchased, yet
is not fully enjoyed till we come to Heaven.

The Olive Tree is a known Symbol of peace among the ancients. Presently upon
the abatement of the flood, the Dove which Noah sent forth to descry the
asswagement of the waters, returned as a Messenger of peace with an Genesis 8.11.
Olive leaf in her mouth, declaring Luke 2.14.
peace upon Earth, good will toward man. So when God was graciously returned
to the people of Israel after the Captivity, sending Zechary on a missive to
the People about the finishing of the Temple; the Prophet received a Vision of
two Zoch. 4.3.
Olive Trees dropping Golden (that is, clear, pure, and precious) Oil into the
Candlestick of the Sanctuary: which by the Angel's interpretation intimated the
influences of the Verse. 6.
Spirit of God upon that glorious work, till the top-stone of the Building
should be brought forth with shoutings, crying, Verse. 7.
Grace, Grace unto it.

The Olive was a Tree dedicated to Pallas the fabled inventresse of Arts: and
because Oil is very useful some way or other, in all Arts manual which
principally flourish in times of peace: therefore did they of Old make it the
Symbol of peace, as Natal. Mythol. p. 301.
some have written. Besides it is of admirable and sovereign virtue: a great
Antidote against poison, and for nothing more excellent then for sodering and
closing the lips of green wounds, curing the hurts which war produces. It was
likewise of old by reason of the durable nature of the wood of that Tree, which
by its unctuous matter resists putrefaction in a great measure, an Emblem of
eternity. Therefore it is that we read of the Image of some of the Heathen gods
to have bin made of this wood by the direction of the Delphian Oracle Herodot.
l. p. 318.
to the people of Epidaurus. Pausanias also in his Peragration of Phocica p.
334. lin. 27. Edit. Francof. 1583.
Phocis, relates a story of the head of a statue made of Olive Tree, which the
Methymnaeans had taken out of the Sea in a Net, and inquiring of the Pythian
Oracle whose Deity it held forth, were commanded to worship Bacchus under it.
It was the custom of the more ancient Heathens to make the Images of their
gods not of Earth or Metals, but of wood; to note their deities to be causes of
fertility and plenty, and particularly of the more durable and incorruptible
Trees, and among the rest of the Root of an Olive Tree, as De imag. Deor. p. 15.
Chartarius notes out of Theophrastus, to denote their perpetuity. Wherefore
the door of the Oracle (if we may compare divine Mysteries with these things)
was made of Olive to signify the perpetual duration of Heaven: and as the
Olive is the Emblem of Fabri Agnisti p. 182.
peace, so it might denote the eternity of our peace with God, when once entered
into Heaven.

The Olive Tree is perpetually green in those Countries, where it is a native,
and besides is exceeding fruitful: and the Oil that is expressed out of its
berries is useful Dr. Reyn. on Hos. 14. Ser. 5. p. 50.
for unction and for Lamps. In the first sense, it makes Psalm. 104.15.
the face to shine, and becomes the Emblem of peace and joy: In the other, it
notes a supply of divine Light from the glory of God and of the Lamb; by which
the Saints shall walk in the new Jerusalem for ever. As it is fit for food and
nourishment, it denotes that Christ the Rev. 21.24.
green Olive yields the food of eternal Life to the Saints, after they are
once planted into Him, and Romans 11.17.
partake of his fatness. The doors of the Oracle bearing the resemblance of
the Saints entrance into Heaven, shows the conquest over the gates of Death,
and the resurrection of their bodies to glory, when they are arrived at this
place, which is no other Genesis 28.17.
then the House of God and the gate of Heaven.

The Olive and the Oil issuing from its fruit, being of a suppling and healing
nature, is often taken for the Emblem of Luke 10.34.
compassion and tenderness: noting that through Luke 1.78.
the render mercy of our God it is, that the Dayspring fromon high has
visited us, and enlightened us through the Olive gates of Heaven, into the
possession of our Master's joy.

The entrance was but one: as there is but one only way for the passage of
Saints into Heaven, and that is through the mediation of Christ, who has the
Rev. 3.7.
key of David; He that opens and no man shuts, and shuts and no man
opens.

The entrance into this glorious place of the Temple was by one door only: even
as there is but one only way to Heaven, through Christ who is the Joh. 10.9.
Door of Life, and straight is that Gate, Matthew 7.14. But there were two
leaves of this entrance which De Tem. p. 64.
Ribera applies to Faith and Love: for which let that Author answer. The
foolish Virgins came not in season, and the door was shut, Mat. 25.10. To give
us warning, what timely addresses we should make to the throne of Grace. On
these Doors were the stately Sculptures of the Cherubims and Palm Trees: the
former showing that Heaven is set open to such only, who, though in infirmity
yet have endeavored with an Evangelical sincerity, to do the Fathers will Mat.
6.10.
on Earth as cheerfully and willingly, as it is done in Heaven by those Holy
Angels. By the other, viz. The Palm Trees is signified Rev. 3.5.
shall He who overcomes, shall be Clothed in white Raiment, and Verse. 21.
shall sit down on the Throne of Christ, even as He overcame, and is set down
with the Father in His Throne: wherefore the conquering Saints are remembered to
be Rev. 7.9.
before the Throne and before the Lamb, clothed with white Robes, and Palms in
their hands in that new and Heavenly Jerusalem, where there is an Heb. 12.22,
23.
innumerable Company of Angels, and the Spirits of just men made perfect.

The Veil.
The Veil comes now to be considered in this its due and proper place.

In that it did distinguish and separate the Oracle from the Sanctuary: It
signified the portion or number of the Saints Militant, serving God in the
Sanctuary-worship without the Veil in the Ordinances of the Gospel, not being
yet received into Heaven: who while they are at 2 Cor. 5.6, 7.
home in the body, are absent from the Lord walking by Faith, and not by sight
or open vision of the glory in Heaven. Into which we are to pass by a Heb.
10.20.
new and living way, which he has consecrated for us through the Veil, that
is to say, his flesh. So that as there was no passing of old in to the Holy of
Holyes, but through the Veil: So there is no passage for us into Heaven, but
by Jesus Christ, who is ascended with his assumed flesh into that Holy of
Holyes, making way for all his members: showing that till we follow the Captain
of our salvation through sufferings, and the death of our flesh, we are kept
off from communion with the Saints in glory. As the Oracle is the Heaven of
glory, the habitation of Saints and Angels: So, The Veil is to shadow forth
the inferior Heavens. So Porphyr. de antr. Nymph. p. 116. which as Veil or
Heb. 1.12. Dickins. Delph. ex Varrone. p. 119.
Vesture shall thou fold them up.

There be, who (taking the Sanctuary to signify the Jewish worship; and the
Oracle, to note the Heaven of Gospel Ordinances: and further considering the
Veil as hindering our passage into, and our beholding of the Oracle) apply this
Veil as a Rivet in Exodus cap. 27. p. 1129.
type of the distinction betwixt Jews and Gentiles: which separation as a Ephesians.
2.14.
partition wall the death of Christ has taken away. Though others more
probably apply it to the outward wall of the Temple that kept off the Gentiles
from coming into that Court, where the Jews did worship: Whereof more anon in
its proper order.

The contexture of the Veil we read to be Exodus 20.31.
of blew and purple, scarlet, and fine twined linen, of cunning work, and
imbroidered with Cherubims. The manner of the work was this, that one of the 4,
suppose the fine twined threads of linen made the warp or stamen: the other 3
made the woof or subiegmen, and were by curious Art framed into figured work of
Cherubims: as it is common in our days, in all sorts of weaving, to express
many sorts of Beasts, Birds, Men or Flowers, most lively in their Works. Ribera
following Josephus, (...). P. 454. lin. 29. Edit. Par. 1552. Turneb. gr.
Philo Judaeus, our Country man Bid, and others of the ancients, expound them
in their discourse about the Lib. 1. c. 21. Edit. 8o. Antwerp. 1598.
Temple, p. 63. in these words. [The blew, because it resembles Heaven in its
color, signifies that the Life of the Faithful should be Heavenly, (not
Earthly, such as is the Life of unbelievers) and full of the desires of the
highest good, which Faith manifests. The Scarlet, because it imitates fire,
signifies the ardor of Charity, and ought to be twice dyed, than not only God
may be loved, but also our Brethren. The Purple, which is stained with blood,
(of the Tyrian Shellfish) notes the imitation of Christ's sufferings, and
patience in Labors, and carrying the Cross, as Bede says, C. 15. The fined
twined linen (as the same Author has it in the same place) because it grows
out of the Earth with a green stalk, and is prepared by the great labor of
Artists in such manner that, losing its natural color, it is reduced to
whiteness; does fitly insinuate the Chastisement of our flesh, which is to be
exercised by works of Repentance, and to be thereby tamed, that it may become
white and clean. Cherubims are woven in the Velle, that we may study to imitate
the life of Angels, as was said before, and that we should constantly make use
of a great deal of knowledge (as Bede speaks) in the good works which we
perform; (For Cherubims signify multitude of knowledge) always looking
toward the divine Oracles, and governing our walkings by beholding of them,
lest perhaps we should err from the path of virtue.

Others there are, who taking the Veil to signify the body of Christ, apply
the purple to the blood of the Virgin: the elegant weaving, to the working of
the holy Spirit: which did frame that excellent variety of his blessed members.
But these and the like (though some, says the judicious Rivet in the forecited
place, do wonderfully please themselves thereat) are idle fancies, and little
to the purpose. For they that would in these things be wise above what is
written, are plain fools. However I thought good to mention them, to excite
sober spirits to a more full inquisition, if any Mystery should be concluded
under them.

Possibly the glorious Embroidery of this curious Veil might signify the
diverse heavenly graces, wherewith our Lord was beautified without measure. The
Cherubims that were woven in it, might possibly note the service and ready
attendance of these blessed Spirits, who diverse times Joh. 1.51. Mat. 4.11.
Mar. 1.13. Luke 22.43.
Ministered to him in the days of his flesh.

At the time of his blessed Passion, this Mat. 27.51. Mar. 15.38. Luke 23.35.
Veil was rent in twain from the top to the bottom, a sight no doubt
exceeding strange and terrible to the Priests that entered into the Sanctuary:
seeing it was no less then a miraculous prodigy attending his death. So that
as the Veil was rent, it signified the rending his blessed body upon the
Cross, (his flesh being signified by it) that so his holy and spotless soul,
after the giving up of his Spirit to the Father, might enter into Paradise.

As this Veil did hide the entrance into the Sanctuary; So it signified that
all things were then covered with shadows, and that the Jewish Nation was
separated from other people, according to the usual and common apprehension.
Its being rent by the power of heaven at his death, did signify that Jesus, our
true High Priest, was then entering into heaven, as to his Soul, and was about
to enter with both Soul and Body, as he did a little after from Mount Olivet.
For as the Jewish High Priest did enter once a year, with the blood of slain
Beasts, into this most holy place; So Christ by the virtue of his own blood and
the merit of his passion, did enter once for all into the sacred heavens,
causing all the ancient shadows to cease, Cloppenb. p. 137.
and to be rent in sunder, and making way for all Nations to become one people
to the Father. So that the rending of this Veil noted the removal of blindness
from the hearts and eyes of such as receive him by true Faith: and the way to
heaven was then laid open for us to follow him into the Holy of Holies; whither
our Heb. 6.20.
Forerunner is entered for us, even Jesus, made an High Priest for ever after
the order of Melchizedek.

In the next place, I come to speak somewhat of the excellent Ornaments of the
insides of the Oracle. The Walls were lined with 1 King. 6.16.
Cedar boards, ver. 18.
carved with Knops and open flowers, ver. 29.
Cherubims and Palm Trees, and all overlaid with ver. 20.
Gold. Now, although one 2 Chr. 3.6.
verse may be applied to the whole House, yet may it more especially be
understood of this most Holy place, which doubtless had the choicest and
richest Ornaments in this point, as we see it had in others by express terms.
Unto which the Jewish History does fully consent, as is before spoken in the
second Chapter.

The Floor also of this house and the Cieling were lined with 1 King. 6.15, 16.
ver. 30.
Cedar, and covered with Plates of 2 Chr. 3.8.
Gold, and the Gold was the Gold of Parvaim, that is of the Island Taprobane or
Ceilan, an Island of the East Indies, lying between 5 and 10 degrees of North
latitude: as the In Phaleg lib. 2. c. 27. and Canaan lib. 1. c. 46.
learned Bochartus has endeavored to prove.

Seeing then the Oracle did decipher the glorious heaven, the manifestative
place of the divine Majesty to Angels, and Saints glorified. Therefore, in a
word (because I have treated largely of the Materials themselves, when I spoke
of the Sanctuary) The Cedar which is odoriferous and imputrible may set forth
the incorruptible state of Saints, and the perpetuity of heavenly glory; and
the never-fading fragrancy of all their Graces, which shall then adorn their
blessed Souls. The Gold, the refulgency and shining radiancy of their bodies,
which shall be like the Mat. 13.43.
Sun; nay, like to Phil. 3.21.
Christ's most glorious body. The various Sculptures of Cherubims, Palm Trees,
and open-flowers, the Communion that Saints shall hold with the blessed Angels,
the Victory wherewith they shall be crowned; and the constant flowring youth of
Glory, which shall never wax old, but always be in a florid and beautiful
state. The various precious stones, the variety of Joys wherewith the life
eternal of Saints shall be for ever imbelished.

Whereas the Materials are the same with those in the Sanctuary we may note,
that the excellencies of Saints in Glory are but the full-blown flowers of the
buds of Grace; showing that Grace is Glory begun, and Glory is Grace perfected:
That Heaven does not change a Saint quoad speciem, in respect to his condition,
but quoad gradum, only advance him to a state of greater perfection in the
same kind, which shall never have end. When once our hopes shall be set ashore
in heaven, we shall satiate ourselvs with the river of Life, and drink in of
the Vision of his face, when we Ps. 17.18.
shall awake in his likeness. In Ps. 16.11.
whose presence is fullness of Joy, and at whose right hand are pleasures for
evermore.

That we may come to a conclusion of our discourse about this glorious Oracle:
Inasmuch as we have (with submission to the learned) probably conjectured, that
there was no light intromitted into this sacred place from without: it may hold
out to us, that when the Elements shall be melted with fervent heat, when the
heavens, being waxed old like a Garment, shall be rolled up like a Scroul, and
laid aside; the new Jerusalem shall have no Rev. 21.23.
need of the Sun or the Moon to shine in it: for the Glory of God shall lighten
it, and the Lamb shall be the light thereof. So that there shall be no night
there, no need of a candle, or of the radiant lamp of the natural heavens: For
Rev. 22.5.
the Lord God shall give them light, and they shall reign for ever and ever.

Of the Side-Chambers.
There were built round about the Temple, 3 stories of Chambers, besides 2 Chr.
3.
upper Rooms likewise over the Oracle, which were doubtless for the grand
Ornament of the building, and had their several uses, although the holy Spirit
has not expressly mentioned the services that they were designed to: though it
be very probable that (since the Priests and Levites are reported to have
brought, from the City of David, the Tabernacle and all the holy Vessels that
were in it, 2 Chr. 5.5.
and such Utensils not being used by Solomon) they might be laid up here. Most
absurd is the fancy of some Popish Writers, who compare them to the three
degrees of Chastity, in Married Persons, Widows, and Virgins; others of them,
to the three estates 1. of those that chastely use the conjugal band; 2dly, of
Prelates and Doctors of the Church; thirdly, of those who addict themselves to a
contemplative life, as Monks and Hermits. The very mention of these things is a
sufficient refutation before sober persons. If there were any Mystery in these
appendant Rooms, which we may consider as subservient to the great Type of the
Temple; let us have leave to reflect a little upon our Savior's Allusion,
which possibly he made to these Chambers, when he comforted his disciples with
this, that in Joh. 14.2.
his Fathers House there were many Mansions: if it were not so, he would have
told them, assuring them that he went before them to heaven to prepare a place
for them. By which we are to understand the Mansions of Glory, in that 2 Cor.
5.1.
building of God, an house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens: so
that when this bodily or earthly Mansion of our bodies, wherein our Souls are
now contained, shall be dissolved, we shall hereafter rise together and fit
together in Ephesians. 2.6.
heavenly places in Christ Jesus. Inasmuch also as we have observed these
Chambers to be repositories for all the Vessels and Utensils of Moses his
Tabernacle, we may thence learn, that the contemplation of Saints in heaven
shall be greatly refresht about the manner of worship, through which they
passed in the Wilderness unto Canaan; and that the Graces therein exercised
shall be the measure of their rewards: For their Rev. 14.13.
works shall follow them to Heaven, and they shall all be perfected and
completed in the fruition and vision of God.

SECT. II. Concerning the Mysteries of the Courts and Buildings, round about
the Temple.
IN the Historical discourse we find but two Courts encompassing the Temple in
the days of King Solomon. The first, or nearest to the Tectum or
covered-building (treated of in the foregoing Section), was called the Court of
the Priests, because the rites and ceremonies of Sacrifice were therein
performed. The other, called the outer Court, the great Court, or the Court of
Israel, was that whereinto the People of the Land of Canaan had free admission,
in case they were clean according to the Law.

Some speak of a third Court, common to the Gentiles, and therefore by
Christian Writers sometimes termed the Court of the Gentiles. But it could not
be Dr. Lightf. Tem. p. 93.
properly styled a Court, because without either Walls or Pavements, containing
it seems the whole compass of Mount Moriah, wherein the Gentile Proselytes
might stand and worship. Some good portion of which ground of the holy Mountain
(it is conceived) was encompassed with a Wall in the days of our Savior, and
was the place out of which our blessed Lord Joh. 2.15.
whipped the buyers and sellers, such not being supposed to have had admission
into the Court of Israel.

The state of the Gospel is accordingly applied to all these Courts, so called.
Among which, the outmost of all might signify Hypocrites and Formalists, who
appear in external shape as sacred worshippers standing in the open view of
Ordinances. Or rather, (because such Proselytes might come, some of them with
sincere and honest intention of heart, to worship) it might shadow forth the
state of such persons whose faces are set toward Zion, and enquire the way to
the Temple in the beginning of the work of conversion. The Court of Israel may
be applied and accommodated to the faithful Worshippers under the Gospel, who
are more fully and clearly acquainted with spiritual service, and draw nearer
to God in divine communion with him, and stand in a near enjoyment and fruition
of his presence. The inward Court was open only to Priests and Levites,
denoting the Church Officers under the New Testament, who present the spiritual
Sacrifices of Saints unto the Majesty of heaven, at the set-times of worship in
the public assemblies.

The body of the Temple had two more principal parts, viz. the Sanctuary and
the Oracle. Ordinary Priests of old were admitted into the former, showing the
secret spiritual communion which the godly Ministers of the evangelical worship
do hold and enjoy with his divine Majesty. From him they receive the bread of
life to dispense for the food of Saints. The Lamps of knowledge for
illumination of the understandings of the faithful, they enlighten at the
Golden Candlesticks within the Sanctuary.

Their Prayers, being perfumed with the aromatical and fragrant Merits and
Mediation of Jesus Christ, yield forth a sweet smelling favor of rest at the
Altar of Incense.

Finally into the Holy of Holies, none had access but the High Priest himself;
showing Christ's entrance into the Heavens, and mediating at the right hand of
the Father for us.

There be that consider only the Court of the Priests, and the covered Building
in this mystical notion: and apply all to the Heavens and Earth, according to
Josephus and Philo Judaeus, and the rest of the Jewish Nation, being ignorant
of the great and unspeakable Mystery of the Messiah in a spiritual sense. Such,
supposing the Court (which entertained both Beasts for sacrifice, and Men for
the service) to signify Pic. Mirand. praef. in Heptap. p. 4.
this World, and the state thereof, apply the Sanctuary to the starry Heavens,
and the Oracle to the supercaelestiall world. These conceits I shall remit to
their several Authors: Others conceive that the Court represented the Nations:
The Holy place, the Church, and the Oracle figured Heaven: so that the Court
was a Moulin. Prophecios p. 403.
figure of the State of nature; the holy place, the state of grace, the other
of glory. Others would have the Inner Court, (whereinto the Beasts were
brought, and the sinner having, confessed his sins over their heads) slain near
to, and after burnt upon the Altar: the music of the Levites, at time of
sacrifice and other services here performed) upon this account to set forth
Romans 12.1.
our confession of sin, praying to God for pardon, the slaying of beastly
lusts, the offering up of ourselves to God, as living and rational sacrifices
(those of old being but of unreasonable and brute Creatures) the works of
repentance, and washing in the laver of renovation, our solemn praise to God
for his manifold mercies: and, in general, the state of such persons, as since
the Revelation of the Word incarnate, do diligently serve and worship the
infinite Essence in such Gospel Ordinances, as were typified by the ancient
Ceremonies solemnized within this Court: whereof more particularly (through
divine permission in the 5th. Section of this Chapter.)

Those then which conversed without these walls of the immediate Worship of
God, and rested only in the outer Court, might possibly shadow forth such
persons under the new Testament, that are not yet emerged or come out of the
common state of man by nature: but are yet carnal and unconverted; or, at
least, as yet are not arrived into that intimate Communion and fellowship with
God, neither have sacrificed and dedicated themselves to his Majesty in holy
and close walking; but have some general knowledge, and common conviction, and
thereupon begin to look toward, and draw nigh to holy worship in the spiritual
Temple. For, as I humbly conceive, the Worship of the Jews, did not only hint
at, and shadow forth, some parts of the external form of Gospel Worship and
Ordinances; but did more principally aim at the spiritual good things of the
new Covenant, which were to be more fully given forth, after the appearing of
Christ, and the pouring out of the spirit upon all flesh in the latter days.

If so be the inner Court (wherein the Priests of old performed the principal
parts of legal worship) did set forth, in a shadow, the state of the
Gospel Ordinances, as it seems probable (and seeing that it was that very
Court, which was nearest to, and did incompass the covered Temple, without any
other intermediate enclosure; and whereas the body of the Temple did signify
the Church, the mystical body of Christ). Then might this Court consequently
(which we are now viewing) exhibit the constant attendance of the Evangelical
Ministry upon the Church; and moreover, that we draw nigh to God's Majesty in
our public services, through the exercise of their Ministerial Functions. For
as, of old, the Sacrifices annexed with Confessions and Prayers were managed
by the Priests, whilst the Song was carried on by the Levites: so under the
Gospel, the public Worship is to be solemnized by the instituted Ministers of
Jesus Christ. So that as the Sanctuary held forth the Communion of the
invisible Church, which she holds with Christ in a secret invisible manner,
unknown to the World: this Court might further exhibit the Ordinances of the
visible Church, wherein all the professed members (whether of the real
mystical body of Christ, or hypocrites and formalists) do join; and do all hold
an external Communion with God in them, and are under the same external and
visible privileges. Furthermore, (allowing an analogy to what has bin
spoken:) The great outward Court, wherein the Jews worshipped, might
accordingly hold out to us the visible Professors themselves, under the New
Testament, which draw nigh to God in those Ordinances, which the
Gospel Ministers (typified by the Priests) do handle and manage within, in the
inner Court. There yet remains a Conjecture to be mentioned of that famous
and learned Critic of our Nation, Mr. Joseph Mede, which I shall nakedly
propose, and resign up the censure unto men that are able, or are so immodest,
as to reflect upon the memory of so deserving a person in the Church, as to
Revelation-Mysteries. This candid and Reverend man, having resembled the Temple
to Christ, thinks there was some Chronical Mystery involved in the Courts, as
to the State of the Church, of Christ, in various times under the Gospel; and
conceives that the Inner Court might denote the State of the Primitive times
under Rome, while it was Pagan and Heathenish, while scorched and burnt in the
fire of persecution, by the cruel Emperors and their Officers. As to which
point the Altar in the Priests Court, seemed to denote the frequent Mede on the
Revel. part 2. page 3. Edit. Land. 1650.
Sacrifices of the holy Martyrs, whose Souls lying under the Altar, do cry Rev.
6.9, 10.
how long, how long Lord, holy and true, do thou not avenge our blood? etc.

This Altar (as the Rev. 4.1.
whole vision) was seen in Heaven, that is, in the Church: which is so called
frequently, whereas by Earth, the wicked and ungodly of this World, are meant
in those mystical pages.

The second or outward Court, he further conjectures to have been the shadow of
the State of the Gospel under Rome, Antichristian and Papal, for the space of
two and forty months. In the mensuration of the Temple therefore, we read of a
Precept given, to leave the outward Court unmeasured, being a place resigned up
to the Gentiles to tread underfoot, during the time prementioned: In a way of
worship (says Lightf. Templ. p. 6.
one) (even as the treading of Gods Courts in the like sense is spoken of by
the Prophet Isa. 1.12.
Esaias) and therefore commanded not to be measured, because of the numerous
multitude of Worshippers under the Gospel, which it could not in the least
measure contain according to its ancient limits. But to be trodden down (says
the former) in way of profane contempt, idolatrous Worship, and persecuting
fury against sincere and pure professors of the Truth.

Suffice it, hitherto to have mentioned some Conjectures about the Mystical
meaning of these Courts in this our view: wherein I shall not immodestly
presume to let loose the rains of fancy; but, with all humble submission to the
sober and godly learned, I apprehend the most genuine and least forced
interpretation of their typical signification (if there were any set Mystery
couched in them, as such capacious places) to be briefly this, That as the
inward Court was made for the Priests therein to perform the rites and
ceremonies of their ancient service, into which there was no admission granted
to the common people, unless when they brought a Sacrifice, and were to lay
their hands on the head of their offering, and to confess their sins over it:
so might it possibly denote and shadow forth a Gospel Ministry, which in the
various functions of the persons engaged in that sacred Office, should stand in
a nearer capacity of service, and approximation to God, then any other calling
or persons whatsoever. Further, as the outward Court contained within its
prescript limits, the ancient senes, when drawing nigh to God, beholding of the
Priests in their services within, and joining with them in the solemnities of
legal worship: In like manner, the faithful people of the new Testament, the
true inward spiritual Romans 2.29.
Jews, are next unto the Ministry, in public and solemn Ordinances, wherein
they come nigh to God under the Gospel. Now whereas formerly the Gentiles could
not be admitted into the Court of Israel, but were afar off without the walls
of the outward Court: Such might shadow forth the state of carnal persons
under the Gospel, or of formal professors, who give their presence in some
measure to Ordinances: but as the bodies of them under the old Law stood at a
great distance, so the hearts of these formalists under the new Testament, are
Isa. 29.13.
far from God. But since the outward wall of the great Court (which kept the
Gentiles in old time, from intercommuning with the Jews) is broken down by the
coming of Christ, who did appear (says holy Paul) for this end, Ephesians. 2.14.
(...), to dissolve, unloose, or take away the middle wall of partition, or
that wall which stood betwixt the Jews and Gentiles of old, Now all are brought
into one Court, into one body and fellowship, and are become coheirs of the
same common salvation.

To conclude, It is observable, that the great Court whereinto the twelve
Tribes did enter of old, was nothing considerable in its limits then, in
respect to what it was set out in its circuit by the Prophet Ezekiel, (whereof
I have spoken before Chapt. 3. p. 49.) nay in the Revelation of St. John, (as
was newly noted) it was left unmeasured, by reason of its quantity, and the
great number of worshippers as some have thought. The measures mentioned in the
Prophecy of Ezekiel, no doubt (what ever the other may denote) did signify the
great fullness of the Gentiles; and that the compass of the Church in
Gospel-dayes, should be marvellously extended. Wherefore we read in holy
Scripture, that Ephesians. 2.14.
Princes shall come out of Egypt, and Aethiopia shall soon stretch out her
hands unto God: that is, the Eastern Aethiopians of Asia, as Ps. 68.31.
Herodotus terms them, or the Inhabitants of Arabia, as a learned Lib. 7. p.
408.
Knight has observed; nay, we read of the men of Rahab (or leigh Rehoboth) and
Babel, two Cities of the Assyrian Empire, to be born in Zion. The former
Rawleigh Hist. part 1. c. 8.. 10.3, 4, 5.
Arias Montanus takes to be the same with Nineveh and called Ps. 87.4.
Rehoboth, for its vastness and amplitude. Nay, the Inhabitants of Philistia
and Tire, even the Nations that are on the North side of the Holy Land, as the
Phoenicians of Tire and Sidon; on the West and South, as the Philistims,
Egyptians; on the South-East and North-East, the Cushites or Aethiopians of
Arabia and Midian, and the people of Assyria and Babylon; nay, all Nations
shall come to the holy Mountain of the Church in the latter day.

Having brought so famous a throng of People from all quarters of the Earth,
within these Courts, we shall leave them ar their pious devotions; and consider
the walls wherewith these spacious places were encompassed. We read that these
Courts (especially the outer) were very strongly and desensibly walled by King
Solomon, signifying thereby the constant protection which is afforded the
Church by Jesus Christ the Antitype of that glorious King. Antiq. Judaic. p. 1.
c. 8. p. 18. edit. 1593.
She shall call her walls Genesis 10.15.
Salvation, [(...) In the name of Jesus] and her Gates praise: or else the Isa.
60.18. Zech. 2.5. Isa. 5.5.
walls may signify protection of Angels about the Church: as In Isa. Tom. 5.
edit. 1530. p. 27.
Jerome expounds that place of Isaiah, where the Prophet speaks of walling in
the Vineyard, building a Tower in it, and setting up a Wine Press. By the
Wine Press, he interprets the Altar, by the Tower the Temple; by the walls, the
guard of Angels.

Seeing also that great men are resembled to Isa. 2.15. and 41.15. Dutch
Annotat.
walls or Towers for the defense of a City: we may consider them, as reflecting
upon the Bulwark, or defense of Magistracy, which God shall raise up in the
Gospel-dayes, for the preservation of his Church and Ministry: there being a
gracious promise that Isa 49.23.
Kings shall be nursing Fathers, and Queens shall be n^r^^ng Mothers to the
Children of the new Jerusalem.

In several parts of these walls, were many strong and stately Gates erected:
We read that, in ancient times, in the Gates, or rather the Chambers over the
Gates of the Cities, the Governors and Rulers sat in judgment, and the
Sanhedrin or Jewish Council sat in some Chamber of the Gates of these Courts:
which might hint forth to us some spiritual Order, Rule and Government in the
Church of Christ, which should preserve the Church from ruin. Well did the
Rulers sit in Chambers over the Gates, to view all that passed in or out:
thereby noting, that where a holy, zealous, and true ordered Discipline is in a
Church, the evening Wolves of Heresy and the sub^le Foxes of error walk not on
the walls thereof: but because of these great and sad mischiefs, Judah
mourns, the Lam. 5.18.
Gates thereof do languish, and are black unto the ground.

The chiefest and most beautiful gate of the Temple-walls did look toward the
East; but yet was something lower then the rest (as Jerem. 14.2.
Ribera conceits out of Bid) ita ut exoriens Sol aequinoctiales sine ullo
obstaculo rad^os suos per ostia Templi, and Oraculi in ipsam Arcam quae erat
intra Sancta Sanctorum, mitteret: that so the morning Sun, (when cutting the
Equator in the beginning of Aries and Libra) might without any hinderance dart
his beams thorough the Gates of the Temple and Oracle, into the Ark it self,
which was seated in the Holy of Holies. I shall not intermeddle with that
conceit, built I suppose upon an apprehension, that the expiation day was at or
near that time of the year, when the Sun was in the Aequinoctiall: at which
time, the doors of the Oracle being open, might admit the Sun, when just upon
the Horizon, to shine upon the Ark. But when we consider the height of Mount
Olivet in the East, we may safely lay that small point aside, and subscribe to
this rather, that the East Gate was built low, that the Priest in the Solemnity
about the Red Cow upon Mount Olivet, Page 17.
might sprinkle of her blood toward the Temple, and look over this Gate through
the Porch, toward the doors of the Sanctuary.

Why the ordinary and most usual Gate for entrance, in the outer Court, and the
principal of the inward, faced the East; most do conceive to be for these ends,
viz. to oppose the Customs of Heathens, who made their chief Gates toward the
West, that these stupid worshippers drawing nigh to their Lightf. Temple
service. p. 192.
blind, deaf and dumb deities, might have their Idols as it were, arising upon
them out of the East, Number. 19.4.
with a salutifetous and cheerful view. Of this their situation, I have spoken
somewhat formerly, when viewing the Porch. But as to this, may be opposed the
saying of Herodotus concerning Ps. 115.5. Page 141. l. 46.
Asychis King of Egypt, that he built a Portic^ for Vulcan's Temple, (...),
toward the rising Sun or the East. Nay in one word with this does concur the
speech of Porphyry, tr^^^ing of the cave of the Nymphs in these words, (f)
(...) etc. (...). Pa. 104.
For what cause, etc. does he ascribe the South to the Gods? and not rather use
the East and West in this matter. Seeing almost all Temples have their Statues
and Entrances turned toward the East, that so those that enter looking toward
the West, may yield their honor and service to their Gods, standing with their
faces right against their Images.

All that I shall rejoyn to this of Porphyries, is, that possibly after the
Temple's erection the Devil might also follow that pattern: thereby the more
to ensnare his d^^uded t^ wo^shippers. For Strom. l. 7. p. 320. Edit. Heins.
Anno 1616.
Clemens Alexandrinus t^ls us, [(...) The most ancient Temples did view the
Western quarter of Heaven: so that those who stood with their faces toward the
Images, were taught to ruin themselves toward the East. But to conclude all;
Why the ancient Christians did worship toward the East, and erect their Temples
in that Posture as that the most sacred place (so repu^ed) should stand at the
east end, seems to be (says De Altar. and Sacrif. p. 94.
Molinaus) the hatred of the Jews who worshipped toward the We^^. [Veluerunt
ergo ^e teres Christiani hac nota a Judaeis discerni] Therefore the ancient
Christians were willing to be distinguished from the Jews by this note or
custom.

So that I cannot apprehend any great Mystery to be further couched in the
position of Solomon's Temple in such a manner as that the entrance should be
East, and the Oracle Westward; than to discriminate and put a difference
betwixt the Israelites and the ancient Heathens, as has bin before hinted in
ou^ discourse concerning the Porch of the covered Temple.

Whether or no this Eastern situation of the gates for entrance into the
Temple, might hint at the Income of Saints under the Gospel into spiritual
worship to be at first principally by the Converts of Judaea, and the Eastern
Nations; I leave to the consideration of the Learned. We know that Peter the
Apostle of the circumcision conversed much in and about the Eastern gate of the
Temple called Acts 3.2, 10.
Beautiful, wrought miracles, and concerted many to the Faith in the dawning of
the Gospel.

To proceed; The Principal We^tern gate led to the King's house (as has bin
declared in the foregoing History) to manifest the necessary connection between
Holiness and Royalty, the amicable co^respondence that ought to be maintained
betwixt the Temple and the Court. Certainly that policy is dangerous to the
State which is not founded upon piety. Kings must always remember to go up to
the house of God, and make inquiry at the Temple before they set their designs
on foot. The sword of Gideon will prove but a weapon made of lead, it the sword
of the Lord do not lead the Van of his Army. David when flying from Saul, takes
to him a consecrated sword 1 Samuel 21.9.
from behind the Ephod at 1 Samuel 22.19.
Nob, a City of the Priests, and proves successeful in evading the hands of his
persecutor. At another time when he was to fight against the Philistines, he 2 Samuel 5.19.
consults the mind of God, and at a second enqui^y he is commanded not to stir,
till he heard the sound of a going in the tops of the Mulbery-Trees: For then
did the Verse. 24.
Lord go out before him to smite the host of his enemies. Afterward in the
Temple-dayes godly Jehoshaphat 2 Chronicles. 20.4, 5.
sought help from God, and powered forth an ardent prayer against the
consederated Armies of Moab and Ammon. Good Hezekiah likewise being greatly
troubled by the great Army of Sennacharib, but more by his Chr. 32.17.
raising ^etters against the Lord God of Israel, goes up into the House of God,
and 2 King. 19.14.
spreads the Letters before him, and commits his Cause to his divine protection
to the terror and miraculous confusion of his adversaries, the comfort of his
subjects, and for an example to all future Princes to commend their lawful Arms
to the God of Battle. Happy are those Kings who before their enterprises seek
to the face of God. Blessed are the Courts of those Princes that stand within
the hearing of Temple Trumpets; and successeful are those Worthies that count
it their highest interest, to hold constant intercourse with Heaven.

But besides this Royal-gate, there were several others in the Western wall of
the outer Court of the Temple, and more (as far as we have any Scripture Light)
than on any other side: possibly, to denote the great and mavelous Income of
spiritual proselytes to the Gospel, from the Western parts of the World in
future ages.

There were likewise gates on the North and South, as before is rehearsed more
fully. So that on all sides there was admission for persons to the
Temple-worship: thereby signifying that many Psalm. 107.3.
from the East and West, the North and the South, should come and sit down with
Abraham in the Luke 13.29.
Kingdom of God. Behold persons coming from afar off, from the North and West,
with others from the Isa. 49.12.
Land of Sinim, or the Country of the Genesis 10.17.
Sinites Southerly of Jerusalem near Sinai, in the Land of Arabia. Nay God has
promised to save his people from Zech. 8.7, 8.
the East and West, and to bring them to Jerusalem, and there will be their God
in truth and righteousness.

As the Temple: So Jerusalem it self did signify the Church, Now the 12
Apostles are said to have their Rev. 21.14.
names written on the 12 foundations of the gates of the new Jerusalem. As by
whose holy and faithful Potter in 666. p. 100.
doctrine all other Christians have had their admission into the Church, and
are converted to the true faith.

It is observed that the lodgings of the Priests and Levites were assigned in
the Jerem. 35.4, and 36.10.
Gate-Chambers of the Temple-Courts: thereby premonishing the Evangelical
Church, what provision ought to be made for Gospel-Officers in reference to
habitation, convenient for their attendance upon divine worship. Moreover in
the sides of these Courts there were porched-walls round about, commodiously
fitted with seats for persons to repose themselves upon, as may be supposed in
the first Temple, not unlike those whereof we are sure to have bin under the
second: seeing our Lord himself acquaints us by the pen of the Evangelist, that
He Mat. 26.55.
sat daily with them teaching in the Temple. At another time we find him Mark.
12.41.
sitting over against the Treasury, beholding what gifts were cast into it. All
which conveniences of walking and sitting in places pleasant and defenced from
impetuous weather, might yield a glance of reflection upon that pleasurable
delight and sweet fellowship, that Saints should hold together under the Gospel
in communion with each other. There being no speculation so sweet in the (...),
the portico's of the ancient Philosophers, no converse so refreshful in the
shady walks of the ancient Temple-buildings, as are to be enjoyed in Gospel
Ordinances: no Dialogues so amiable as holy conference: no disputes so mild, so
grave, so convincing, and so little intermixed with the Checquer-work of vain
janglings: as those that are managed by meek and holy people in the
Gospel-Courts and Porches of our blessed Savior.

The most famous of these was called Solomon's Porch, by way of eminency, as
being on the East side of the outer Court, most Resplendent and Majestical, and
as it seems bearing his name in the days of our Lord: which though formerly
destroyed by the Chaldaeans, as to the super-structures, yet reaedified again
upon the very same foundations, which that glorious King had stupendiously
raised out of the Valley: whereof has bin treated at large in the 2d Chapter
foregoing. In this place Joh. 10.23, 24, etc.
our blessed Lord did Preach himself, and bespeak the people with so much
persuasive Rhetoric (no man ever speaking like him) that many believed on his
Name. Over these porched piazzo's were treasure-Chambers built in several
places (as is generally conceived) standing upon many stately marble pillars.
In the which were laid up provisions of several sorts for the use and service
of the Temple: showing that even under the Gospel also there shall be
treasures, and Mich. 4.13.
spoils dedicated of men's substance to the Lord of the whole Earth. The open
places of both these Courts (as has bin formerly mentioned) were admirably
paved with great variety of curious stones laid in checquered work. Showing how
decently all places in and about the Temple were fitted for use: what handsome
and splendid Ornaments were bestowed upon that beautiful Temple? what cost was
expended? what neat and cleanly provision was made for all the parts of that
ancient and legal worship. To remember us, surely, that though there be not
such holiness now to be ascribed to public places of worship, as was of Old;
and although the main stresse of our service lies upon the spirituality of our
hearts, and sincerity of our minds in drawing nigh to God; yet certainly that
as to the very places where we now worship, there ought to be care taken for
all decency and comeliness, so far as may not trend upon the border of
superstition. If so be the very Rooms of our Houses wherein we lodge and take
our repast, cannot be endured to be offensive by uncleanness. I^ for our civil
meetings, as in public Halls and Senatories, men take the strictest care to
have such places swept and garnished: how much less should public Oratories
and Temples for the Congregations of the Faithful to assemble in, be turned
into Garrisons, Prisons, or Stables. Furthermore,

We read concerning the Temple ( Dr. Light. p. 3. 12. and Temple p. 191.
as it stood in our Savior's days that all the Courts were curiously and
strongly arched under ground with double arches, one upon another: which was on
purpose done to prevent any secret making of graves in any of the Courts of the
Temple: much less the Temple it self. To Levit. 19.16, 18.
touch a dead body was a great defilment: or the bone of a man, or a gave. Such
a person was to be unclean for seven days, and there were appointed many
curious rites about his purification there observable. It should seem in the
days of our Lord, that ordinary burial places were without the gates of the
Cities or Towns. As may be observed about Lazarus his grave, that Christ was
not Joh. 11.30, 32.
yet come to the Town of Bethany, and yet was at or near the grave: but more
particularly about the raising of the young man of Naim, who was Luke 7.12.
carried out at the gate toward burial. The Mat. 8.28, 33.
Tombs likewise where among the possessed person conversed were without the
City: Lastly our Lord himself as he suffered Heb. 13.12.
without the City, so was he buried. For Joh. 19.41, 42.
in the place where he was crucified, there was a Garden, and in the Garden a
new Sepulcher of Mat. 27.60.
Joseph of Arimathea, and there was the body of our dear Lord intombed. Nay the
Common burial place was in the Valley of Kidron, as Jerusal. number. 204.
Adrichomius relates. Now whereas we read of the Kings of Judah buried in the
Garden of the Kings house: that was a particular Royalty, as among the Romans
they permitted their chief and most noble Patriots or Generals to be buried in
the forum, or other place designed within the Walls. As among the ancient
people of God, so neither among the wiser Heathens were Sepulchers permitted
within their Cities, much less in Temples. Plutarch in the clo^e of the life
of Aratus, says, that there was among the Sicyonians (...), an ancient Law
against it. P. 1922. Edit. H. Steph. Tom. 3. And Petitus in his explication of
the Athenian Laws, says, Tit. 8. Page 495.
Semper extra urbis pomoeria: that they always interred without the limits of
their Cities. As for the Romans the ancient December virate in the Laws of the 12
Tables commented upon by Cap. 3* Page 20.
Kittershushius, this is one. Hominem mortuum in urbe ne sepelito, neve urito.
Bury not, neither burn a dead body in the City. Whereof that commentator
renders 3 reasons, 1. That a public place should not be tied up by private
Relig^on. For they did exercise some kind of Religious piety toward the places
of their dead, The Lares, Larvae, and Genii or Ghosts of the departed being
esteemed sacred, 2. That the sacred places of the City he not polluted: which
agrees properly to our purpose, 3. Because the Air is vitiated by the
exhalations from dead bodies. In which point the Civillians would do well to
consult and recite the opinions of learned Physicians. To the same effect he
mentions the Laws of several Emperors, as Henr. Salmuth in Panciroli. de reb.
deperd. Tit. 62. p. 339.
Hadrian, Antoninus pius (in Jul. Capitolin) Gratian, Valentinian, Theodosius:
who gave express charge, especially the last, and sent out Edicts against
burying in Churches or Temples.

It seems also that the civil Law of the Romans had obtained among us here in
Britain in this matter: and had continued for many ages till the days of
Cuthbert the 11 Archbishop of Canterbury who obtained license of the Pope of
Rome to bury in Churchyards, as De presul. Angl. p. 65. Edit. 1616.
Bishop Godwin expressly mentions in these words [Hujus Pontificis precibus
indultum a Papa, ut in coemeteriis liceret mortuos sepelire in civitatibus
sitis, cum antea mos esset, cadavera extra pomoeria tumulanda deferre], At the
request of this Bishop the Pope did grant leave to bury the dead in
Churchyards, situate within Cities: whereas before, the manner was to carry
them to burial into places without the Walls. Nay it should seem that liberty
was also given to bury in Churches themselves at the same time; for this
Archbishop was Antiq. Britan. p. 61.
buried in his own Church: who died (as these 2 last cited Authors agree) A.
D. 758. So that this undecent custom (it seems) of inhumation in Weavers
funeral Monuments. p. 8. Somner's Canterbury p. 232.
Churches has not bin in England but a little above 800 years, and began
almost in the depth of Popery. Strange it is, that a thing to the Jews of old
so abhorrent and detested; unknown to the Primitive Christians; so strictly
forbidden by the Civil Nations in their Laws, should obtain among Christians:
in it self so unseemly, to the living offensive, to the dead unprofitable,
unless that we grant prayers for the dead to be availeable, a piece of worship
fit for such and as decent as the act of burial. It is somewhat inconsistent
with them that place such holiness in Churches, so to pollute them with graves:
for they are counted great pollutions in the Book of God. But I crave pardon
for insisting so long upon this Popish absurdity that is so riveted into men's
minds by inveterate Custom, that it is almost out of view of cure. For my part
I think it a great mercy for persons deceased to have comely and decent
interrement, and according to their quality, both lawful and commendable it is
to have Monuments of their Virtues erected over them: But why it may not be
done in a place walled in for that purpose without the bounds of Cities, as of
old it was customary, and is at this day at Newport and Yarmouth in the I Will of
Wight, good presidents for us: nay, and be less subject to impair, let others
Judge. Sure we are, The Temple of Solomon, nor its Courts and Precincts, knew
any such matter: but all its pavements were preserved in due Order and Method
unviolable.

Hitherto have we traced the naked buildings of that glorious Temple of
Solomon: It is now high time to survey the Mysteries of the particular rarities
set up in their due places within and without. Which with the gracious
permission of Gods holy Majesty, begging the silver influences of mount Zion, I
shall proceed to lay down in the succeeding Section.

SECT. III. The Mysteries of the several Ornaments and Utensils of the Temple.
IN the beginning of this Section, let the method of our procedure be digested,
which will fall out commodiously according to four several principal parts of
the building, wherein these rare Ornaments had their situation. Some whereof
were in the Oracle, others in the Sanctuary, some in the Porch, and the rest in
the Priest's Court.

The Excellent things that were s^tuate in the Oracle were, the Ark, the Tables
of Stone, the Mercy-Seat, the Cherubims, and, as some conceive, the Rod of
Aaron, and the Pot of Manna even as before they were laid up in the adytum, or
most holy place of Moses his Tabernacle. In the first place then, we are to
begin with the Ark, and endeavor to understand and explain what Mystery was
held forth by it.

But here, before I speak to the mystical signification of this rare and
admimirable Vessel, containing the stone Tables of the Decalogue; let me not
pass over in silence that which was observed by Heathens themselves concerning
the Oracle at Jerusalem, that it had within it no Image or repraesentation of
the divine Majesty which was adored by the Jews. In the first place Hecataeus
Abderita, Joseph. p. 1048. c. 8.
who flourisht in the 117 Olympiad, (as recited by Con. Apion. l. 1. p. 1049
Josephus) says concerning the Temple; (...). That there was no Image, nor
consecrated Statue, or other Donarium on the Walls at all. To the same purpose
do several others speak, whom I shall briefly recite; as Diodorus Siculus in
the Excerpta of his 40th book, where falsely affirming that Moses built the
Temple at Jerusalem, which is true of the Tabernacle its previous Icon, he
adds, that he shaped no Image or Statue of God, since that a humane shape can
in no wise agree to him. Very memorable are the words of Geogr. l. 16. p. 700.
etc.
Strabo as to this in hand, the words in Greek I shall omit: Who speaking of
Moses goes on thus, [(...) etc. For he declared and taught them that the
Egyptians did not conceive aright of God, while they likened the Deity to
Beasts and Cattle: neither the Lybians or Grecians assigning the shape of man
to God. But that alone was God (containing us all with the Earth and Seas)
which we call Heaven, and the World, and the nature of all things. Will any be
so presumptuous and bold, that is in his right Wits, to essigiate or shape an
Image of him, like to any thing among us? Wherefore, rejecting all carved
works, it behooves us to erect a Temple and holy house befitting such a Majesty,
without any figure at all.] Upon this account it is, that the Heathens, seeing
no Image or Statue at all in the Temple, could not tell what Deity it was the
Jews worshipped. The Athenians had an Altar [(...)] to the unknown God. Critias,
being reproved, by Triphon in Lucian, for swearing by the Heathen Gods, at last
swears [(...) etc.] by the unknown God at Athens, mentioned by Paus. At. p. 1.
lin. 34, 35.
Pausanias to have had an Altar at Phalarum, a Port of Athens: There (says he)
are [(...)] the Altars of the Gods called Unknown. In another place in his
Eliacks, discoursing at large of the many Altars that were near the Temple of
Jupiter at Olympia, he mentions one close by the Altar of Jupiter Olympius
called (...), The Altar of the unknown Gods. Wherefore Plutarch, in the life of
Crassus, professes his want of knowledge to discern what God it was* which the
Jews did worship. The place is worth reciting: [(...) etc. Crassus spent many
days in weighing the money of the Goddess which is worshipped in the Holy City;
Plut. in Cras. p. 1010. edit. H. Step.
and assigning a set number of Soldiers to the People and the Rulers,
afterward freed them for a sum of money, whereby he lost his credit, and was
despised by them. The first Omen (or token to him of bad success) was from
this Goddess. Which some take to be Venus; others, Juno; others the (first)
Cause and Nature supplying the beginnings and seeds of all things out of
moisture, and manifesting the principle of all good things unto Mankind. For
as they were going out of the Temple, first Crassus the younger stumbled at the
Door, and then the Elder fell upon him.] To this Inquiry of Plutarch, What the
Deity was which was worshipped at Jerusalem; the Answer of Triphon to Critias (in
Lucian's forecited Dialogue) may be returned; [(...): But we having found out
the God unknown in Athens, and worshipping him, lift up our hands to heaven,
and give him thanks that we are made fit to be subject and obedient to so great
a Power. Some glimmering knowledge of this great God had Socrates attained to,
and was thereupon scofft at in that scurrilous Comedy of Plut. (...).
Aristophanes, styled (...), or Clouds; as if he worshipped those Exhalations:
for which also at last he suffered death. Of whom Aelian, in his 2d. book of
various History cap. 13. Plato, in a set Apology for his vindication, and
Diogenes Laertius, in his life; Plutarch and Apuleius have enlarged. While we
in the mean while are fully assured by an Apostolical pen, that this our God,
of whom the World was generally ignorant, Act. 17.23, 24. etc.
made the World, and all things therein, being Lord of Heaven and Earth, and
dwells not in Temples made with hands. Wherefore, no wonder that the
Heathens, searching after what Deity was worshipped in Judea, yet sat down
with Phar. lib. 2. v. 590.
Lucian declaring the Conquests of Pompey, Cappadoces mea signa timent, et
dedita sacris
Incerti Judaea Dei, --
The Cappadocians at my Banners tremble,
And Jews who at the sacred feasts assemble
Of God, unknown to us, --
Hist. l. 5. p. 622. Lug. Bat. 1640.
Tacitus moreover treating of the Wars of Titus in Judea, takes occasion to
speak of the Religion of that Country, in most things very corruptly: but as to
our purpose at present expressly thus [Judaei mente sola unumque numen
intelligunt. Prophanos, qui deum imagines, mortalibus materiis, in species
hominum effingant summum illud, and aeternum, neque mutabile, neque
interiturum. Igitur nulla simulacra urbibus suis, nedum templis sunt.] The Jews
worship only with their Souls, and apprehend the Deity, to be but one. They
count such to be profane, who do fashion images of the Gods in the shapes of
men with perishing matter. The most high God they deem eternal, unchangeable
and immortal: wherefore they have no images in their Cities, much less in their
Temples.

Di^n Cassius shall bring up the rear, who in the 36th Book of his History
speaks thus, [(...) (...), etc.] They are of a diverie opinion (speaking of the
Jews) from all other men, as in all other things, so in their ordinary course
of life; but especially in this that they worship none of the other Gods, but
one they chiefly honor and adore: At that time ( viz. of Pompey's Wars in
Judaea) they had no image at all in Jerusalem, holding their God to be of an
inestable and invisible essence, exceeding all other men in his worship: unto
whom they had built a Temple of great bulk and exceeding beautiful. Hence was
it that the Heathens did so profanely jeer at the Jews, for lifting up their
hands to Heaven as if they prayed to the Clouds. So Petronius flouts at them,
Satyr. p. 211, ed. Franc. 1621. 8o.
Et coeli summas advocat auriculas, which we will translate to a more sober
sense, Let Jews to Him lift up their eyes,
Whose Throne is fixed above the Skies.
And therefore Juvenal, speaking how apt Children are to follow their Fathers
in Religion, be it what it will, says that some, having learned to be Jews,
Satyr. 14. ver. 98.
Nil praeter nubes and caeli numen adorant.
They worship naught but Clouds, or else
That God, who in the Heaven dwells.
Nay, David seems to complain of his idolatrous Neighbors, exprobrating to him
in his afflictions, Ps. 42.10.
Where is thy God: as if so be, he were no where, who did not appear unto the
eyes of men. Whereas invisibility is one of the choicest attributes of that
immaterial, uncompounded, spiritual and infinite essence: whom we ought to
serve with fear, and rejoice before with Ps. 2.11.
trembling. Memorable is that passage of Lucian in his Philopatris: which
Dialogue (because forbidden by the Romish Index expurgatorius to be printed,
for reasons best known to themselves, while they suffer every obscene Poet and
Scoffer at Religion, and therefore not to be found in their latter Editions) I
shall recite somewhat largely: [ Page 466. edit. Basil. 1503. To^. 4.
(...). I will teach thee what the Universe is, and who was before all things,
and what is the Systeme or frame of the Universe. Formerly indeed I suffered
the same things thou do: But since the Galilaean met with me, (one 2 Cor.
10.1.
bald on the forehead, and his Nose hooked) who had been carried up in the air
into the 2 Cor. 12.2.
third Heavens, Paul.
and learned thence most excellent things, did regenerate us by water, and
brought us into the foot-paths of the blessed, and redeemed us from the Region
of the ungodly: And I will make thee a man in truth, if thou will hear me.]
Which person that its meant of Paul, seems evident by Niceph. Callist. lib. 2.
c. 37. where describing of Paul, (as before he had our Lord, lib. 1. c. 40.)
among other things says, he was (...), etc. (...), etc. (...) bald on his head
and that he had a nose handsomely bending. Where breaking awhile from that he
speaks afterward of the Creation and other matters, in these words, page 467.
(...) (...). There was an incorruptible, invisible, incomprehensible light,
which dissolved the darkness, and dispelled that deformity by a word alone
spoken by it: as the Moses Exodus 4.10.
slow-tongued (person) has related. He established the earth upon the waters,
stre^ched out the Heavens, formed the fixed stars, and appointed their course,
which thou worshippest as Gods. He has beautifyed the Earth with flowers, He
produced Man out of nothing into being, and He is in the Prove. 15.3.
Heaven beholding the just and unjust, and, writing their actions in books,
will accordingly render to every one in that day, which he has appointed.]
Furthermore, that we may see the ancient Heathens had more knowledge of the
divine Essence, partly by the light of Nature well improved, and partly by the
light of Scripture and of the primitive persons carrying the Gospel about the
Nations, may appear by a pass^ge (...) little before the first citation: [(...)
etc.] Crit. By whom shall I swear then? Trieph. By the sovereign, great,
immortal God in the Heavens; by the Son of the Father; and the Spirit
proceeding from the Father: One in three and three in one.] A God certainly of
which there can be no shape or Image, and therefore surely the Gentiles knew
more then we ordinarily think they did, at least the wiser sort: and more they
might have known, had they been sedulously inquisitive into the matter. Because
that which may be known of God, was manifest to them: for God has shown it to
them. Romans 1.19, etc.
For the invisible things of him from the Creation of the World are clearly
seen, being understood by the things that are made, even his eternal power and
Godhead, so that they are without excuse. Manifold are the Testimonies of the
poor Heathens, concerning the unspeakable and inconceivable Essence of the
Deity. Among other, excellent is the Inquiry of Edit. Heins p. 222
Maximus Tyrius in his 38 Dissertation, Whether Statues are to be dedicated to
God or not? where he speaks thus, [(...). There is no more need to erect Images
or Statues for the Gods, then there is for good men to have theirs. In the end,
Page 226.
he draws toward a conclusion in these words; (...), etc. [For God is the
Father and Maker of all beings, ancienter then the Sun, ancienter then Heaven:
More excellent or before all time and age and every fluid Essence, a Lawgiver
ineffable, unspeakable by our voice, invisible as to our eyes; who not being
able to conceive aright of his Essence, let us fixedly endeavor (to search him
out) by words and names, living Creatures, figures of Gold, Ivory, and Silver;
from Plants, Rivers, tops of Mountains, and Springs, earnestly thirsting after
some knowledge of him.] Thus as Paul told the Athenians, that they did [(...)]
seek after the Lord, Act. 17.27.
if possibly they might feel after him (in the dimm twilight of Nature) and
find him out. Most remarkable is the Law of King Numa, commented upon by
Plutarch in his Life in these words; Plut. in Numa p. 118. Tom. 1. vit. Edit.
Hen. Steph. 8o.
[(...), etc. Besides, those Laws which he made concerning Statues or Images
are altogether a-kind to the sense of Pythagoras. For he did not conceive the
first principle of all things to be sensible or passible, but invisible,
immortal, and to be apprehended by the mind. Numa therefore forbad the Romans
to make any Statue of God, in the shape a of man or any other living Creature:
Neither was there among them in former times, any picture or carved Image of
God. But during the first hundred and seventy years (of the City), although
they built and consecrated Temples, and erected little Sacraries or Chapels of
wood: yet they neither fashioned nor dedicated any Image at all. Counting it a
profane thing to express more excellent Beings by such as are mean and low:
Neither did they think to attain to the knowledge of God but by their
Understandings.] To conclude, De imag. Deor. p. 39.
Chartarius reports out of Pausanias, that a Temple was erected to Apollo under
the appellation of Juventus, or youth in the Corinthian Territory within a
grove of Cypresses, where there was no statue at all, for a certain secret
reason, which his Author durst not produce. Surely if De EI apud Delph. p. 699
edit. H. Steph.
Plutarch's Etymology and gloss upon the name of Apollo be right, that it is
q. (...), not many, but one: showing that there can be but one only God, the
first principle and mover of all things, and that the first being must needs be
immense and infinite, without beginning or end, and therefore in continual
flourishing state: well did those Corinthians to consecrate a house to the
youth of Apollo, and add no statue at all. Though their darkness was greater,
the farther the line of Heathens descended from the family of Noah, where they
all were instructed by that Preacher of Righteousness in the knowledge of the
true God, and his proper worship.

But to come to an issue: Seeing then there was no manner of form or shape
within the Holy of Holyes to represent the infinite Majesty of Heaven: God
having most expressly forbidden it by his command, written upon the Tables of
stone that were laid up in that sacred place: Nay, the thing being attested by
Heathens concerning this very Temple, and they falling foul upon, and
condemning one another for this gross and stupid worship of any Deity framed by
the works of men's hands; what great reason have the Jews and the Greek Churches
and thesober Heathens, that any where do advance the light of Nature: (nay,
Turks likewise) to be offended at the Popish Idolatry, whose conversion is
greatly thereby obstructed.

Whereas God expressly forbids any Deuteronomy. 4.16.
graven Image, the similitude of any Figure; or the likeness of male or female
to be made to represent the Diety: Yet do the Papists permit and commend it as
expedient for the unlearned and vulgar people, that the Divinity should be
expressed in the Histories of Scripture that are painted in Churches. Now
although the Papists do not think the Picture or Statue to be a God, neither
did the wiser of the ancient Heathens: Synod. Trident. Sess. 25. p. 241. edit.
Rhotomagi. 1640.
although it is probable the Devil did speak through the Trunks of the ancient
Images, and so imposed upon them: as the Papists did by the Statues of the
Virgin in Cheapeside Cross to delude the common people: which with various
Trinkets were shown and exhibited to public view, by Thomas Lord Cromwell in
the days of K. Henry the 8th. and afterward to the fire: yet certainly for a
man to make use of a Crucifix to stand before him in prayer, although he do not
think it to be Christ, neither do worship that, but only use it as a
Commemorative figure, and a representation only to excite devotion: yet is this
no less then refined Idolatry, which in some measure is confessed by Durand
one of the Schoolmen, as produced by a worthy Divine of the Neighbour-Nation,
in these words. The truth is Rutherford Church Government, p. 164. edit. 1646.
Religious geniculation before the Image, or at the presence of an Image, as if
the Samplar were there present, is one and the same adoration given to the
Image and the Samplar. Where he prosecutes the proof of this assertion; That to
kneel before the Creature as a memorative object of God, is Idolatry. But of
this and the like points, it is not my business to treat here: only upon the
account of the Oracle being destitute of any shape or figure of the Divine
Majesty, I have hitherto discoursed; and shall now speak of the Ark, the first,
and principal Ornament of this most sacred place.

Of the Ark.
Lightfoot Temp. p. 261
Before we speak expressly to its Mystery, let us consider the place where it was
made, and how it was removed providentially from place to place, till at last
it was fixed in this glorious Temple.

Moses the man of God did make and frame it in the wilderness of Sinai, where
the Israelites Camped before the Exodus 19.2.
Mount of Horeb. For we read that the Tabernacle was reared up on the Exodus
40.17.
first day of the first month of the second year of their Exodus, of coming out
of Egypt; and further that on the Number. 10.11, 12.
20th day of the second month of the same year they departed from that place:
After which time the Ark marched along with them from station to station, till
at last it was set down at Jos. 5.10.
Gilgal, for there the Children of Israel kept the Passover the 14th day of
the Month at Even in the Plains of Jericho: a City of the Benjamites, that
stood betwixt Jericho and the River Jordan, and is accounted by Tom. 3. ad
finem de locis Hebr. p. 16. lin. 3. edit praefat.
Jerome to be situate two miles East of Jericho. After the Land was subdued, the
Tabernacle of the Congregation was set up at Jos. 18.2.
Shiloh, a City of the Tribe of Ephraim, which the forecited Page 24. lin. 19.
Father places at the distance of 10 miles from Neapolis or Shechem in the same
Tribe. We read of the Ark's being afterward at Shechem, Josh. 24.1, 25, 26. and
after that, at Mizpeh, Judge. 11.11. and 20.1, 27. and 21.1, 2. Whereby it
should seem that the Ark might be occasionally transferred from place to place,
though its ordinary residence was in the Tabernacle at Shiloh: which place the
forecited Jew in his Itinerary, page 50. fixes at the distance of three
Parasangs from Gibeah, (and from thence three more to Beth Nob) and further,
that it was but two Parasangs or eight miles from Jerusalem. 1 Samuel 4.1, 3.
From this Shiloh, in the days of Samuel, the Ark was fetched out of the
Tabernacle into the field, against the Philistines at Eben-Ezer, near Mizpeh in
the Tribe of Benjamin; and as far as yet appears to me, never came within the
ancient Tabernacle again: which possibly was translated to Nob, a City of the
Priests, as may be seen by comparing 1 Samuel 21.1, 4, 9. c. 22. ver. 11, 19.
several verses of Scripture: which may be conceived near Anathoth, as named
next in the register of some of the Cities of Benjamin in Neh. 11.32.
Nehemiah, and it stood as some think here in the time of King Saul. From hence
the Tabernacle was transferred to Gibeon, another City of Benjamin, which was
40 Stadia or Furlongs from Jerusalem, as Josephus attest, page 238. or at the
furthest at 50. if so be that be the same place with the former, which is
mentioned by the same Author, page 818. But when and from whence it was carried
thither it does not fully appear; but that it was here in the days of King
David and the beginning of Solomon is 1 Kin. 3.4. 1 Chr. 16.39. and 21.29. 2
Chr. 1.3.
plain and evident out of the sacred books, till it was 2 Chr. 5.5.
brought up to Jerusalem. But the Ark steered another course, by the special
guidance of God: For the Philistines having overthrown the Israelites in Battle,
took the Ark of the Covenant, and carried it from Eben-Ezer to 1 Samuel 5.1.
Ashd^d, thence to ver. 8.
Gath, thence to ver. 10.
Ekron, and having continued seven Months in the Land of the Philistius, it was
sent home to 1 Samuel 6.12.
Bethshemesh in the Tribe of Judah, thence to Kiriath jearim in the same Tribe,
called also Jos. 15.60. and 18.14.
Kiriath-Baal, to the house of 1 Samuel 7.1, 2.
Abinadab in the hill, and the^e it continued twenty years. This place is
called 2 Samuel 6.2.
Baaleh of Judah, and the house of Abinadab that was in ver. 3.4.
Gibeah, or in the hill; which Josephus reports to have been at the distance of
fifty stadiae or furlongs from Jerusalem the Head-City, page 907. Indeed we
find one City of Judah to be called Josh. 15.57.
Gibeah, and I suppose it to be the same exactly with Josh. 15.9. 1 Chronicles.
13.5, 6.
Kiriath Baal or Kiriath jearim, called Gibeah from its hilly situation:
although Vol. 3. p. 14,
Weemse would have it a Mistake in the Translation, wherein an Apellative is
made a Proper Name: But seeing as I said, we find a City of Judah, in the book
of Joshua, called Gibeah; possibly this place might have two Names. However
that be, it is clear that the place was Kiriath-jearim, which Ibid. p. 10. lin.
18.
Jerome in his Catalogue of Hebrew places, fixes but at 1 Mile distance from
Jerusalem, in the way to Diospolis or Lydda. From this Kiriath-jearim it was
brought to 2 Samuel 6.6.
Nachon's threshing-floor, otherwise called 1 Chr. 13.9.
Chidon, where Uzza was smitten, and the place therefore called by David
Perez-Uzza, and then it diverted to the house of 2 Samuel 6.10. Ver. 11.
Obed-Edom, probably in the borders of the same City, and there it stayed three
months; and thence at last it was brought to the Ver. 12. and 1 Chr. 15.29. and
16.1.
City of David at 2 Samuel 5.7.
Mount Zion in Jerusalem, about the third year of his reign over all Israel,
and in the tenth alter his Unction at Hebron, it being a Sabbatical year, as
the Usher Annal p. 52
learned Primate conceivs: and there it continued the residue of his Reign in
Zion, that is about thirty years, and in the eleventh of King Solomon's, when
the Temple was fully finished, it was brought 1 Kin. 8.1. 2 Chr. 5.2.
from the City of David, in a most solemn manner, into the glorious Oracle or
Holy of Holies.

Having traced the Arks motions from place to place till it came to rest in
Moriah's sacred Mountain, let me cra^e leave to add a few words about that kind
of wood whereof it was made.

Gregor. Lexi^. sanct. p. 401.
Some would have it to be a kind of excellent Cedar, whose wood will not
putrify, and is the smoothest of all other sor^s, excelling in strength,
solidity, shining, and beauty. Others a kind Avenari'
of Thorn, not subject to putrefaction. It seems indeed to have been of a very
durable nature by its continuation from Moses to Solomon, and thence to the
captivity, about 900 years. Others, take it to be [(...) mentioned by
Dioscorides de med. matter. cap. 74.] the Pitch-Tree; others, the Box. It could
not be the ordinary and common Cedar, nor Pine, nor Box, nor Myrtle: for it is
reckoned among them as a distinct species, under the name of the Schittah-Tree,
by the Prophet Isa. 41.18.
Isaiah. Jerome, in his Comment upon Esaias, says it was a Tree like to the
white-Thorn for color and leaves but not for magnitude. That it was the same
Tree which Lib. 2.
Diodorus calls the (...) I dare not affirm, which he reports to have grown in
that part of Arabia which the Nabathaeans dwelt in, that is, the posterity of
Nebaioth, so called in Scripture, whom l. 12. c. 17.
Pliny also places as borderers upon Syria. Yet truly, by the Balsame and
Palms which Diodorus reckons up to grow in that Country: it seems somewhat
probable that it was the place whereabout Moses was, at the erection of the
Tabernacle. It is observable to this purpose, that the Exodus 3.3.
Bush wherein God appeared to Moses was in the same Mount where afterward
(near to it) the encamping of the Israelites was fixed, at the making of the
several Vessels of the Tabernacle. Though by some it is thought to be a
Talmudists in Schindler.
Thorn that bore Roses: by others, a white-Thorn: and a Bramble, by others: Yet
Lib. 16. p. 767 edit. Casaub.
Strabo, out of Eratosthenes, tells us, that no other Trees grew in that North
part of Arabia, but a few Dates, the Tamarisk, and the (...) or a certain
prickly Thorn: which probably was the (...) Sineh or Bush of Moses, which might
be the same which is turned in Diodorus by (...), and by some counted to be a
sort of sharp prickly Cedar, and thought to be the Schittim wood whereof this
Ark was made. Mar. 12.20. Act. 7.30.
Our blessed Lord, and the Proto-martyr Stephen, following the 70, call it
(...), and this might be the same Tree, in a low and shrubby state upon so dry
and stony a place ^ Bellonius in his Observations when traveling that Country,
says there was but one sort of Thorn in all Syria: which is since brought over
into England, and nursed in Noblemens Gardens with us, if it be the right, and
termed Our Lord's Thorn. If it should be the same Tree with Moses his Bush, it
is very worthy our note to remember the Churches preservation in all the flames
of trouble and persecution, to have bin managed by God's presence in the Ark in
the midst of them. Indeed the Septuagint translate these Shittim Trees by
(...), of the Tree Thya, by L. 5. c. 5.
Theophrastus described to be tall, ever green, like the Cypress, of a solid
and sweet sented wood, smelling like Cedar, and not easily corrupted: Of which
Homer speaks, when he tells us of Calipso's Island that there was a fire Odyss.
5.
-- (...), That smelt of Thus all over the Island, whereof l. 12. c. 14.
Pliny treats at large. But to let that pass; whether the Schittah-Tree were
odorous or not, is not mentioned, neither is it affirmed of the Arabian
Schinus; which although some do not think to be this wood of ours, yet their
reason drawn from a report that it was not tall and big, is refuted by Cap. 18.
Lemnius in his History of Scripture Plants, where he says, It was, patula and
satis procera, spreading to a good height; and yet this last Author conceives
it was the Page 76.
Citrus, alluding therein to the Hebrew name. But if there were no Trees
growing in those Deserts of Arabia, where Moses then was, but only the three
forementioned, according to the Testimony of Strabo, it seems most probable
that it was that prickly Tree: seeing it was neither Tamarisk nor Date: the
name whereof, mentioned by Diodorus alluding to the Hebrew, may yield some
light. I know some count it to have been made of a wood that was brought with
them out of Egypt, because the Text says, that every man with whom was Exodus
35.24.
found Shittim wood, brought it for the service of the Tabernacle: but that
does not follow, that this wood did not grow in the wilderness, where they
offered it for the service of the Tabernacle, because the Text says it was
found with them.

But indeed it does not appear clearly and directly what sort of wood it was,
and therefore we shall suspend any peremptory assertion, and proceed to the
Mysteries of this excellent and rare Ornament of the Oracle.

The Mystery of the Ark.
THe Ark was the 1 Samuel 4.22.
Glory of Israel, and the Throne of God amongst his People: it was the sign of
his presence, and before it were Sacrifices 1 Samuel 6.14, 15.
offered, and in the Wilderness, when it set forward then Moses said, Number.
10.35. The Lord is in his holy Temple. Psalm. 11.4.
Rise up, Lord, and let thine enemies be scattered. Many are the fancies of men
ancient and modern, in this particular: But the Apostle has left us a Key
whereby to open this Mystery in some measure; since he expressly tells us, that
Heaven was signified by the Oracle. For Christ ( Heb. 9.24.
says he) is not entered into the holy places made with hands; which are
figures of the true: But into Heaven it self. So that, though as to the state
of the Jews it was the Symbol of God's presence; yet, seeing their
solemnities were Typical of things under the Gospel, we must enquire according
to the mind of Scripture what the Ark did signify, and it seems it must
represent somewhat in heaven where Christ is entered. Wherefore, laying aside
the recital of the various opinions of learned men in this point, which would
take up much time and paper, they being commonly mentioned every where almost.
The most naked and clear Rivet in Exodus p. 116.
signification of this holy Vessel was (seeing it contained the Tables of stone
or the Commandments) to represent the Divine Majesty: as he is the great Jam.
2.12.
Lawgiver to the whole Creation, and especially Ps. 147.28. Romans 3.2.
showed his Word to Jacob, his Statutes and his Judgments to Israel. For to
them were committed the Oracles of God: who required obedience to them under
pain of death. In the Ark therefore we are to look upon God's divine Majesty,
as making a Covenant with Mankind: whose Royal Law speaks on this wise Gal.
3.12.
THIS DO AND LIVE. Wherefore, when the Rev. 11.19.
Temple of God was opened in Heaven, The Ark of the Testament was made visible.

It was made of Shittim-wood, and overlaid with Gold; for which cause Cramer.
Schol. Prophet. part. 4. p. 78.
some apply the Ark it self to Christ, they say the imputrible wood noted his
Humanity, the Gold his Divinity: But these are niceties, and forced
Applications not grounded on Scripture; whereas, seeing the most proper meaning
of this Ark is of the legislative power of God, the Chest may be accomodated to
signify the constant and inviolable conservation of the pure and holy Laws of
God, given forth to the Church; seeing it was made on purpose to retain the two
Tables of stone, written upon by God's own finger, whose breast is the fountain
of the Churches Laws: and his constant presence there, noted that God did
continually eye his people, whether they kept his Covenant. Now, though the Ark
was to be abolished in due time: For in the latter days they shall no more
say, The Ark of the Covenant of the Lord: But they shall call Jerusalem the
Throne of the Lord, Jer. 3.16, 17.
and all Nations shall be gathered to it. For God will manifest his presence in
his Church in a more spiritual way. Yet during the state of the Jews, though
Solomon made most Materials anew, he made no new Ark: but brought that which
Moses made within the Oracle into the Temple; to note, that though some forms
of worship and circumstances may vary, yet the moral Commandments of God are
never to alter, nor the token of his presence as a King among his people. But
now, since that no mere man ever yet kept the Law of God perfectly, only the
Lord Jesus has fulfilled his whole Will: therefore God appointed a Mercy Seat
to be laid as a Covering upon the top of the Ark, seeing 2 Cor. 5.19.
God was in Christ reconciling the World to himself; not imputing their
Transgressions to them. The Law needed a Covering, by which our sins might be
concealed from God's sight, which was properly called a Propitiatory: because
God will not be satisfied as to our sins, and become propitious to us, but
alone through Christ, Ps. 40.8.
the Law being within his heart, who came to do the Will of God, and was the
Romans 10.4.
End of the Law for Righteousness to them that believe.

This Propitiatory or Mercy-Seat, the Covering of the Ark, was made all of
beaten Gold, to show the inestimable and precious virtue of Christs' obedience,
and it is styled by the 70, (...). To which probably the Apostle Paul alludes,
in the use of this very word of the Septuagint, treating of Christ's
Righteousness: whom Romans 3.25.
God (says he) has set forth to be [(...)] a Propitiation through faith in
his blood, to declare his righteousness for the remission of sins that are
past, through the forbearance of God. Holy John uses a word of near
consanguinity with the former, when assuring us, that Christ is 1 John 2.2. and
4.10.
[(...)] the Propitiation for our sins. This Golden Cover lay betwixt the
divine presence (as mentioned Exodus 25.22.
sitting between the Cherubims) and the Tables of stone within: showing, that
God through Christ alone looks upon us as accepted, and keeping the
Commandments. To this purpose the learned Lib. 1.. 4. cap. 7. part 2. p. 187.
Essenius in his disputations against Crellius the Socinian, has a good
Criticism upon this word, comparing it with other of the same termination, and
observes that such words do hold forth the effect and consequent sign of that
action, which the Verbs do signify from whence they flow, as the word (...)
does note the Reward of Victory. Some also do denote the place of the action:
so (...), the place of Hearing: (...), the place of Sacrifice or the Altar. So
(...), and, among the rest, this word (...), when it is used of the Cover of
the Ark, and may also be taken for the declaration of God's propitious good
Will to Mankind through Christ, who was signified by that Cover.

As for the Crown of Gold round about the Ark: it might denote the royalty of
God's Majesty in his Kingly power over the Church.

Its having Rings and Bars to be carried up and down, from place to place,
might signify, That the Commandments of God were to be declared by the Priests
and Levites to the People who were to bear it up and down upon their shoulder.
These Rings were not taken away from it, though in the Temple; to denote, That
if they broke his Commandments, the Symbol and Token of his presence should be
carried away from them.

On the Golden Mercy-seat stood two Cherubims, of one beaten work with it: and
on the ground were placed two more, (as is declared above in the Description).

The form and shape of the Cherubims, a thing not fully declared before, let me
obtain leave to speak a little here to it.

In the Temple described by Ezekiel, we read that the Cherubims which were
placed on the insides of it, between the Palm Trees, had two faces. Ezekiel. 41.19.
The face of a man was toward the Palm Tree on the one side, and the face of a
young Lion toward the Palm Tree on the other side. Whereby we learn that the
Cherubims in the Temple were of that form, which was represented to him, in a
Vision in the first Chapter, with four faces: two whereof are here expressed;
the other are supposed to be swallowed up on the inside of the Walls, and we
are to conceive them to have been the face of an Eze. 1.10.
Ox and an Eagle, on the other sides.

Ver. 5.
The shape and lineaments of their bodies were like to men; but differing in
four things, their heads, feet, and in that they had Wings, and were full of
Eyes.

Ver. 4.
The Vision, we read, came out of the North: and so the first and principal
face of that Cherub, of the four that stood in a square, looked Southward on
Ezekiel, and was the face of a Man: on the right side, the face of a Lion; on
the left side, the face of an Ox; and behind, the face of an Eagle.

Herein, as to the denomination of the right and left sides of the Cherubim, we
are to conceive of it as derived from man, who if he look to the South (as one
of these in the Vision) his right hand is toward the West, his left to the East.

Now then, seeing the principal face is the humane, as derived from the most
noble of the four Creatures; and whereas we read that the Cherubims on the
Mercy-Seat did look down upon it, let us conceive it to be meant of their
humane face.

That Cherub then, that stood on the North end of the Propitiatory, with its
man's face looking down upon it; had its Lions or right-side face Westward; its
Oxe-face Eastward, or down the Sanctuary to the Court of the Priests; its
Eagle's face Southward. The other Cherub, annexed to the Propi^iatory on the
South Side, had its Lion's face East, toward the Sanctuary; its Oxe's face
West; its Eagle's North; and its Man's face South, and downward on the Covering
of the Ark.

The two Cherubims which stood upon the ground, and were of Solomon's making,
looked with their faces toward the Sanctuary Eastward, as was spoken to supra
page 61: which, If we apprehend (as it is most probable) to be meant of their
humane faces; then did their right side or leonine face look Southward; their
face like an Ox on the left side, Northward; and the Eagle-face Westward.

But as to these appearances, it is probable that they were not faces, carved
upon four sides of one head; but as it is observed by Temple in Christ's time.
p. 245.
Dr. Lightfoot, speaking larger of this matter: they had four distinct heads
arising from the Neck, as the words of the eleventh Verse seem clearly to
import, (...) thus rendered by Arias Montanus (...) Et facies eorum and alae
eorum disjunctae desuper: Both their faces and their wings were disjoined
upward. So the word (...) is used generally, to sever, Judge. 4.11. and to
divide, Genesis 10.5.

Their wings were six, as the Prophet Isa. 6.1, 2.
Esaias numbers them, in respect to the Seraphims, the same with these, for it
was a Temple-Vision: with two he covered his face, with two he covered his
feet, and with two he did fly. The like we read in the Rev. 4.8.
Revelation of St. John, of the four Beasts that were about the Throne. It Is
true, it cannot be inferred directly from the Vision of Ezekiel, in the first
Chapter, that the Temple-Cherubims were of the same form with his there
described. But a very probable conjecture may be thence raised upon this
account, that as he describes there the Firmament like Crystal, and very
terrible, which was over the heads of the Cherubims: Ver. 22.
and upon that Firmament, a Throne of Sapphire; and in the Throne, the
appearance or likeness of a Man: From his Loins upward the appearance was of
fire of the color of Amber, and downward as bright flames, Ver. 27. and cap.
8.2.
and round about the Glory was like the Rainbow. This was no other then the
Throne and Seat of God's Majesty, as he was pleased in a Vision to represent it
to the Prophet: So had the Lord his Seat and Throne upon the Wings of the
Cherubims over the Ark.

But whereas there is mention made of cap. 1. ver. 16. cap. 10.9.
four wheels of the color of Beryl within the four living Creatures, (For so
Cornel. A-lapide in Ezec. c. 1. p. 16. edit. Paris 1622.
A-Lapide most properly places them: For the Prophet having fully viewed and
described the Cherubims, seems to spy as it were beneath between their legs
upon the Earth these wheels ver. 15. as fitted to sustain the Chariot of the
visionary Glory. Besides, cap. 10. ver. 6. ver. 11.
the fire was within the wheels which were within the Cherubims, as the vulgar
Latin translates it, and so the Syriack also. Besides in the 11th ver. the
wheel is said to follow the face, that is most probably of the Cherubim.) In
the like manner the Ark, God's Throne in the Temple, though we read not that it
had wheels; yet there is somewhat allusive to it, in that there is mention made
of a 1 Chronicles. 28.18.
Chariot of Cherubims, wherein God's Majesty is said to ride: Nay, the Throne
of God is expressly said to have wheels, Dan. 7.9.

Further, as the Throne of God in heaven, is described by John: (which was
shadowed forth by the Oracle as has been declared) we read of four beasts like
to those in Ezekiel, having six wings.

In these excellent visions there seems strong allusion to the form, shape,
and accessory Ornaments of the Temple-Cherubims: although I confess they do
not necessarily evince it.

The remaining description of their c. 1. v. 8.
having hands between their wings, and that their whole body, backs, hands, and
wings, were full of c. 10.12.
eyes, and of their See their picture in A-Lapide's title to Isaiah.
feet being like Calvesfeet: must be built upon the sametion

But to leave the description of them: and proceed to the mystical exposition
of the Cherubims, in whatever form it was that they were made.

By the former Key we must proceed to open the Mystery of these Cherubims. For
having asserted and manifested, by the Epistle to the Hebrews, that the Oracle
wherein they stood, did typify heaven whereinto Christ is entered once for all
to make intercession for us: it seems we must interpret these curious
Attendants upon the Ark, of some Persons that wait upon God's Majesty and
Christ in heaven. To this end and purpose the Apostle Peter leads us by the
hand into the explication of them, telling us that [(...)] the sufferings of
Christ, and his mediation for us under the Gospel, and the sending the Spirit
from heaven, are such, (...), as into which the Angels desire earnestly to
stoop down and look into, ^s they did of old upon the Mercy-Seat.

But before I proceed to enlarge in this point, I must lay one Objection out of
the way: wherein some labor to show that the four living Creatures in Ezekiel,
and the four beasts in John, are not to be meant of Angels, especially in the
last, (which they deem parallel to the former); for two Reasons.

1. Because Angels are mentioned as distinct from the Beasts, Rev. 5.11. and so
Rev. 7.11.

To which I answer, That it does not follow, that therefore the four Beasts are
not Angels, because they have not the same denomination with the rest; but the
name of Beasts: For this name is given to them by way of allusion to the
figures of them mentioned in the ancient Visions of Ezekiel: which are
generally, by the most learned Interpreters, expounded of Angels, who, for
their Eyes and Wings, their wisdom, knowledge, and ala^rity to do God's Will,
are so resembled. So that although there is mention made of many Angels round
about the Throne besides these: even as in the Temple-Walls there were carved
Cherubims, and on the Veil likewise; such might denote the wonderful company of
these winged Messengers, that are dispatched as ministering Spirits for the heirs
of salvation: yet these might denote the constant attendance of some of the
Angels nearer the Throne; such as did give the seven Golden Vials to seven
other Angels, Rev. 15.7.

But 2ly, Whereas the Beasts together with the Elders are alleged to have said
that they were redeemed to God by the blood of the Lamb: Rev. 5.9.


To that I answer, That the Angels may in some sort count themselves happy by
the benefit of Christ's blood, as to conservation in their Estate, being called
elect Angels: 1 Timothy 5.21. Ephesians. 1.22.
and Christ himself said to be a head to principalities and powers. Besides, if
we strictly examine the Grammar of the eighth verse in Rev. 5. the Text says,
Every one of them had Harps and golden Vials, where the words in the Greek are
[(...)] in the Masculine Gender, referring to (...) the Elders, the more
immediate Antecedent, and not to (...) or the four Beasts which is the Neuter
Gender. Accordingly in the Temple at the time of Sacrifice, in which the
Allusion harpeth, we know that the Levites sang and played with Instruments
according to their 24 Courses in which they did Minister: which denoted the 24
Elders. But I shall not rigidly insist upon this: although we find a set number
of sealed ones harping before the Throne and the four Beasts, Rev. 14.3.
and the 24 Elders in another place: it being very improper to assign the
transmission of the work of the pouring out the seven Vials to Angels, by the
Ministers of the Word round about the Throne, as was mentioned cap. 15.7.

Psalm. 68.17. Act. 7.53. Gal. 3.19. Heb. 2.2. Mat. 18.10.
Wherefore seeing that in Scripture the Angels are mentioned to be near God. The
Chariots of God are 20000, even thousands of Angels, the Lord is among them as
in Sinai, in the holy place: who gave forth the Law by the disposition of
Angels; and who are they that always stand before the face of our heavenly
Father, but those glorious Angels?

Their faces then, of a Man signified Wisdom: of a Lion, boldness and courage:
of an Ox, laboriousnesse, industry, and patience: of an Eagle, swiftness and
alacrity in performing the Will of God.

1 King. 8.7.
Now, although I must confess, one place imports clearly, That the
Temple-Cherubims had but two Wings: yet to speak by allusion to the other
places mentioned: With two Wings they cover their faces, as being not able to
behold the radiancy of divine Glory: with two they cover their feet, that is,
in a modest expression what may be guessed at, showing that the Angels are not
pure in his sight: with two they flew on the messages of God.

They were full of eyes, showing the acuteness, perspicacity and sharpness of
sight: Zec. 4.10.
they are the eyes of the Lord, that run to and fro throughout the Earth.

They had Calves feet, dividing the hoof, alluding to the clean Beasts in the
Levitical Law: so that, though three of their shapes were bestiall, as thereby
denoting some excellent properties in the Angels which we find in each of these
Beasts, whose faces they bore: and although the Lion and the Eagle be unclean,
yet the feet did show that these Creatures were clean: that is, holy and
unspotted Angels standing before the Throne.

Cramer. schol. Proph. part 1. p. 348
Some speaking of the Cherubims on the Ark expound them of the two Testaments
looking upon Christ: But we shall let pass that and many other conjectures in
silence, and speak only to that of Angels.

Their looking one toward another, might hint forth their intuitive knowledge,
mutual love, concord and harmony. Yet as they look down on the Exodus 25.20
Mercy-Seat, it denoted, first their inability to behold directly the Glory of
God's face who dwelt between their wings. But as the Glory of God did reflect
upon the shining golden Mercy-Seat: so they beheld it; to note that the very
Angels themselves cannot see the face of God and live, unless as it is
reflected by Christ the Mediator.

In the Temple there were two more then those upon the Ark, which it seems
stood upon the ground. Unto which four it is probable that St. John does allude
in his Revelation, concerning four Beasts near the Throne, of which we touched
before. But why the number was increased in Solomon's days, it is hard to say,
Weemse vol. 3. part 1.
unless it might be a Typical Prophecy of the increase and augmentation of the
Church after the true Solomon should appear: and consequently, that on the
Churches behalf more Angels might attend the Throne to carry the manifold
Messages of Mercy and Goodness from the Throne of Grace toward the increased
number of the Faithful. And indeed, it is worth the minding, that these two new
Cherubims in Solomon's Temple stood with their Wings stretched out over the
other two, and with their faces looking downward toward the Temple, Heb. 1.14.
declaring the readiness of their posture to be employed as ministering
Spirits, for the heirs of salvation in the mystical body of the Church.

Besides these things, In the days of Moses was laid up within the Oracle the
Deuteronomion or Book of the Law: But whether or no in the Temple, Deuteronomy. 31.26.
2 Kin. 24.8.
it cannot be decided; yet under Josiah's famous Reformation, Hilkiah the
High Priest found the Book of the Law in the House of God, 2 Chr. 34.14.
given by Moses. But whether or no the (...), or a Transcript, or what part of
the house it was found in, it is not expressed. If it were laid in this Oracle,
it signifies, That all tha Laws of the People of God, both ceremonial and
judicial as well as moral, do flow from him, and continue always before him.

As for the Pot of Manna, which we read of in Moses's Tabernacle, it seems
probable it was brought up to the Temple by that expression, 1 Kin. 8.4.
that All the holy Vessels that were in the Tabernacle did the Priests and the
Levites bring up; and besides, Exodus 16.32, 33.
at the first it was commanded to be laid up by the Testimony (that is the Ark)
to be kept for the future generations.

That Manna did Typify Christ, is a most clear and generally granted assertion:
Seeing our Lord applies the Manna to himself, Joh. 6.32, 48. etc. and the
Apostle in the 1 Cor. 10.3. as he calls it spiritual food, and the Water out of
the Rock, spiritual drink, applies it to Christ expressly; who is called (...),
Rev. 2.17.
Hidden Manna, and so termed in reference to the Type: for first of all, a Number.
11.9.
Dew fell upon the ground, and the Manna upon it. Then upon the Manna lay
another Dew, for when the Exodus 16.14.
Dew was gone up, there lay a small round thing on the face of the Wilderness:
So it seems it lay between two clean sheets of Dew. Besides, it was literally
hidden also; For a Homer of it was laid up near the Ark. The Soul that inwardly
feeds upon Christ in the promise, has food the World knows not of, and his
Col. 3.3.
life is hid with Christ in God.

It denotes then that Christ in the food of life, and as It came down from
heaven, so did Christ in his Incarnation. But it was carried into the Oracle
the Type of heaven: to show, that Christ after his Incarnation is ascended up
to God again, and as it was put in a golden Pot, a Vessel assumed (for bodies
are sometimes called 1 Samuel 21.5. 2 Cor. 4.7. Romans 9.22.
Vessels in Scripture) so the golden Pot might denote the unspotted and pure
Humanity.

But here, before I proceed: seeing we have food laid up in the Oracle, and, as
we shall see anon, (in the Sanctuary) there was bread on the Table: let us
inquire what might be the difference. I answer, This Manna did signify Christ,
the true sacramental bread, the Joh. 6.51.
living bread. The Shewbread in the Sanctuary denoted the doctrinal Bread, or
bread of the Word, given forth by the Priests and Ministers to the People:
Whereof more anon.

Let Us then compare this Manna with Christ, the true Bread of Life.

1. Of the Name of Manna there are three accounts usually given.

The first Derivation is from (...) numerare, to number, distribute, or set out
a portion. For every one had his Exodus 16.16. Ver. 18.
Homer of it in a day. He that gathered much had nothing over, and he that
gathered little had no lack. That is, when the Father of the Family came to
distribute a Portion to each, he set out a Homer to every head. To which the
Apostle Paul alludes in the citation of this place, when exhorting the richer
among the Corinthians to help the poor out of their abundance, that there might
be 2 Cor. 8.14.
equality: as of old among the Israelites, God would have those that gathered
more Manna then others, to supply the want of such who had gathered less. So
among Christians, God would have those that are rich by his blessing on their
labors, to assist the mean and poor with their riches. But whereas Exodus 4.16.
our Translation says, The People shall go out and gather a certain Rate, a
Dr. Gell. on the Pentateuch. p. 224 etc. Ver. 16.
learned man rendering the words more strictly according to the Original [(...)
The Word of the day in its day] conceives that the Spirit of God points at a
mystical Underdanding of the Manna, and that it did signify the bread that was
to come down from heaven; and accordingly ver. 16. where we translate [This is
the thing] he following the Hebrew praecisely, (...) translates it, This is the
Word; and cites Arias Montanus turning it, Hoc est Verbum; the Vulgar, Hic est
Sermo; the Seventy, (...); and the Chaldee paraphrase, (...) Hoc est Verbum,
This is the Word, and in the Verse before, (...) This is that Bread, as our
Lotd speaks of himself, Ver. 15.
I am that Bread (...), even the Bread of Life.

A second derivation of the Word is from the same root (...) parare praeparare;
to prepare or provide: It being such a Bread as was prepared of God without the
Israelites toil and labor.

The third and most probable is from the Interrogative in the 15th Verse, (...)
Man-hu, Ver. 15. Deuteronomy. 8.3.
Quid hoc, What is this? For they knew not what it was. So Moses told them
afterward: He fed thee with Manna, which thou knew not, neither thy Fathers
etc. and verse. 16. He fed thee in the Wilderness with Manna which thy Fathers
knew not. There be that have mentioned a fourth from (...) Donum, as a gift of
God. Joh. 4.10.

On all these accounts Christ answers to Manna: For as that was given out by
portion; so to every one is given Grace, Ephesians. 4.7.
according to the measure of the gift of Christ. As that was prepared and Neh.
9.20.
given by God; so it is the Father (says our Lord) that Joh. 6.32.
gives us the true bread from Heaven. Lastly, As the Israelites knew not Manna
to be the bread, which God had Exood. 16.12.
promised to give; So neither did the Jews in our Lord's time know him whom the
Father had Joh. 6.27.
sealed and sent: For they Ver. 41.42.
murmured at him, because he said, I am the bread that came down from Heaven:
and they said, Is not this Jesus the son of Joseph, whose father and mother we
know? How is it then that he says, I came down from Heaven?

Secondly, As to the Quantity or bigness of each grain of Manna, Exodus
16.14.6.31.
Behold upon the face of the Wilderness, there lay a small round thing; as
small as the hoar-frost on the ground and it was like Numb. 11.7.
Coriander-seed, which some have translated by Mustard Seed: but the Greek
(...) in the Lxx: does confirm our Translation. However in its being compared
to congealed drops of dew and Coriander-seed: we see how small and contemptible
a thing it was, to the outward eye. So was Christ despised of the world and
rejected of Isa. 53.3:
men.

Thirdly, The Figure or outward shape of Manna was round, as we read in that
verse of Exodus 16. Whereby some would have the perfection of Christ to be set
forth by that capacious Figure. But it is not good to fetch blood out of Types
by too much squeezing.

Fourthly, The color of Manna. It was like Coriander-seed, for its littleness,
and Exodus 16.31.
white, the color thereof being as the Numb. 11.7.
color of Bdellium. The seed of that Coriander which grows with us, when ripe,
is of a whitish color, tending to yellow. Some report, that its color is not
white, to wit, of such as grows in the Eastern parts of the world; and
therefore In veec (...)
Pagnine citing a Rabbi conceives that the Text must be thus pointed and
paraphraz'd. It was like Coriander-seed, (that is) for its littleness and
roundness, and it was white, not that it was like to Coriander for color, For
its color was as Bdellium. Some out of l. 12. c. 9.
Pliny expound this Bdellium to be the gum of an Arabian tree: But its plain by
him that the tree and the gum was black, but transparent, being of a dark-red
turning to Wicked Antedotarm p. 371. Edit, 1642.
black, and so cannot be the thing this Manna is compared to. Others, because
the Lxx. do translate (...) by (...) conceit it to have been of the color of
Crystal, transparently white. But others will have it to be a Pearl-Margarite
white and round, such as we sometimes find in shellfish. To which purpose
there is a story related by a Jew in his Benjamin Itinerar. page, 105.
Itinerary, that on the 24 of Nisan, they take rain when falling upon the
waters, and shut it up in a vessel, and let it down to the bottom of the Sea:
then about the middle of the month Tizri, they let down men with ropes and
bring up the vessel, and finding little creeping creatures in it, they cut them
open and take out this Pearl, which they call Bdellium. It seems by the
coasting of his journies, that this place was not far from Ormuz near the mouth
of the Persian gulf; It was a Town on the Arabian or west side of that gulf
Purch. Pilg. part. 1. page 237.
more North then the Island Baharem. Although its more then probable that the
foresaid story is corrupt, yet Polon. Polyhist. cap. 56. p. 432. ed Lug. Bat.
1646.
there was a sort of shellfish taken up thereabouts, wherein they found these
Pearls, and called them by the name of Bdellium: and that which is remarkable,
that the next place in the Jews Itinerary, Ammian Marcellus. page 172.
is (...) to Havilah, Genesis 2.12.
the place where (as Moses tells us) was found the Bdellium and the Onyx stone.
From all which we learn, that the grains of Manna were round, some what
transparent and Barthol. de luce. animal. p. 132.
white.

To apply it briefly to Christ. Whiteness of old was the Emblem of innocence,
sincerity, and beauty. Innocence; and therefore there runs a promise, that when
God pardons his people Isa. 1.18.
their sins shall be as white as snow; so the Saints that are made Priests unto
God, are resembled in their glorified estate, to be habited like the Priests of
old, in Rev. 7.13.19, 18.
white sinnen.

Sincerity and Integrity; and therefore the Judges of old rode upon Judge. 5.10.
white Asses. And in the Vision of Daniel, the Ancient of Days coming to
judgment, is represented with a garment as Dan. 7.9. Rev. 20.11.
white as snow, ha^ing a white Throne set for him. For Beauty: the mixture of
white is a great Ingredient of beauties Panegyric. My Beloved (says the
Spouse) is Cant. 5.10.
white in the first place, and also ruddy; And the other side the Bridegroom
commends his Spouse to be Cant. 6. 1 Pet. 2.22.
fair as the Moon. In all which respects, Christ is the chiefest among ten
Thousand * an unspotted Lamb; Innocence and Purity being fully in him.

Fifthly, As to the taste of Manna, it was like Exodus 16.31.
wafers made with honey, and like fresh oil. Which Ainsworth conceits to be
thus understood: that when it was fresh gathered and uncooked, it tasted like
sweet Wafers: but when baked or otherwise prepared, it tasted like oil. For its
pleasant and most delicious sweetness, Numb. 11.8.
Nonnus in his Paraphrastical Version of John, calls it the bread, (...) of
Honey dropping snow. In another place (...), famous hony-flowing Manna, and
(...) the bread of Heaven, or, as the Psalmist, Angels food. Whatever Manna was
to the Israelites: sure we are, nothing so sweet and pleasant to a gracious
soul, as the Cant. 1.2.
kisses of Christ's mouth, for his love is better then wine. O taste and see,
says the Psalmist, that the Joh. 34.8.
Lord is good. His mouth is most Cant. 5.16.
sweet, yea he is altogether lovely; and this they cannot but experimentally
affirm, if so be they have 1 Pet. 2.3.
tasted, that the Lord is gracious. How Psalm 119.103.
sweet are thy words to my taste, cries David, yea sweeter then Honey to my
mouth?

1. Manna descended from Heaven in a miraculous manner, Such was the birth of
Christ: his Divine Nature he brought from above, his humane body was produced
by the unspeakable Luke 1.36.
power of the Holy Ghost. Manna was divided equally among the Israelites: So
Christ gives out himself without Act. 10.34.
respect of persons: the meanest may have as great a portion in him as the
greatest.

3. Manna was a plentiful food, none wanted; but all had it fully and freely.
Of his John 1.16.
fullness have all we received, even grace for grace. Its called the Psalm 73.24.
Corn of Heaven, Angels bread: not as if it fell like crumbs from their Table:
but as descending from Heaven their habitation; or, as some think, because it
was dispensed by the ministration of Angels: or so called rather by way of
excellency, that if Angels were to feed, they would like Manna; this Ambrosia
would suit their palate.

It fell in the night or toward morning. Our Lord was born in the Luke 2.8.
night, in the night of Jewish Ceremonies, but toward the dawning of the
Gospel-morning. Whereof Paul speaks Romans 13.12. Dr. Tailor of Types: page
, The night is far spent, the day is at hand.

5. It fell round about the Camp of Israel. The food of life is no where to be
found but in the Church.

It was mere gratuitum: a gift of Grace to Israel, they plowed not, sowed not,
planted not for it. No labor, no merit of theirs procured it. Adam indeed
might get his bread with the sweat of his brows: but if Angels sweat out their
hearts, they could not obtain this bread without a free gift of Grace. It Is so
with Christ; all the good nature, and moral honesty in the world, cannot of
itself procure one glance of love from God, not one smile of Grace through
Christ. It Is of Ephesians. 2.9.
gift, that no man should boast. For Romans 3.27.
boasting is excluded by the Law of Faith.

It was a miraculous food its beyond the limits of nature to produce it. All
the Application of Actives to Passives, will yield but an abortive Birth. I may
apply hither that expression of Job, (a) Who has begotten these drops of dew?
Out of whose womb came Manna, and this bread of Heaven, who has gendred it? In
like manner the coming of Christ out of his Father's bosom was a miracle of
love. To reconcile Justice and mercy each to other, Job. 38.29.
was a miracle of Wisdom. To spare the sinner and kill the sin: A miracle of
grace and favor. To regenerate fallen sinners, and give them a life of Faith:
A mysterious miracle of divine power. All Heaven born Christians are so many
walking-Miracles: so many pillars of Wonder. Its observed by some, that the
works of Creation are said to be performed by Gods fingers. When I consider thy
Heavens (says David) the work of thy fingers, Stolla in Luke Psalm 8.3.
the Moon and Stars which thou have ordained: Whereas his extraordinary and
miraculous works, are represented as done by his powerful Arm. The deliverance
of Israel out of Egypt, and causing them to pass over the red sea, Exodus 6.6,
15.16. 1 Psalm 77.15. Luke 1.51.
was performed by his outstretched Arm. So says the Virgin Mary: He has
showed strength with his Arm: To note the miraculous production of Christ into
the world. Now though that be but a nice Notion, yet there is truth in the
thing, that the work was performed by the extraordinary power of God.

7. The raining of Manna was in the week time, there was none upon the Sabbath:
to note an eternal Sabbath coming, wherein shall be no ordinances at all, But
twice as much the day before, to note their plentiful distribution in the end
of the world. Now is the time for these golden Showers of Manna. It began to
rain on the Lord's Day, and ceased on the Jewish Sabbath. Origin. page 87. Hos.
2.14, 15.
It rained, to note its plenty: and a double portion on the 6th. day, to
signify our fullness of it in the la^ter ages of the Gospel. When once the
Israelites were past over Jordan, they had no Manna, but while they were in the
howling Wilderness. God many times ends sweet messages of Christ to the soul
when in the Sinai of a troubled estate; when the briars and thorns of the
Wilderness prick the soul; when the heart is thoroughly stung with sin, when its
weary laden, Christ is sent to give it rest. I will allure her and bring her
into the Wilderness, and speak to her heart, says the Lord to his Church, and
give her Vineyards in the Valley of trouble. When once past over Jordan the
River of Lethe, that runs into the (Mare Mortuum) the sea of Death; expect no
more Manna, no more bread of Life, no more time for Repentance or reception of
mercy. Wherefore (to allude) that place, where the son of man is said to have
power upon earth to forgive sins; thereby, Luke 5.24,
is not only intimated the annexion of the Divinity ^o his humane Nature, God
being manifest in the flesh, and his having power coequal with the Father: But
also, that when once we are off the earth, if not forgiven here, no more
remission or means of Grace is to be expected hereafter. Here indeed we want
this bread, the staff of our spiritual life to lean upon, and in the support
thereof to walk from strength to strength till we all appear before God in
Zion. Then we shall feed upon the Corn of the good land of Canaan, upon the
Milk and Honey of Heavenly joys, and Drink of that River of pleasure, which
flows at his Right Hand for evermore.

8. Manna before it was eaten, was ground in Mills, beaten in Morters, baked in
pans: sodden in pots to prepare it for use, and afterward it tasted and
relished according to that which each person most affected or longed for, If
the Jews do not fail in their Stories. All to set forth Christ how he was
scourged, reviled, pierced, dead and buried. He trod the Wine Press, he stood
in the fiery burning Furnace of his Fathers wrath, that he might be prepared
for Believers to feed upon him by Faith: and indeed whatever is said of Manna,
that Christ is even and much more abundantly all and in all to a Saint;
whatever we stand in need of, is to be found in Christ. Joy in tribulation,
Wisdom in difficulties, Srength against enemies, support in desertions, Riches
of Grace here, and a massy Crown of Gold for heaven hereafter.

Manna, when gathered, if not eaten before the morning, putrefied, and bred
worms and stank. If we do only gather the word by hearing, and not presently
feed upon it by Faith, and digest it in a holy life, it will be of no value nor
efficacy o our souls -- But so much of Manna.

The Rod of Aaron.
As in Moses time there was laid up in the Oracle Aaron's rod which blossomed:
It is likewise probable, that it might be laid up also in the Oracle of
Solomon, though it be not praecisely mentioned.

The story of Aaron's Rod is at large recited in the 17th of Numbers, which may
be consulted at leisure.

Aaron being the High Priest and chief of the Tribe of Levi (as all the Princes
of the Tribes had their Rods or staffes, Numb. 21.18. So he) had a Rod for an
Ensign of Government. He was a Signal Type of Christ, as the Apostle to the
Hebrews does clearly manifest. Some think that all the three Offices of Christ
respecting the Church, were signified by these three choice things in the
Oracle. The Ark with its Crown round about it, and as being the Throne of God,
noted his Kingly Office. The Manna, his Prophetical or Pastoral Office. And the
Rod of Aaron his Priestly. And therefore it is, that he is so often styled in
Scripture, the Branch, as Isaiah 4.2. and 11, 1, 10. and 53, 2. Jer. 23.5. and
33, 15. Ezekiel. 17.22, 23. Zech. 3.8. and 6, 12. Rev. 5.5. and 22, 16. The Hebrew
word in some of those places is in the Septuagint version rendered by (...).
Which makes me to reflect upon that place in Luke, where the Luke 1.78.
(...), is rendered by us, the Day spring from on high. Now considering that the
old Greek Version was much eyed by the new Testament Writers: we may translate
it, The Branch from on high has visited us- and overshadowed us with his
healing Boughs: and therein possibly might be an allusion to Aarons Rod, or
Branch laid up in the Oracle, signifying Heaven: which that it did denote
Christ is the opinion of Justin Martyr Dialog. Cum Triphare. Jud. page 24.
(...). The Rod of Aaron bringing forth Buds, did declare him High Priest.
Isaias did prophecy of Christ's birth by the Rod out of the root of Jesse.

To speak then a while to this Rod of Aaron: being the note of the Ministerial
function, as residing in him and his successors: and that none should take to
themselves that honor, but such as are called of God as was Aaron.

Heb. 5.4.
Here give me leave to enlarge a little upon this flourishing subject of Aarons
Rod.

A Rod in Scripture denotes Government, and so this Rod signifies Christ's royal
Dominion in his Church. He will send, the Psalm 110.2.
Rod of his strength out of Zion. He is to rule over his people with a Psalm
45.6.
Scepter of Righteousness. Sometimes it hints at judgment.

Hear the Mic. 6.9
Rod, and who has appointed it. 1. The Rod of affliction. Shall I come to you
(says Paul to his Corinthians) with a 1 Cor. 4.21.
Rod? i.e. with some Church-censure. Sometimes it notes Teaching and Doctrine.
He shall smite the earth with the Isa. 11.4.
Rod of his mouth, i. e. with doctrinal reproof. Feed thy people with thy Mic.
7.14
Rod of Instruction. The Metaphor being taken from Shepherds, who carry wirh
them a Rod and a crook the one to drive their sheep into green pastures, and
the other to catch them. Psalm 23.4.
Thy Rod and thy staff comforted me. Thereby they kept off the Wolves and the
wild Beasts from the Folds. Mercury of old was the Caduceator and Virgifer of
the gods, being painted, with a Rod twined with Serpents, to note its
Rhetoric, and persuasive Eloquence in speaking, he being interpres divum.
Christ is the revealer of the Father's will, he lay in his bosom, and has
declared him, Joh. 1. 18. Sometimes it signifies ease, because this is the end
of a Staff or Rod, to lean upon as Jacob Heb. 11.21.
leant upon his Staff; to show that the Evangelical Ministry, whereof Christ
is the head, is a safe resting place for the Church.

This Rod of Aaron was made of an Almond-Tree, of which its observed by Plin.
l. 16. c. 25.
Pliny, that it flowers the first of all Trees, even in Jan. in the more
Southern Countries, and brings forth ripe fruit there in March.

To show how quickly those that are designed for the Ministry, should blossom
toward Heaven; young 1 King. 18.12.
Obadiahs Jer. 1.5.
Jeremiahs, Luke 1.15.
John Baptists, 2 Timothy 3.15.
Timothies, even in their youth, savouring the things of God. This does
likewise reflect upon the effect of their Ministry, how soon God will bring to
pass what they precict in his name, when they receive their Visions from him
in the holy Mount. Therefore Jeremy, who was a Priest of Anathoth, saw the
Vision of an Jer. 1.11.
Almond-Tree, to confirm his heart in the work of the Ministry. The vulgar
Latin reads that place [by virga vigilans] a watchful Rod, hin^ing how God
would hasten the judgment he threatened, unless the people repented: and
further, to show what diligence and vigilance Ministers ought to use in their
Embassies, they must be Isay 11.
Watchmen and See^s of the night. We read that the Egyptians resembled God by
the hieroglyphical sculpture Plutarch. de Iside and Ostride moral. part 1. gr.
p. 632. ed 1. H. Step^. 573.
of a Rod or Scepter, with an Eye in it; noting his omni^cient care and wisdom
in the Government of the World. Every Gospel-Minister should have for his
hieroglyphick, an Almond Rod, with an Eye annexed to it; not to rule and teach
only, but a so providently to foresee the evil coming, and to warn the people
of approaching judgments.

Besides, it was a fruitful Rod. The Rod of Aaron had Numb. 17.8.
Buds, Blossoms, and ripe Nuts, all at once. As to the words in the letter,
there is a little haesitation among the Dr. Gell on Pentateuch, p. 512.
learned, why it should be translated thus, the Rod of Aaron budded and brought
forth buds, as if so be it were a tautology, whereas in the Hebrew it is (...)

And behold the Rod of Aaron for the House of Levi budded: and it sent forth
buds, etc. The same radical word (...) being used first in the Verb, and then
in the Noun. The 70 not ashamed to use the same word likewise, (...), It budded
and brought forth buds: and so Paul Heb. 9.4. only speaks in general, (...),
the term being comprehensive of all the rest, after mentioned in that verse in
Numbers. The meaning this: the Text first says in the general, that Aaron's
Rod did germinate or bud, or sprout forth, which ye please; and then comes to
the particulars, rehearsing in order how it was: or else to express, that at
the very same time there were upon it botn buds, flowers, and fruit; and
probably, leaves also: which might be included in the general signification of
the Verb, set in the first place. Junius and Tremelius renders it, Ecce
flourisset etc. Producens enim germen emiserat florem and educebat amygdala.
Behold it had flowred, etc. For bringing forth buds, it sent forth flowers, and
brought forth Almonds, much to the sense of our present acceptance of the Text.

The Almond-Tree is exceeding plentiful in its flowers; and when they knit
well, its a sign, say some, that it shall be a very great year for Corn,
Pierius p. 647. Hieroglyph.
as Pierius observes out of Virgil, according to our common saying, that a good
Nut-year shows a good year for Wheat.

The rind of an Almond is bitter, but the kernel very delicious, and the Oil
expressed out of it very physical, and of much virtue. To show that chastising
and reproving words, though bitter in the present taste, yet yield a precious
and excellent fruit, if well improved.

The shell of the Almond is very hard and not to be broken by the teeth but
with great difficulty. Such is the Law, but the Gospel is the sweet kernel
within.

Though mainly this Rod did decipher and hint at Christ: yet did it also lock
at the Ministry, Heb. 13.20. 1 Pet. 2.25.
whereof he is head and principal; He is the (...) the graet Shepherd of the
sheep, and Bishop of souls. A flourishing Ministry is an excellent Omen of a
fruitful and holy people.

Besides, this Rod did denote a continued succession of Gospel Ministers in the
work: Christ the great Aaron has his successors by his assignation, Cant.
2.13.
nay that are begotten by him by the Word of truth as his Children: Some tender
buds, growing up in the Spring of Learning and divine knowledge: Some sweet
blossoms opening into the flower of service, and giving a goodly sent: Some
ripe fiuit, able Ministers of the New Testament, that can both divide the truth
aright and withstand gainsayets, whose shells are hard for opposition, whose
kernels sweet in the food of Doctrine. Or we may understand this Rod, as
signifying the Ministry [effective] as to the effects it produces, by the
blessing of God, being made effectual to produce some precious buds of Grace
in the hearts of their hearers; some blossoms of heavenly joy and assurance;
some holy fruits of righteousness and new obedience. There are some Lambs in
Christ's fold, some riper, some elder Christians; some great with young
traveling in birth, with Paul, Gal. 4.19.
till Christ be formed in others.

The Buds nor Blossoms nor Nuts did not perish but miraculously continued on
the Rod laid up by the Testimony: so neither shall the Ministry, or the Word of
the Gospel, or the work of Grace in the hearts of the faithful, wither away.
Every branch in Christ shall not only be like Aaron's Rod, but shall Joh.
10.10.
bring forth more fruit, and have life more abundantly.

The color of the blossoms of the Almond are of a rubens Candor, a whiteness
tinctured with red: white, to show the purity and innocence of the Doctrine and
Life of faithful Ministers, and yet many times discolored with redness by
reproach and persecution.

They have a fragrant and sweet sent: so, says the Apostle, that the
Gospel Ministers are a 2 Cor. 2.15.
sweet savor of Christ in them that are saved and them that perish. Plin. lib.
7. cap. 17.
Pliny relates of the Panther, that by his sweet breath he draws and allures
the beasts to him; so does Christ in his Gospel Ministers draw the souls of
sinners to him, and then teaches them the knowledge of life and salvation.

But as to this Rod, further. We do not read expressly of any leaves it brought
forth (though I cannot say it did not, yet however by way of allusion) we may
thence observe; that as leaves are Emblems of outward profession: so the
Ministers ought mainly to take care of bringing forth fruit in themselves and
others: No leaves of a bare formal profession only but a holy, practical,
fruitful life attending their flowring doctrines.

This Rod was laid up near the Ark, which was the Emblem of Gods presence; The
Mercy-seat of Christ incarnate, the Cherubins of the holy Angels, and the
tables of the Law, and all this within the Oracle, the Figure of Heaven. To
note that the pastoral or Prophetical Office of Christ is near and dear to God.
The only begotten son who lies in the bosom of the Father, he has Joh. 1.18.
declared him: and as all the Buds of the Ministry flow from Christ's Rod, and
lies by and near him: It notes, from whence the Gospel Embassy comes, even out
of the Conclaves or secret Chambers of Heaven: and to note that Ministers
should study much, converse with God, with Christ, and the holy Angels: and as
the Tables of the Law were there, the Compend of Scripture So should it be
their diligent care to search in it as Prove. 2.4.
for hidden Treasure; As the Holy of Holies signified Heaven wherein this Rod
lay. It admonishes Dispensers of the sacred Oracles, that they should often
Ascend the rounds of Jacobs Ladder, be often in the Mount of transfiguration
with Christ, and be transformed from the Image of the world, often in the
Pisgah of Prayer; often in the Nebo of meditation, and when they come down, O
how will their faces (like to Moses's) shine before the people. But alas! many
there be, who intrude into that sacred Function, that need Moses's Vail rather
to cover their shame, than to hide the strength of their gracious beauty from
the people. Did they walk more with God, the reproaches and marks of Christ
would be their honor. Pet. 4.14.
The Spirit of God and of glory would rest upon them.

Though Israel was in the Wilderness, yet this Rod lay in the Oracle; and
though the Israelites murmured against the Priestly Office, yet the Rod falls a
blossoming. If thou would prove a blossoming Minister, endeavor to keep
company with the Ark of Gods presence. Hence we may infer from the Rods lying
near the Ark, that a holy fruitful, flourishing Ministry is of great esteem
with God. How then ought the people to cherish, honor, and pray for these Rods
of Aaron. Oh pray for a blossoming Ministry. While Zachary was praying within
the Sanctuary, and conversing with an Angel: we read, that Luke 1.10.
the people were praying without. If the people did pray more fervently for
their Ministers, they would feel more blossoming work in and upon their hearts
from the Ministry of Christ. While they are meditating and seeing Visions, do
you fall a praying.

If this Rod were laid up as a token of the persons whom God had chosen: then
let all persons beware of prophesying, unless their Rod do bring forth
blossoms, unless they find a sealing appointment from God. Oh did men but know
and understand the weighty work of an Evangelical Minister, how that their Rod
ought to bud as did Aarons, with a heavenly prognostic or sign of ministerial
fruit, and accordingly to prophecy of Gods mercy or judgment to a Nation. How
that it ought to blossom as did Aarons in doctrines of comfort, joy and
assurance to broken souls: How that it ought to bear Nuts, for the people to
feed upon in spiritual knowledge: surely they would not dare to venture on such
holy things. Shall Uzzah be smitten for toucning the Ark? Shall the men of
Bethshemech for prying too curiously into it, be dismayed with so sore a
slaughter? Shall Dathan, Abiram, and the rest of his company be swallowed up
alive for contemning the Ministry instituted of God? Shall Vzziah the King be
smitten with 2 Chro. 26.19,
Leprosy for daring to offer Incense, because it did not appertain to him?
Nay, shall Nadab and Abihu, Priests by Call and Profession be slain upon the
place for offering with strange fire, Mat. 4, 20.
and yet shall dry stumps to please their vain humors, puffed up with conceit
and pride turn blossoming Rods: let them take heed of Divine blasting? We read
the Apostles left their nets, their particular callings, when they were called
to the Ministry (...) The counsel and command of Paul to Timothy, and in him to
every Gospel-Minister is. 1 Timothy 4,15.
Meditate upon these things, give thy self wholly to them, that thy profiting
may appear to all.

But as to the people: Too delicate and nice are those ears that cannot bear
the smiting of Aarons Rods: they love to smell the Blossoms of Rhetoric only.
But such must remember that Aarons Rod was a Scepter of Rule and Discipline,
and btought forth Almonds also of knotty truths. There are sons of Thunder as
well as of Consolation: Aarons Bells must sometimes ring the knell of the Law,
as well as the marriage peales of Gospel Grace and love to weary souls.

Some would fling all Aarons Rods without the Camp, and wait upon Inspirations
from Heaven in a more immediate way. On how grievously do they tempt God and
oppose Christ? who when he ascended up to the Oracle of Heaven, gave Apostles,
Teachers, Pastors to the Church; For what? Ephesians. 4.12.
for the work of the Ministry (...); For how long? till we all come in the
unity of the faith to a perfect man. Ministry is a plant of Gods own
right hand, an (...) a semper-vive. For such has God 1 Cor. 12.28.
set (...) placed, constituted and established in the Church as the Rod of
Aaron, always to continue in all ages green and blossoming in the Oracle.

Whereas some ignorantly object those John 6.45. Heb. 8.11. 1 John 2.27.
places, wherein it is promised, that we shall be all taught of God, and that we
need not that any man teach us, nor for any to learn of his Neighbor. They
consider not of a mediate teaching, wherewith God does ^oncur. Ministers are
Instruments in the work only, Luke 2.17.
and teach but the ear: it is God is the principal Efficient, and reaches the
heart. Why did John and others write their Epis^^^s else. if this conceit had
been the true meaning of the Apostles? We shall observe therefore, even under
the new Testament (whereunto those Promises did look) that God was pleased
still to use the mediate teaching of his Ministers, but still reserving the
grand prerogative of moving the heart to himself, and that in a more copious
manner than of ancient times, therein fulfilling the promise more abundantly.
Wherefore its observable, that though God himself could have revealed the birth
of his Son to the Shepherds by immediate suggestion, yet he uses the Ministry
of Angels to them, and of the Shepherds themselves to the people of Bethlehem.
God has appointed Shepherds and Pastors in his Church to reveal his mind.
Acts 8.29.
Philip was sent by the Spirit to expound the Prophet Isaias to the Eunuch.
Acts 9.11.
Ananias was sent by God to Paul. And the Angel bid Acts 10.16,
Cornelius send for Peter: All to show, that God is pleased now to teach
mediately and Instrumentally by his Ministers.

How happy then is such a people, who have the true and genuine Rods of Aaron
always blossoming in their streets? Happy are the people that are in such a
case, whose God is the Lord!

Thus much concerning the mysterious Things laid up in the Oracle: I shall now
descend to the Sanctuary, and view the three famous Utensils therein contained:

The Mystery of the Vtensils in the Sanctuary.
In the next place the stately Rarities of the Sanctuary or Holy place, command
from us a diligent and humble survey, as to the excellent significations
concluded in them. There were in this place, an Altar of Incense, ten tables of
Shewbread, and ten Golden Candlesticks: whereof in their due order.

In general, it is conceived of them: that as the three Offices of Christ were
exhibited in the Oracle, which we have beforementioned: so also here in the
Sanctuary we find the like, viz. The bread on the Table noting Christ's Kingly
Office in sustaining his Church. The Candlestick, his Prophetic, in
illuminating and teaching of his people: The Altar of Incense, his Priestly in
mediating for them. As to the former I shall (...), suspend at present, only as
to the last it will appear very clear, I hope, by what may succeed in the
particular handling of it.

Dr. Lightf. p. 58.35. Temp.
First, I shall endeavor to speak to the golden Altar of Incense, which
challenges our first attendment, as standing nearest to the holy Oracle.

The Altar of Incense.
This golden Utensil was famous in its generation: a Vessel of Honor and
Renown. It stood (a) nearest of all to the Oracle, and therefore comes first in
order of dignity to be handled.

The Description of this golden Altar we have heard related before. Two things
more I would speak to a little before I descend to the Mystery. 1. The Censer,
2. the Composition of the Incense.

As to the Censer; it is thought to be a little pan made of Gold with a handle
to it, which as to the brazen Altar is called a fire-pan, Exodus 27.3. and a
censer, Lev. 10.1, and 16, 12.

As for the Composition of the Incense we read according to our Translation,
that it was made of a like quantity of several ingredients; and thereof they
burnt Ainsworth. Exodus 30. v. 8.
50 drams in the morning; and 50 at night, i.e. one pound of incense every day.
What the Hebrew dram is, may be seen page 2. of this Treatise.

The Composition was of sweet spices, Exodus 30.24.
Stacte Onycha, Galbanum, and sweet Frankincense.

They are called in the Hebrew (...)

Arias Montanus turns them by Gutta, Onycha, Chalbanum, and Thus. For Gutta the
Vulgar reads Stacte, the 70 (...).

The first of these Aromata or sweet spices is Nataph, from the Verb of the
same Letters, signifying to distill or drop: intimating that it was some liquid
Gum that distills out of a Tree. Dioscorides in his first Book de materia
medica, Cap. 62. speaking of Stacte, says it is the fat juice of fresh Myrrh,
bruised with a little water, and squeezed out by a pressing Instrument.
Matth^olus, in his Comment upon him, says, It Is his opinion that it was a
subtitute for Myrrh. Josephus in his Antiquities speaking of the Present, Page
60.
which Jacob sent into Egypt by the hands of his Sons, to Joseph (his then
unknown Son) the Governor, being things of the growth of Canaan; calls that
Stacte, Lib. 2. c. 3. p. 46.
which we in our Translation render by Myrrh from the Hebrew word (...) in
that place, and that I humbly conceive it to be. Pliny, Lib. 12. c. 15. says,
it flows from the Myrrh-Tree, of five cubits in height and thorny: and Basil
on the fourth Psalm cited in the Notes on Pliny says, Stacte is a sort of the
thinnest Myrrh, which being laid aside is so called, Athen. Dipn. l. 17. Edit.
Commelin. 1611. p. 688.
the thicker being termed Myrrh. Athenaeus speaks of it in these words (...).
Many ^unguents (says he) are prepared with Myrrh, but Stacte so called is made
of Myrrh only: that is, without any other ingredient. To this purpose likewise
speaks Theophrastus in his Book of Edit. Turneb. p. 8. Tem. 2. Opuscul. var.
Argentorati. 1600.
Odours; (...). There flowe^ an Oy^ from the Myrrh Tree when incision is made*
and is called Stacte because it drops a little (agreeing with the Hebrew word
taken from dropping or disti^ing, as was said before). Which some Stuckius in
Per pl. Erythr. p. 44. Says it is Storax. and Tzori. Psalm. 40.
say is the only Ointment that is simple and uncompounded, whereas all others
are mixed. See Plin. l. 2. c. 15. The next is (...) and is derived from (...) a
Lion as Avenarius conceits, because it is greedily sought after as a rich prey
or booty for the confection of perfumes, or possibly from its extraordinary
strong aromatical sent.

The word is (...), but once mentioned in Scripture, but seeing the Chaldee
Parap raze does render it by (...) Tuphrah from (...) unguis, and so the 70.
Thereby we learn from those ancient Versions that it was the unguis odoratus,
the sweet-sented Nail, if I may so english it. Of which Dioscorides in the
forecited Treatise, says thus. [The Onyx is the cover of a shelfiish (like to
that in which the purple-fish is enclosed), which is found in the lakes of
India that bring forth, and yield the Nardus; therefore giving a sweet sent,
for that the fish feeds upon Nardus]. It is then gathered, when the waters of
the lakes are dried by Summer's heat. The most excellent is brought from the
Red Sea, and is white and unctuous. The Babylonian kind is somewhat dark of
color, and less then the other. Both of them are burnt for sweet perfume, but
smell something strong like Castor. To this Antidotar. 82.
Weckerus adds, that by the Moors it is called Blatta Byzantia, and that it
presently dissolves in the fire like Bitumen. Matthiolus acquaints us that
those Ungues, Nails, Hoofes, or Shells, call them what you please, which are
usually sold for this ancient rarity, yields an unpleasant smell being imposed
upon the ignorant Buyer for the true by the ordinary druggist. The true are
very rare, and of a curious sent.

The 3d ingredient is (...) Chelbenah, and is at this day called Galbanum, and
is nothing else but the juice of the ferula or fenel-gyant growing in Syria
(says Lib. 3. c. 81, p. 359. Edit. Venet.
Dioscorides). The most tenacious and clear is the best; somewhat like to Thus
or incense, far (and thence it gained its name from (...) Chelebh fatness.) The
best is without sticks, yet retaining somewhat of the seed and plant, of a
strong savor: [neither too moist nor too dry]. Thus does he describe it. Pliny
speaks to it in these words, Syria yields also Galbanum in the same mountain of
Amana (mentioned, Cant. 4.8.) out of the plant called ferula, which is termed
Stagonitis, after the manner of rezin of the same name) [for so Frankincense is
called, viz. the male or strongest sort by Dioscorides.] It seems the plant
from whence this Galbanum is taken was by the Greek Physicians called
Stagonitis, (...), from the drops of this gum which it yielded:] The best
(says Pliny) is very thick and firm, pure like Ammoniack, and not woody. If
you burn that which is pure, it Plin. l. 19. c. 10.
drives away Serpents and Gnats. He compares it to Ammoniack, which is supposed
to be the juice or gum of the same plant, but growing in Africa near the Temple
of Jupiter Ammon* and thence so called; or else, as others, from the Renodaei
Dispens. p. 547.
root of this Ferula by expression.

The last is called (...) an is retained by the Septuagint, and generally by
Greek Authors in (...), being doubles derived from the Hebrew, and that from
(...) white, the purest whereof being the whitest as we shall see by and by.
Some would have the mountain Lebanon called so from the plenty of Thus, which
they suppose to have bin taken thence: but they are mistaken, for it grew not
there, that any Author of credit does report; but in Arabia. Whereas the name
of that famous mountain is taken from its being white with snow in the ho^test
seasons. It being so sublime, that the reflection of the Sun's heat from the
Earth did seldom arise so high as to melt it all away. So Schindler has noted
in that word, applying to this purpose Jer. 18.4.

Lib. 1. c. 70. p. 65.
Dioscorides in his forecited Book tells us that it grows in that part of
Arabia, which is thence called the Thuriferous Country. The Theophr. de Odor.
p. 13. lin. 30.
most excellent in that kind is the masculine Thus called Stagonitis (as was
said before), round of its own nature; when broken it is white, fat within,
presently burns [even like a Candle] when fire is applied to it, and thence
has its name Thus (...) a suffitu, from the burning of it as a perfume at the
sacred offerings in Temples.

Lib. 2. c. 47. p. 93. Edit. Hen. Steph. 1559.
Diodorus Siculus relates that in Arabia this excellent rarity grew
plentifully. [(...), etc.] It contains (speaking of Arabia) many various gums
or tears dropping from Trees. The utmost Coasts bring forth myrrh and
frankincense acceptable to the gods, which is carried from thence into the
whole World; and further goes on to tell us that of Costus, Cassia-lignea,
Cinnamou, and of this Thuriferous plant, there is such abundance that, whereas
they are but seldom offered up to the gods in other places, here the Trees
administer fuel for their Ovens: and whereas otherwhere some small parcels of
them are to be seen as great rarities, there they make beds of the wood of
these Trees for their servants. Furthermore, out of Lib. 12. c. 14.
Pliny we understand that no place in the World has it but Arabia, if we may
credit him, and that among the Sabaeans, in the pagus Atramiticus: The exact
description of the plant he says he cannot give us, but that it grows in clay
grounds among hills where few springs are and those nitrous. Some report the
leaf to be like that of the Pear Tree, others like the Mastick-Tree. The bark
for certain is like the Laurel, some say the leaf also: for in his days
Ambassadors came to Rome with Rods of this Tree in their hands, which were
smooth and without knots. The chief time of gathering the Tear, is in the
Dog-daies by incision. Then it stands in round drops, and such is held to be
the Thus masculum, or the choicest of all, especially (simammosum) if hanging
in many drops cleaving together. That which is good may be known by its
whiteness, largeness, bitterness, and easy burning; and that it will not bear
the tooth, but is presently resolved into crumbles, and such of it as is broken
into small parts; in Plinies days they called it Manna. In many of these
things Cap. 36.
Solinus (The Scapula of Pliny) goes in one path with his master, but with
addition.

The leaf of the Tree, says he, is somewhat like the Olive: its trunk grows
crooked, and is somewhat rough with prickles, and here gain-saies his Tutor:
and further, that it never grows higher then five cubits.

But to find out this rare Country exactly where it grew, I would crave leave
for a little enlargement. To which end Arrian in his description of the Red Sea
will be a firm and sure guide, joining him in Commission with Ptolomy. Arrian
says, that beyond Cana a Mart-Town of Arabia, P. 9. Edit. Stuck.
there is a famous Reach called the Sachalitan bay, and there lies the Country
yielding this our precious plant. Now although this be the chief and principal
Country where it grew; yet what Pliny said was true, that the Atramitae, or as
Ptolomy calls them the Adramitae, had some of it also; who received their
denomination from Hatzarmaveth one of the Sons of Joktan, says Bochartus in
his Phaleg, p. 113. Nay, Canah was a port of theirs, to which it was brought
from the in land parts says Arrian, in preceding lines. For in the Inland
Country at Sabota, the chief City of the Saboeans, there was a receptacle or
Warehouse for it; which place Ptolomy calls Sabbatha. Besides this place,
Syagros a Town near the greatest Promontory in the East, (says Arrian) was
another Storehouse for this rich Commodity. Ptolomy indeed places the
Frankincense-Country near the Asabaean Mountains. For in his description of
the more inland parts of Arabia, the happy, he says that beyond the Omaritae,

Lib. 6. c. 7. p. 178. Edit. Bertii.
(...), more East were the Catabaeni, near the mountains of the Arabi under
which lies the Country that yields Frankincense, then next the Sachalitae
were the Jobaritae. Which does well agree with Arrian, for ye see the
Sachalitae challenge by both their testimonies, the honor of this precious
Shrub. With this, consents Strabol. 16. p. 768. (...), etc. (...). A little
before he says that the Royal seat of the Catabaeni was (...), by others
called (...), and thence is this gum called (...), and corruptly (...) and
(...), In Dioscorides forecited, where the translator has turned it
Individuum, by a mistake, (...), being the corrupted name of the City, near
which it was plentifully gathered. Now that we may know the true place where it
is situate at this day, lets observe that Cane of the ancients does yet retain
its name, and so directs us to Caien a City of the Kingdom of Fartach in the
South of Arabia, as Stuckius, Scaliger and Cardan, have hinted; and the present
Maps; such as they be, do fully declare it. But as for Arrians description,
take it in short. [(...), etc.] The Country that brings forth frankincense is
hilly and hardly pastable, Bochart Phaleg. l. 2. c. 18. More at large.
(The Air thick and cloudy). The frankincense is gathered from Trees, which
are not high nor large, and produce it sticking to the bark, even as some of
the Trees with us, says he, in Egypt, weep out gums. They are called gums from
the Greek (...), and that (...) from incision. It Is gathered by the King's
slaves, and such as are condemned to punishment. The places are very unhealthy,
and somewhat pestilential, even to those that sail by them, and usually the
gathering of it is the cause of death to the laborers. In which assertion
St^ckius defends the Author out of Strabo, who in his 16 Book p. 778. says
that the extreme fragrancy of these gums and Spices produces a Sopor in their
brains, which is very hurtful.

To this I shall only add what two or three of the ancient Poets have said,
and so conclude, Virgil. Georg. l. 1. India mittit Ebur, molles suae thura
Sabai.
And Georg. l. 2. -- solis est Thurea virga Sabaeis.
And near to that place. Totaque thuriferis Panchaia pinguis arenis,
In his Culex near the beginning. -- Illi Panchaica thura.


Cap. 36. Indeed Pomponius Sabinus on the Culex, says that Panchaia is a port
of Persia, from whence the incense was brought of old. Isa. 60.8. Jer. 6.20.
Solinus speaks further about it, when treating of that rare bird the Phoenix,
in that part of Arabia, Regos suos struit cinnamis, quos prope Panchaiam
concinnat, in Solis urbem flrue altaribus supposita. Which City of the Sun so
called i^ by Ptolomy styled (...). the sacred promontory's of the Sun, a place
among the Nariti, a people situated by him near the Sachalitae, with whom,
Arrian told us, this our excellent Tree did grow. Which agrees with the holy
Scripture, where we read that Sheba of old brought incense to the Temple.
Another place of the ancients, is that of Seneca in his Hercules Octaeus v.
790. Splendescat ignis Thure, quod Phoebum colens,
Dives Sabaeis colligit truncis Arabs.


And not to meddle with Ovid, Propertius, Horace, or any others. Sidonius shall
close all, Carm. 5. P. 41. Edit. Paris. 1609.
-- Ser vellera, Thura Sabaeus, v. 43,
And again v. 47. -- Arabs guttam, Panchaia Myrrham.


Whereby it seems these places were famous for all the chief precious gums in
ancient times. This of ours which we are now speaking to, retaining the Hebr.
Wocker Antidotar p. 375. and others,
name in some measure, is at this day called Olibanum in the Shops, and is of
great use in Physical Plasters, as may appear by the writings of our modern
Learned Physicians, and their Dispensatories. Thus much of Frankincense.

Now to the Mystery of the Incense which was compounded of these four stately
ingredients forementioned, for the golden Altar. As for the Altar it self, that
the Gold should signify Christ's Divinity, and that the Ce^ar-wood underneath,
should note his humanity; or concerning its quantity and dimensions or figure,
that it was square, signifying the firmity or strength of Christ his mediation;
or that its Angles or Horns should note the extension of his intercession,
through the four parts of the World; these things show more the curiosity, than
the solidity of such Interpreters: neither date I aver that, Its Crown round
about the edges, should hold forth Christ's Kindly Dignity.

But as to the sweet Incense which was burnt upon it, the holy Scripture is a
sure guide to us, that it exhibited or shadowed forth as to Christ the fragrancy
and sweet Savor of his Intercession. The odours were to signify the Rev. 5.8.
prayers of Saints. The Lord Jesus Christ himself is represented standing with
a golden Censor, there being given to him much incense, that he should offer it
with the Rev. 8.3, 4.
prayers of all Saints upon the golden Altar before the Throne, and the smoke
of the incense which came with the prayers of the Saints ascended up before
God, out of the Angels hand. So that as the High Priest on the expiation day,
did go into the holy of holies, and perfume it with incense from this Altar: So
is Christ gone into Heaven, and there Col. 3.1.
sitting at the right hand of the Father, ever lives to make Heb. 7.25.
intercession for us.

Nay, the prayers of the Saints themselves are shadowed forth by this, which
were offered up by the Priests every day. Let my Prayers says David, be set
before thee as Psalm. 141.2.
incense; and whereas Zachary was by lot burning incense in the Temple of the
Lord; we read, that the whole multitude of the people were Luke 1.10.
praying without at the same time.

The time of this service, was Exodus 30.7, 8.
morning and evening, about the time of the lighting of the Lamps. As The Lamps
denoted the light of the Word (whereof more by and by): So we see, that the
Word and Prayer must go together. In that it was every morning and evening, it
denotes daily and constant prayers, which we ought to power out before the
Throne of grace, even as Luke 2.37.
Anna the Prophetess, departed not from the Temple, but served God with
fastings and Romans 12.11. 1 These. 5.17.
prayers night and day. In which sense, the Apostle Paul is to be understood,
when he bids us to pray without ceasing, to continue instant in prayer.

Forasmuch also as this Golden Altar was to be sprinkled with the blood of the
Exodus 30.10.
sin-offering of atonements, once in the year by the High Priest, on the Levit.
16, 18. v. 29.
10th day of the 7th month: it shows that neither the prayers of Priest or
people, can be acceptable with God, unless the impurities thereof be taken away
by the Joh. 1.7. and 2, 1.
blood of Christ, and his all-sufficient Mediation with the Father, or else he
that Isa. 66.3.
offers incense is all one in the sight of God, as if he blessed an Idol.

To add a little by way of allusion: As these precious gums in this fragrant
Incense, came naturally and freely dropping out of the Trees which bare them,
and that was counted the best and purest; or else the Trees did yield it by
inclusion and cutting of the Bark: So is that prayer most acceptable, that
comes with the freeest breathings of the soul; or else, that we ought to apply
the launcings of the Law, or cutting-considerations of Repentance, to work upon
the soul in its ardent drawings near to Heaven in prayer.

As we have said before, that the odours of these gums when burnt, did drive
away Serpents, and perfume the Air from all noxious sents: So is it with
heavenly and ardent prayers, whereby the soul is enabled through faith, to
resist the Devil, and the contagious Air of his temptations; and of all corrupt
lusts and affections; for Mat. 21.17.
this kind goes not out but by prayers and fasting.

As these ingredients were to be Exodus 30.36.
beaten very small into fine dust or powder, before they were put into the
censers: so is the heart by humbling meditations, to be brought into a low and
self-abhorring frame, when it appears before God in prayer. A Psalm. 51.17.
broken and a contrite heart the Lord will not despise. Such as with Abraham
esteem themselves but dust and ashes: Then he whose name is holy, who dwells
in the high and holy place of the Heavenly Temple, will dwell also with him
that is of a Isa. 57.17.
humble and contrite spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble, and to revive
the heart of the contrite ones, with gracious answers to their prayers.

Furthermore, the burning of this incense, showed the ardency and the heavenly
inflammation of the heart in prayer, Romans 12, 11.
servent in spirit, serving the Lord: We ought to be so. Last of all, as the
sweet and fragrant smell came from these incensed or fired ingredients upon
Gods Altar: so it shows how sweetly pleasing to Gods Majesty it is for the
soul to draw nigh to him with a humble, holy, ardent frame of spirit, through
the mediation and intercession of Jesus Christ.

The Golden Tables of Shewbread.
HErein I shall desire leave to speak somewhat to the four urensils described
Exodus 25.29. because omitted in the preceding History, viz. the Dishes, Spoons,
Covers, and Bowls: the Hebrew has these words, (...) which Arias Montanus
renders Scutellas: the 2d is (...) Arias and Coclearia: the third (...) and
medios Calamos: the last (...) and Cyathos ejus.

The first word is translated, a Charger, Numb. 7.84, 85. and was no other then
a golden Dish or Charger wherein the Cakes were placed: The next is derived
from (...) signifying hollow, and was a little Vessel, wherein the Incense was
put, which we translate a Spoon. The 3d is from (...) which some translate by
scutella; others explain it by a Vessel to cover, and seems to be a Golden
Vessel that was laid as a covering on the top of the Bread: whereas Arias has
turned it by Medius Calamus, it is in favor of the Jewish relations mentioned
by Ainsworth at large, out of the Rabbis on that place, and Dr. Lightfoot, p.
83. of his second Temple, as if they had bin golden Canes slit in the midst,
and laid between each Cake to preserve them from touching each other, and
thereby contracting any mustiness. This word in Numb. 4.7. is joined with (...)
to cover withal, which Buxtorf says, when used with things that are dry,
signifies obtegere, obducere, to cover or overwhelm; for what liquid thing was
there here, for any effusion or libation? and therefore he translates them
Scutellas tegminis, the covering dishes. The last term comes from (...) to be
pure and clean; and thence some have translated them Scopulae, as if they were
brushes; but were such made of gold? The Septuagint in Exodus, 37.16. Numb. 4.7.
and Jer. 52.19. translate this word by (...), and we, in that last place of the
Prophet, by Cups. They are called by that name in the Hebrew from purity.

1. Conserving or keeping pure or clean, as the covers of Goblets or great
Cups, are therefore laid to keep the inside of the Vessel pure and clean, or
the liquor or any other matter within from dust. So then the two first are the
Vessels that stand underneath the bread and the incense: the two last, the
covers on the top of each. So that on the top of the Covering Vessel that was
whelmed or laid upon the bread, stood the Spoon, as we call it, or the
container of the Incense, with its Cover or Bowl, as we translate it, to
preserve it from dust, or any thing falling into it all the week long: till it
was taken up, and offered to the Lord by fire at that time, as is conceived,
when the bread was taken off. Now, because that Incense does (as it were) melt
in the fire: Lev. 24.7.
therefore possibly might the 70 call these Vessels (...), which are the common
terms for receivers of liquids: and that which we Numb. 4.7. render to cover
withal, they render (...) in which libation, or pouring out, is used.

So much then, for what was omitted formerly in the Historical part: I shall
now descend to the signification thereof.

As for the Tables themselves, their Rings, Crowns, Staves, matter or outward
form, I shall leave as niceties for others to pry into, that please; Taking
them to be all but attendants, and accessaries of what was the principal thing,
viz. the Bread upon it, and Incense. The number of the Tables were 10, being
increased in Solomon's days.

We read in Scripture of the Psalm. 105.16.
staff and stay of bread, as on which, man's temporal life does lean: it being
the Psalm. 104.15.
strengthner of his heart. It is the principal of all food, Isa. 3.1.
and therefore all our refreshments are prayed for under that name in our
Lord's prayer. But Mat. 4.4.
man does not live by Bread alone but by every Word that proceeds out of the
mouth of God. Therefore was this part of the whole Mass of the Corn of Israel,
presented before the Lord, as an homage-testimony unto God, that the Harvest
was blessed by God, and that he gives Hos. 2.9.
his Corn to his people in the season thereof.

We see here, that God's Majesty was pleased by this shadow, to hint forth his
Commission with his Inheritance. The people of God do enjoy a (...), a
fellowship with him, they are entertained by God who spreads their Tables, who
Isa. 55.10.
sends his Rain from Heaven, that the Earth may give Seed to the Sower, and
Bread to the Eater.

The Word of God is often compared to bread in Scripture, for the nourishment
which Souls receive by it. The famine of Bread for the body, is not so sore a
punishment, as that Amos 8.11. Mat. 16.12.
of the hearing the Word of the Lord. Our blessed Savior admonishing his
Disciples to beware of the leavened Bread of the Pharisees, expounds it of
their corrupt Doctrine, that was unsound food for souls: for such as attended
to them Isa. 55.2.
laid out their money for that which was not true Bread.

The Sanctuary signified the Church of God, (as has bin declared) wherein the
Priests were to set forth bread every Sabbath Day: to show that on that day,
the bread of life, the Doctrine of the Gospel should be administered to the
people of God, by such as are able Ministers of the New Testament, workmen that
need not be ashamed, rightly dividing the 2 Timothy 2.15.
word of truth; and as the bread, set on the Table that day, did continue all
the week there, so we ought all the week long to live upon the spiritual food
of the Sabbath. Now, as the Incense-Altar signified prayer; and the
Candlestick, the light of a shining Minister, to illuminate the understanding
in all things that accompany salvation, (of which more by and by): So the Table
of Shewbread signified the feeding Doctrines: the former concerns the head,
the other the heart. To show, that Ministers are not only to set up
Candlesticks in their Congregations, and to prepare the Lamps of knowledge; but
to administer the solid food of soul-saving and soul nourishing Doctrines. The
Manna within the Vail was the Type of Christ Essential: This Bread on the
Table without the Vail, of Christ Doctrinall; or Christ explained, opened, and
applied to the hearts of all hungry souls, that come with a heavenly appetite
to the feast of the Gospel.

Ribera p. 130.
To let pass the conceit of Ribera, that this bread noted Charity: as the
Papists are always harping on that string, tuning and straining all places
possibly they can to that lesson, which is most excellent and melodious in it
self, but when played upon to the tune of merit: such persons do transgress for
a Prove. 28.11. Luke 14.15.
piece of bread that it may fall into their Basket: like crafty Gibeonites,
that ensnare the Israel of God with such leavened Doctrines.

I will not say neither, that this did signify eating bread in the Kingdom of
God: that place being only one by spiritual accommodation of the present bread
that he was eating at a Pharisees House, as our Lord was always ready in a
most heavenly way to apply every present providence to some spiritual benefit
and improvement. Though its certain, that they shall be blessed that come to
that Table of glory which Christ shall spread in Heaven, where shall be no
fastidium, no glutting Satiety, the Table there shall never be uncovered: At
his right hand, are pleasures that excel for evermore.

Yet I cannot say, this was a Type of it, but rather of the food of the Church
here, before we come within Heaven, the Holy of Holies: yet certainly, it is
the breakfast of grace to prepare our stomachs, and whet our appetites for the
Manna within the Vail: on which we shall feed for evermore. Lord evermore give
us of this Joh. 6.34.
bread, that we may never hunger more; but as Adam in innocence, whose
inclination to eat, is conceived to be without any corrosions of pain, he had
no Latrans Stomachus. So and much more excellent shall it be with Saints in
Heaven, when we shall Luke 22.30.
eat and drink at his Table, in his Kingdom. If we let in Christ to sup with us
in the Banquet of Grace, he will open the Gates of the New Jerusalem, that we
may Rev. 3.20.
sup with him at the Table of Glory.

This bread was set in order before the Lord continually, being taken from the
Children of Israel, by an everlasting, Lev. 24.8.
Covenant. For as Laban and Jacob did make a Covenant of peace by eating of
Genesis 31.54.
bread together. So Jethro, Moses Father in Law, the Elders of Israel, and
Aaron, eta Exodus 18.12.
bread together in token possibly of a Covenant; for Saul, when he was sent to
destroy Amalek, bids the Levites to depart from among them, that he might
remember the kindness which they showed to the Israelites, when they 1 Samuel
15.6.
came up out of Egypt.

This custom of making a Covenant by eating of bread, is noted by Alexander ab
Alex. Gentil. l. 2. c. 5. Stuck. Antiq. Conviv. lib. 1. c. 30. m. 6. Coelius
Rhodig. Lect. Antiq. l. 28. c. 15. and many others: to recite whose words,
would fill up too much time and room.

Sufficient is it to note, that hereby there was a Covenant made between God
and his people, that if they did obey him, he would Psalm. 81.16.
feed them with the finest of the Wheat, and with Honey out of the Rock would
he satisfy them.

This Temple-bread was made into 12 Cakes, denoting probably the 12 Tribes of
Israel, and therein the Church of God, under the conduct of the 12 Apostles of
the New Testament. Jerusalem we read, to have been built upon Rev. 21.14.
12 Foundations. Now as in the Temple there were 10 Tables, and each Table had
in it 12 Cakes in the days of Solomon, arising in the whole to 120. I will not
affirm, that it reflects upon the Act. 1.15.
120 Disciples, that were assembled at Jerusalem: (then I should consent to the
inventing niceties, which are justly condemned by sober men.) But I conceive
rather, that as Solomon was a singular Type of Christ: so this might signify
the great increase of the Congregations of the faithful, after the days of
that Prince of peace, who was greater then Solomon in all his glory.

In each of which, as the Mass of each Cake was made up of many grains: So the
Saints, though many, yet are one bread and one body, if they are all (...)

In the last place it is to be observed, that the Priests were to Lev. 24.9.
eat of this holy Bread, who were the Lords [(...) or] portion: to show that
they are to have their livelihood from the Church of Christ in the days of the
Gospel, in which they minister. And further, it notes in a spiritual way, that
the Priests were to feed upon, and live up to, the same truths which they held
forth to others.

The Incense that was on the top of the Cakes was to be burnt on the Sabbath,
to show, that prayer was to be joined with the word, as before was mentioned.

The Golden Candlesticks.
The last things within the Sanctuary, were the Golden Candlesticks. page 262.


Concerning the const^nt burning of their Lamps, Josephus affirms, that they
were enlightened (...) every day. In the Exodus 13.7.
morning Aaron was to burn Incense when he dressed the Lamps, and when he
lighted the lamps at verse 8.
even, he was to burn Incense: the Text thereby implying, that they were to
burn day and night, Lev. 24.3.
from even to morning. And so Josephus, citing Hecataeus, without any
di^-relish of his relation in this particular, p. 10.49.
tells us that the golden Candlestick had (...), light unextinguished night and
day.

For the Lamps, there was provided some matter to help the conception or
accension of flame, which was made of twisted flax: To this possibly the
Prophet alludes when he speaks of our Savior, that he shall not Isa. 42.3.
quench the smoking flax, which Text our Lord Mat. 12.20. Martinii lexic. in
linum fumig.
applies to himself. For as the Priest when he came in the morning to dress
the Lamps, and found any of them to glimmer and be obscure, he snuffed them,
pulled up or applied more wick to them g^ve new and fresh oil: so will Christ
not put out, but Psalm 18.23.
enlighten our darkness. As darkness is put for sorrow, grief, obscurity, and
affliction: So light is the Emblem of joy and comfort, which Christ will bring
to every poor afflicted soul: sending out his Ps. 43.3.
light and truth, thereby to guide us.

Oil Exodus 27.20. Lev. 24.2.
Olive beaten was also provided for the Lamps. Plut. in Alexandr. page 587.
Oil is the Emblem of joy as well as light. The purest also and sweetest Oil,
was enjoined. In Zachary there were Ezekiel. 4.3. See Pemble.
Olive Trees that emptied their Golden oil, so called for preciousness, because
passing through golden-pipes: We see there were no Tapers of wax in the
Sanctuary, as no honey in Offerings. Jerome ad Gaudentium. p. 100. or 104.
Cera contempt^, quae mel^is hospitium est: oleum accenditur in Templo Dei quod
de amatritudine exprimitur olivarum. The oil noted the Spirit of God, 1 John
2.21.
the Unction of the holy One. In vain does any man light the Lamp of Doctrine
without the oil of the Spirit: they must go together. With his assistance must
Ministers shine in the Doctrines of truth.

Of each Candlestick there seems Exodus 25.31
to be six parts: Its shaft, branches, bowls, knops, flowers, and lamps. That
which we translate shaft, is in the Hebrew (...) Arias femur ejus, its thigh.
Junius, Scapus, the body of a pillar: the 70 (...), its stalk, that part which
arose out of the Basis. The next is (...) Arias and calamus, its reed or cane:
the 70 (...) its small reeds: Junius, rami ejus, its branches, and so our
translation: by which we are to understand the 6 lesser parts or branches that
rose out of the main stalk or shaft of the Candlestick, 3 on the one side, and
3 on the other. The third is (...) Junius [and lauces] its little hollow
plates, like scales of a Balance: which word, unless in this story of the
Candlestick here, and in the 37th. Chapter of this book, is not found, that I
have observed any where but in the story of Genesis 44.2, 12, 16, 17.
Joseph in Genesis, and of the Rechabites in the Prophet Jer. 35.5. from v. 34.
Jeremy: In which places we have translated it by Cups, but in this present
story by Bowls. The fashion is conceived to have been like half an
Almond-shell, as sometimes drinking-cups were made in that form: and therefore
the 70 turn it by (...), drinking-cups for wine. The vulgar Lat. by Scyphi,
others Calices, to the same import, and so they seem to have been cups, through
the middle whereof the shaft and the branches did pass, (as the stalk of the
Dipsacus, the teazle or Venus Basin. the Cup being hollow, and encompassing
each of the stalks to receive any filth that should fall from the Lamps. Three
of these Bowls like Almonds being in each Branch. The next word is (...)
Arias, and poma ejus, and its Apples: the Vulgar, Sphaerulae, its little
Spheres: and so the 70 by (...). Junius, by mala oblonga, its knops like long
apples, which doubtless were for mere Ornament. The 5th. word (...) Arias and
Pagnine, and flores, from (...) germinare, to bud forth. The 70 and the vulgar
Lat. Lillies. Junius, and caliculi, Flowers blown out, which were also for
Ornament. The sixth and last is Exo. 25. page 33.
(...) Arias, and lucernas. The 70 (...) we render it, its Lamps: which Arias
Montanus Antiq. Judaic. page 82. Edit. 1593.
conceives to have been in form and shape like a man's eye, at the one end a
little ear or handle to hold it by: at the other end a hole to put in the oil
and wick, a little higher then the former. This Lamp he conceives was fastened
on the uppermost Lilly or flower of each Branch.

In brief, the whole Candlestick with all it Appendancies was thus formed.

First a Basis or foot, which though not described is to be supposed: whether a
solid massy piece or with three or four feet; its left to conjecture. Then
issued upward the body or main Stalk of the Candlestick, called for its
greatness, Ar. Mont. ibid. page 81. a^ lin. 40.
The Candlestick, page 34. etc. 37. v. 20.

Every Bowl had a knop and a Flower, which seems to be the true meaning of the
34 verse, where its said, that in the Candlestick, that is, (by a Synechdoche)
the shaft or chief part of the Candlestick, there were to be 4 Bowls with
their Knops and Flowers: that is, to each Bowl one.

Verse 33.
So then at some convenient distance from the foot began in the shaft its first
Bowl, then a Knop and a Flower, and out of that first Flower issued forth two
Branches: then in the shaft was made another Bowl, a knop and a flower, Verse
35. chapter 37. v. 21.
and then issued forth the second pair of Branches, one on the one side, and
another on the further side. After that another Bowl knop and flower, and
thence ascended the two last Branches on each side. And lastly, a Bowl, knop
and flower at the top of the shaft; in which last flower stood the Lamp, as
Arias conceives. For we read of four of each in the body or main upright. Part
of the Candlestick, whereas the bending branches which arose up equally to the
height of the main shaft had but 3 of each a piece, in the same Order with
their Lamps at the top. Rivet says in Exodus p. 1122. a. Ita ut unusquisque
calamus haberet tres Scyphos quorum unicuique adderetur Sphaerula cum flore,
line 38.

This with submission I humbly conceive to have been the form of the golden
Candlesticks, which I have here added, because omitted in the former
Description.

There belonged likewise to the Candlesticks oyl-Vessels: wherein the Priests
did bring oil to supply the Lamps with, termed Number. 4.9.
(...) and called (...) by the 70, Vessels to carry Oil in. The very same word
which is used in the Parable of the Mat. 25, 4.
ten Virgins: It being not sufficient to shine in profession, but there must be
supplies of Oil from Vessels, or the Lamps will go out.

There were also Exodus 25.38. Ver. 37.23. 1 King. 49.50, 51. 2 Chronicles. 4.21.
Tongs and Snuffers of Gold, the former to put in or pull up the wick, the
latter to take away the coal of the wick, or the burnt-part, serving for
cleansing and purifying work. In the 37 of Exodus The word for the Tongs in the
former place is rendered, Snuffers, but to the same sense.

Most certain it is, that this rare Utensil did signify and typifie some
Evangelical Excellency, especially the Lamps thereof. We read that Christ did
walk among the Rev. 1.20. and 2.1.
7 Golden Candlesticks: (...) properly is the golden Lamp; wherein the (...) or
the Lychnus, the ^int or wick is set and enflamed, to give light by the supply
of Oil: As there were seven Lamp-vessels of Gold in the one Candlestick in
Moses's Tabernacle: So our Lord, who was Heb. 3.5.6.
figured by Moses, had in the first body mystical of his Church, 7 famous
Churches of Asia: for the Candlesticks or the Lamp-vessels are the Churches.

The seven Stars or shining Lamps (bright as Stars) were the prove. 1.21.
Angels of Ministers of those Churches. Wherewith do these Angels shine, but
with the light of true Doctrine? John was a John 5.35.
shining light. The Dispensation of the Gospel by the Ministry is called the
Rev. 2.2.
Candlestick. They are the light of the World: our Lord Mat. 5.14.
enjoins them to study to shine in truth and Holiness of life; Nay, those that
walk by the light, are said to Phil. 2.15
shine as lights in the world, holding forth the Word of life, the Commandment
is a Prove. 6.23.
Lamp, and the Law is a Light, says Solomon. Thy word is a Psalm. 119.105.
Lamp unto my feet, and a Light unto my path, says holy David. And in another
place, The entrance of thy Words gives Ver. 130.
Light.

The word in the two former places (...) is the same radically with that which
is for the Lamp of each of the Branches of the golden Candlestick. The word of
Prophecy is also by the Apostle Peter compared to a 2 Pet. 1.19.
Light shining in a da^k place: and 2 Cor. 4.6. a light shining.

The Candlestick was of pure See Riv. amply, page 1122.
Gold, which our Lord parallels to the Churches: to show how golden and pure
their lives should be, who live under the shining Rays of the Gospel: Such a
life according to the word, is more to be desired then Psalm 19.10.
much fine Gold.

The Rev. 4.5.
seven Lamps signify the various gifts of the Spirit: many are the Sevens in
Scripture, of which Cyprian Cypr. adv. Jud. page 265.
speaks at large; and so likewise the Account of this Number was of great value
among the Alexand. Tab. Hiae. p. 13. 24, 42.
Heathen Ancients.

The trimming of the Lamps might hint the purity of Doctrine, or the great care
that Ministers should take in their Dispensation of the Word: that it be not
dim or fuliginous and dark: men are led away by dark and smoaky preaching.

Snuffers and Tongs say some, Ribera, p. 136.
did note, Disputations and Explications about the Word: Nay, the Snuffers must
be of Gold, to show, that those who correct and Discipline the Church in truth;
must be very pure: and therefore those who reprove others, must be pure and
holy themselves.

There were ten Candlesticks, wherein as to the number I cannot conceive any
Pythagorean mystery: such as Plutarch explains by that Number as a Number of
perfection in his De Ei apud. Delphos.
Morals, and Meursius in his Denarius Pythagoricus. But rather the multiplying
of light and knowledge in the latter days, which should not only cover the
earth as waters do the Sea: but as Lamps did fill the Sanctuary: Here were ten
times seven. I will not say, it hinted the 70 Disciples whom Christ sent forth
by two and two. It would be to draw nigh to a nicety: but rather, the fullness
of Light and Grace in the Churches in Christ, might be thereby denoted.

In the Porch.
The two Brazen Pillars.
IN ancient times, Pillars were erected for the bounds of Countries: as
Hercules his Pillars (one in Spain and another on the opposite shore of Africa)
for the boundary of his Labors and Empire: and so, near the River Euphrates we
read of Pillars set up, for the limits of the Eastern part of the Roman Empire.
A custom likewise there was of setting up Pillars on the Tombs and other
Monuments of famous Heroes: as those of Trajan and Hadrian, to remember their
glory and honor to posterity.

In Temples the body of the building rested upon Pillars, for security and
firmity. In war, when they erected Trophies, they set up Pillars, as Herodotus
relates of Sesostris King of Egypt setting up some in Palestine: Lib. 2. c. 106
Suidas relates in the word (...), of a Pillar set up by Alexander in an Isle
of the Indian Seas among the Brachmans: Some Monuments of Alexander in India,
Page 121. lib 5. Ed. Hen. Step. 1575. Lib. 5. c. 9. Tab. 2 Asia.
Arrian calls His twelve Altars, near the River Hypasis. The like whereof (if
they be not mistaken for those of India) are mentioned by Ptolomy to have been
fixed by Alexander in the Asiatick Sarmatia, and called (...), the Pillars of
Alexander, in the Longitude of 80 Degrees and Latitude of 51 30. Nay, that this
was a frequent custom for limits, is asserted by Strabo, who mentions several
of the same kind, lib. 3. page 171. in his discourse of Spain. But to come
nearer home: The Seventy do inscribe the 16th Psalm, (where the Hebrew has
Micktam) (...), The Erection of David's Golden Pillar upon the conquest of his
enemies. When therefore the People of God had their Territories most enlarged,
as in the days of Solomon, from the 1 King. 4.21.24. 2 Chr. 9.26. Deuteronomy. 1.7.
River, etc. unto the border of Egypt; even Deuteronomy. 11.24. Josh. 1.4.
from the River Euphrates, to the great Sea, or the Mediterranean. Now then,
(when he built the Temple) at such a time was it fit and proper to erect the
Pillars, as Monuments of God's praise in the (...), in the Mountain of his
chief City. But why in the Temple? To note that it was God that gave him the
power and dominion over all those Nations, and had fulfilled his promise made
to Moses and to his people Israel.

But to what are these to be resembled under the Gospel? Some would have the
Apostles to be thereby signified, as the Primipili, and the Defensores fidei;
The first magnanimous assertors of the Faith of Christ: They stood in the Porch
or entrance of the Temple; the Apostles lived in the beginning of the Church.
Gal. 2.9. Jer. 1.18.
James, Cephas, and John (...), they seemed to be Pillars in the Church: and
the Prophet Jeremy God promised to make as an Iron Pillar against Judah.
Ministers, for their gifts and eminent site, are Pillars. Absalom, 2 Samuel 18.18.
being without Male Children, erected himself a Pillar in the King's Dale, to
keep his name in remembrance. Saul is mentioned to have made himself (...) a
Hand, 1 Samuel 15.12.
the Vulg. fornicem triumphalem, a triumphant Arch: We translate it a Place,
and so the word being taken for monumental Trophy or Pillar, is mentioned in
Isaiah as a promise to such as please God, that they shall have a Place and a
name within his house; Isa. 56.5.
the word is (...) a Pillar erected for same. To which possibly the Spirit of
God may allude in some measure in the Reve^tions; though both that and this may
principally referr to Solomon's Temple: Rev. 3.12.
For he that overcomes shall be a Pillar in the Temple, and shall go no more
out, as these did into Babylon: Brazen Pillars may be broken in pieces, but
Saints, as Sons, shall abide in the House for ever, Joh. 8.35. they shall
endure against all weathers: Every Saint is Monimentum aere perennius; no
eating showers, no blustering winds, Hor. Carm. l. 3. Od. 30. Psalm. 74.6. Jch.
10.28, 29.
nor length of years shall impair him: Axes and Hammers may break down the
carved work of the Temple, but Saints are Pillars in the hand of Christ, and of
the Father: no man can pluck them down.

Pillars are Emblems of permanency and stability, of Ornament, of Victory, of
strength and service, patience, fortitude and perseverance: in all respects
Saints are thereby set forth.

There were two Pillars in the Temple, which some resemble to the two states of
the Church of God, Jewish and Christian: I shall therein suspend. The one
signified present strength, Boaz: the other Jachin, He will fortify; the
promise of the Gentiles. They had no names written on them, but were called
only by these names; and so Rev. 3. The Saints shall be called by the name of
God's strength. Others understand thereby the two standing Ordinances,
Magistracy and Ministry: or the two witnesses, in allusion to Moses and Aaron,
Joshua and Eleazar, Elijah and Elisha, Zech. 9.
Zerubbabel and Jeshua; and so in the Revelation-prophecies. Christ sent out
his Disciples by two and two. But this were (...), Luke 10 1.
to hunt after too much nicety.

The Tops of the Pillars were curiously adorned: 2 Timothy 4.8.
to show that those who persist to the last constantly shall be crowned. The
Lilly work, the Emblem of Innocence: Pomegranates, of Fruitfulness, there
being many grains in one Apple: their Crown shall declare their Glory: As
Crowns did vary according to the nature of the Service among the Romans; so
shall every one be rewarded according to his works.

The Vessels in the open Court.
IN this place there are these things considerable, The Altar of burnt
Sacrifice, The Sea of Brass, and the ten Lavers: of each in their order.

1. The Altar of Brass.
The Brazen Altar stood in the Priests Court in the open air, that so the
nidor and fuligo, the sent and smoke of the Sacrifices might be the less
offensive.

This Altar had its several implements fit for service, as Censers or Ash-pans,
Number. 4.14.
Flesh-hooks, Shovels, Basins, etc. of which we must not speak particularly,
they being but proper appurtenances of the work of Sacrifice.

What the Altar signified, we need not much trouble our selves or haesitate
about it: having so sure a guide, as the Apostle by the dictate of the Spirit
of God, who says We have an Altar, Heb. 13.10. Molin. de Altar. p. 79. Rivet
in Exodus p. 1132. Heb. 10.10, 14.
whereof they have no right to eat who serve the Tabernacle. Those that
continued enslaved and yoked to their Jewish Ceremonies had no right to the
Altar of which we are to feed on, which Christ offered himself. We are to eat
of the Altar, i. e. the Sacrifice offered on the Altar by a frequent Metonymy:
so then, the Sacrifices signified Christ, and the Altar his Cross. For Christ
was offered to bear the sins of many, Heb. 9.28. As the Altar was set without
the Temple, the Emblem of the Church or new Jerusalem, Ver. 12.
so Christ's Cross was without the Gate of the old Jerusalem. And as on the
expiation-day the Priest officiated without the limits of the Tabernacle, Lev.
17.11. See Ess^nius de sacrificiis p. 220.
or Courts of the Temple; so the blood of Christ that makes atonement, was
shed without the Camp in Golgotha, where he had the place of his burial. Christ
crucified is the food of Souls, as the Sacrifices were of old for the Priests.

The name of the Altar in the Hebrew is sometimes (...) from Mactation, or
killing and offering of the Sacrifice: sometimes (...) from ascending up to it,
whence (...) among the Greeks, Altar among the Latins, is derived ab Alto,
from its being built up high above the earth, or because in high places, as
mountains and hills: and Ara from (...) Preces, prayers or imprecations, made
to the Gods at their Sacrifices.

There be who would by no means have the Altar to signify the Cross of Christ
(because the Papists do so highly idolize it; and besides, do count their
Tables on which their unbloody Sacrifice is offered to be signified thereby):
and therefore understand that place by a Metonymy, Habemus Altar, we have an
Altar, i. e. A Sacrifi^e offered upon the Cross, viz. Christ himself. But I
know no reason, why there should be so much flying to Tropes and such
curiosity, in evading this designation, because Papists commit folly about it.
Whereas no doubt, they will all affirm, that Christ is the Gospel-Sacrifice;
For he is our Pascha^ Lamb, 1 Cor. 5.7.
says the Apostle.

Molin. de altar p. 79.
The Fathers, for 200 years, called the Table of our Lord, The Altar, as
Molineus witnesses; and that only by allusion and accommodation: and in this
figurative sense, the Church may say still, that we have an Altar: though
Christ's Cross were destroyed, before the Apostle wrote to the Hebrews.

But yet if we shall join both Sacrifice and Altar in one signification of
Christ: I shall not gainsay, though I see no such grand inconvenience in
applying it more distinctly, especially since we do it only by accommodation:
For on the contrary side, by applying the Altar to Christ, there is more danger
of the inference of Popish adoration, Psalm. 118.27.
if any be inferred.

The Sacrifice of old was to be bound to the Horns of the Altar. Some, by the
Horns of the Altar, expound the strength of Christ; but if the Altar might
prelude to the Cross, these might note Christ's nailing to the Cross.

Whether this Altar were underneath framed of stone is not certain: if it were,
to be sure not of hewn stone. Cont. Apion lib. 1. p. 1049.
Josephus relates of the Altar at Jerusalem out of Hecataeus (and does not
^o^^radict it) thus; (...) A four square Altar not of hewn, but unwrought
impolished stones, according to the Exodus 20.25. Deuteronomy. 27.6. Jos. 8.3.
command of God. Instruments did pollute it. The hearts of Saints are compared
to Altars by the Ancients, in the Primitive Church. Humane skill, Art, and
Reason cannot polish stones fit for an Altar to offer up to God, Clem. Alex.
strom. 7.
(...) The whole Church is a grand Altar for holy Sacrifices. Impolisht stones,
Saints differing in Judgment, may lie together in one Altar, on which God may
have his Isa. 31.9.
fire in Zion, and hearth in new Jerusalem.

None but fire from heaven, no culinary fire ought to inflame the Sacrifices of
the Altar. Aaron's Sons smarted in that case. No strange fire of our Passions
ought to be admitted in any service of God: For the wrath of man works not
the righteousness of God.

Let us in few words mention the New Testament Sacrifices, that through Christ
are offered up unto God: whereof more in the 5th Section.

Ps. 51.17.
A broken Heart is a Sacrifice which God will not despise. The heart that is
wounded by the knife of Repentance, is acceptable to God.

In Cra^tfying of our lusts, offering them up on the Altar of the Cross of
Christ is a Sacrifice well pleasing in the sight of God.

The offering up of Christ in prayer to God, as of a Lamb without spot, morning
and evening is another. Let the Psalm. 141.2. Mat. 27.46.
lifting up of my hands, says David, be like an evening Sacrifice. Christ died
on the Cross toward the evening, about the 9th hour: (according to 12 unequal
hours counted about the time of Easter, from Sunrise to Sunset) falls
between 3 and 4, afternoon.

The service of our very bodies to God, is another reasonable Sacrifice. Of
old, (...) unreasonable Creatures were sacrificed: now we may offer our selves
Romans 12.1.
rational Creatures in this way of sacrifice. Psalm. 4, 5.
The Sacrifice of righteousness is another. Praising of God is another. He that
Psalm. 50. ult. 23.
offers praise glorifieth me. The Hos. 14.2.
Calves of our lips may be given to God. By him i. e. Christ let us offer the
Heb. 13.15.
Sacrifice of praise continually, i. e. the fruit of our lips: giving thanks to
his name. Such are the free-will-offerings of holy David's mouth, breathing
toward Heaven. Alms-deeds, and giving to the indigencies of the poor Saints, is
another Heb. 13.16.
Sacrifice, wherewith God is well pleased.

The most famous of all is Martyrdom, and therefore See, his Life.
Cyprian at his suffering calls himself a Sacrifice. So the Martyrs Souls say
under the Altar, even as the blood of the Sacrifice was of old, powered out at
the foot of the Altar, and the blood is said to be the life or soul of the
Creature; therefore is that elegant allusion mentioned of the Martyrs: Psalm.
119.108.
who^e blood was powered out for the Testimony of Christ: Their souls are said
to lie under the Altar, crying, how long, etc. and Paul says (...), I am ready
to be offered up upon the account of your Faith. Heb. 13.16.
But so much as to the Altar, briefly.

The Brazen-Sea.
Another rare and admirable Vessel, called a Sea for its greatness, stood in
this Court of the Priests: the end of it was for the Priests to wash in, or
else in the water drawn out by Cocks or Siphons into less Vessels, before they
did go about their services. Which way soever, it noted the purity and
cleanness of their persons, who were to officiate in sacred services; to which
possibly David might allude, when he said, Ps. 16.6.
He would wash his hands in innocence, and so would he compass the Altar of God.

Oh how ought they to prepare, even after the preparation of the Sanctuary,
that draw nigh to God?

They were to wash their hands and their feet, in this water of the Mosaicall
Laver. Their hands for working and service, their feet for walking, Ministers
must walk cleanly as well as teach. Heb. 10.23:
Holy things are not to be toucght in unholy manner; besides, p. 146.
Ribera would have it to shadow one of their invented Sacraments, viz.
repentance and penitent tears: others the blood of Christ, as Mr. Cotton upon
the Revelations on the 2d Vial, p. 18.1643. Seeing Christ has washed us in
his blood, Rev. 1.6.
and made us Priests unto his Father.

It was made of the Looking-glasses of women, i.e. of the polished Brass,
Exodus 38.8.
which they used for the reflection of their faces, as the manner was of old:
so that the Priests might look into it; and when they washed their faces,
discern whether the spots were fully cleansed. But as to this of Solomon's,
when there was more plenty of Brass: we do not read of any such (...) used for
this end: But surely it was made of 1 King. 7.45.
bright polisht Brass in a larger form, and greater beauty then that of Moses.
I shall adhere to holy Paul's allusion, when he compares washings to the Laver
of regeneration, and the renewing of the spirit, which purges our conscience
from dead works, as in Baptism. Tit. 3.5.
It Is the answer of a good conscience: 1 Pet. 3.21.
setting its seal within, to the outward washing. Therefore was it placed in
the Court, noting admission: before we enter the Sanctuary to sit at the Table
to eat of the feast of fat things in the Mountain of the House of the Lord.

Rev. 4.6.
We read of a Sea of Glass like Crystal standing before the Throne, it being an
allusion to the Sea of Solomon, made of bright polished Brass, then used to
reflect the face in; the Text looking back on that of Moses and Solomon. We
read it was mingled with fire, Rev. 15.2.
(...). i. e. mixed or tempered together into that form by fire; for the
material was of Brass, but brought into that shape by the use of fire. But
because the phrase is somewhat uncouth in the Greek, to hold out the way of its
artificial Composition, seeing the Sea did note Baptism, there is added fire,
possibly to reflect upon the baptism of fire as well as of water, Mat. 3.11.
which must be joined together, to make Saints pure. When Christ does it, he
baptizes with the Holy Ghost and fire.

Under this great Vessel, stood twelve Oxen to support it, which some apprehend
to be meant of the Ribera p. 149. Potter in 666. p. 41. Sheringham in Jona. p.
49.
twelve Apostles, who first of all carried the Doctrine of regeneration and of
Baptism, in the name of the infinite Trinity throughout the whole World: upon
this account, because the Apostle Paul compares the Ministers to Oxen. But it
may seem, the Apostle does, for their industry and laboriousness, compare them
to Oxen, arguing a Minori, out of the Judicial Law of Moses. Does God take care
of Oxen, that tread out the Bread-Corn? how much more then of those that tread
out the Corn of the Gospel, 1 Cor. 9.9. 1 Timothy 5.18. Tab Heleac. p. 39.
for the Children of the Kingdom?

Oxen are the emblem of fertility, because they are used for tillage of the
ground: as Aleander notes out of the Egyptian Mysteries. But I leave it to
others application.

The 10 Lavers.
These were for the washing of the Sacrifices, and that briefly does note: that
in all the works, services, and duties, wherein we make our addresses to God,
we must be sure to wash and cleanse them by holy preparation beforehand:
prayers, praise and alms, are all to be washed; our very tears need washing in
the Layer of Christ's purification. But so much of the Vtensils.

Lightfoot, Temple 2d. p. 240. Psalm. 133. 1 John 2.27. Exodus 30, 23. Rivet. p.
1168.
We read of sundry things laid up in the Chambers of the Courts, as Salt, Wood,
etc. and the Oil of Unction, wherewith the Priests and Kings were anointed:
which signified the Oil of Joy, wherewith Christ our High Priest was anointed:
It ran down upon his Beard and Garments, and so to his feet. We have received
an Unction of the Holy One, whereby he has taught us all things. Of the
Composition of this Ointment, I might speak particularly, viz. pure Myrrh,
Cinnamon, Calamus Aromaticus, Cassia-lignea, and Oyl-Olive: But it shall
suffice to have mentioned it at present, because I have been too long, and
shall have a more convenient place in the next Section: it being high time to
invite the Temple-Officers to our Discourse.

SECT. IV. Of the Officers.
THe Principal Officers of the Temple were these, 1. The High Priest. 2. The
ordinary Priests. 3. The Levites, who were divided into four sorts, Singers,
Porters, Judges, and Treasurers. 4. The Nethinims, or the hewers of Wood, and
drawers of water for the Sanctuary.

Here I shall begin with the High Priest, who was an undoubted. Type of the
Lord Jesus Christ: as may be clearly and expressly noted almost in every Chapter
of the Epistle to the Hebrews. His Unction, and many of his rare endowments
being there mentioned, Cap. 1.9.2.17.3.1.4.14, 15. 5.1, 2, 3, 5, 6,
10.6.20.7.1, 3, 17, 21, 26, 28.8.1, 3, 9.7, 11, 24, 25.10.12, 21.12.24. 13.11,
12.

We shall then consider our blessed Lord, as shadowed by the Type of the
High Priest in three things,

1 His Election: 2 His Rayments or Vestures: and 3dly, his Consecration.

1. As to the Election or choice of the High Priest; and therein, we are to
look upon the Tribe, out of which he was to be extracted: and 2dly, the
Compleatness and comeliness of his body, wherewith he was to be qualified.

1. As to the Tribe: Its known that the Jewish High Priest was always taken
from the Tribe of Levi: of old, the eldest of the Family was the High Priest.
But Reuben had forfeited the right of primogeniture, by going up to his Fathers
Couch; and therefore Jacob prophesied of him, that he should not Genesis 49.4.
excel. Simeon and Levi had bin Brethren in iniquity in the matter of slaying
the Shechemites, and lost their dignity; and therefore great was Jacobs Genesis
34.30.
anger against them, and sad his Genesis 49.7.
doom upon them. But Levi recovered in some measure his privilege, when the
people of that Tribe Exo. 32.26, 27, 28.
slew 3000 of their Brethren upon the account of their worshipping the Golden
Calf while Moses was in the Mount with God. For he Deuteronomy. 33.9.
said to his Father and Mother, I have not known thee; neither did he
acknowledge his Brethren, etc. Therefore they shall teach Jacob thy Judgments,
and Israel thy Law: they shall put incense before thee, and whole burnt
sacrifice upon thine Altar. God was pleased to set them Numb. 3.12, 13. Exodus
12.29.13.2.
instead of the firstborn of Israel, whom God had hallowed to himself, in the
day when he smote all the first born in the Land of Egypt: Christ the
firstborn of every Creature was our High Priest. Now out of the Tribe of Levi,
God appointed Aaron and his sons in a direct line, to be Highpriests. But
you will say, Our Lord came Heb. 7.14. See Pareus in Mat. and Suidas, In voce
(...) edit. Aurel. Allobr. p. 1228. 1619.
of Judah. I answer with the Apostle: This was to show the change of the
Priesthood; and that our Lord was a royal High Priest, not after the Order of
Aaron, but of Melchizedeck, the King of righteousness and Prince of Peace. As
for the story produced by Suidas, concerning our Lord and Savior, that he was
descended of the Tribes both of Judah and Levi, they being sometimes mixed by
Marriage into the Highpriests Family: and what he further recites of his being
actually admitted into the number of the 22 Priests, in the room of one
deceased at that time, I shall leave as a futilous and idle story: seeing
Scripture in the preceding Prophesies all along mention him, as coming of the
royal House, he being the Rev. 5.5.
Lion of the Tribe of Judah and springing out of the Root of David.

2. To speak a little to the comeliness and excellency of his body: as to which
because all the other Priests were to have the same complete perfections,
therefore I shall conjoyn them both together.

To this purpose the Lord gives instruction unto Moses, in the 21 Chapter of
Levit. beginning at the 16th Verse, and so forward. Now because all these
things which happened to them as Types or Examples, were 1 Cor. 10, 11.
written for our admonition: Give leave to resemble them to those rare
endowments and perfections wherewith Christ the Evangelical High Priest is
fully accomplished, and Gospel Ministers should be qualified in a spiritual
manner, according to their degree and measure: wherefore the spots and
blemishes to be avoided in Priests are, by Jerome compared to spiritual
infirmities, Precipitur Sacerdotibus, etc. ne truncis auribus, laeso oculo,
simis naribus, claudo pede, cutis color mutato, quae omnia referuntur ad
animae vitia. Jerome. Fabiolae de vest. Sacerd. Tom. 3. p. 58. It is enjoined
concerning Priests, that they should not be crop^eard, blemished in the eye,
flat-nos'd, lame-footed, or the skin discolored, all which are to be referred
to the vices of the mind.

The first blemish mentioned is Lev. 21.18.
blindness; with which, if any person of the line of Aaron was afflicted, he
was not admitted to perform the Functions of a Priest. As to this, it is
sufficiently known that ignorance is set forth in Scripture by blindness. His
Watchmen are Isa. 56.10.
blind, (says the Prophet Isay) they are all ignorant. Our Lord calls the
Scribes and Pharisees Mat. 23.16.
blind Guides; and the Apostle Paul says, that the God of this World has 2
Cor. 4, 4.
blinded the eyes of unbelievers, that the light of the truth should not shine
upon them. But of all, it is the greatest shame for a Minister to be blind:
such a one God would have to be Hos. 4.6.
rejected.

A second imperfection was lameness, a very unseemly thing in a Priest, who was
to be a Guide to others in the ways of God. Ministers must [(...)] Gal. 2.14.
walk uprightly according to the truth of the Gospel. They must teach with
their feet as well as their mouths, being 1 Pet. 5.3.
examples to the flock; and above all others, to 1 John 2.6.
walk even as Christ the great High Priest has walked before them in the days
of his flesh. As the Eccles. 5.1.
feet in Scripture sometime note the affections of the soul, and sometimes the
orde^ing the conversation aright; in both these respects they ought to make
Heb. 12, 13.
straight paths for their feet, lest that which is lame, be turned out of the
way.

Another blemish is a Levit. 21.18.
flat nose: whereof, as well as of the rest, Dr. Gell. on the Pentateuch. p.
315.
a learned Author has lately treated, who, out of Gregory, interprets it of
folly, imprudence and stupidity, or dullness of spirit, such as are called
Horat. Epod. 12.
naris obesae, one of a thick nose, it being a note of hebetude and flatness of
parts, as Physiognomists have observed.

The God of nature has placed this member over the mouth, to be a censor of
what things are taken into the body, whether putrid or sweet, and fit for
aliment: It fits between the eyes as a Judge of what is proper nourishment. The
eye may deem that good, which when brought to this discerning faculty, may
prove offensive. So should Ministers study for acuteness of judgment, and to
exercise their senses, to judge betwixt good and evil, and to discern the
spirits. An instructor of others out of the Law, should have skill Heb. 5.14.
[(...)] to prove and make trial of, and give a sound judgment upon things
that 1 Cor. 12, 10. Romans 2.18. Phil. 1.10.
differ.

Besides, he must not be broken-footed, or broken-handed. The feet are for
walking, the hands for working. Gospel-Priests must not cease and leave off
walking in holy ways, or performing of holy works. If others must not be Gal.
6.9. 2 These. 3.13.
weary of well doing, how much less they? No, nor walk or work by halfs, not
having fit Organs or Instruments for service. Many and great are the
inconveniences of the defect in these members, but far sadder, when those that
are employed in sacred functions tread awry, and halt between God and Baal, or
put forth their hands to any iniquity.

He must not be Rev. 21.20.
Crook-backt, or a dwarf, or that has a blemish in his eye, or be scurvy or
scabbed, or unfit for Generation; and one word in the Hebrew signifies crooked
and deceitful. The crookedness of the body is an usual Index of a perverse
spirit. They are a Deuteronomy. 32.5.
perverse and a crooked generation, as Moses complained of the Jews. Therefore
Paul exhorts the people of God to be blameless and harmeless in the midst of a
Phil. 2.15.
crooked and perverse Nation. There is an old saying: Take heed of them whom
God has marked; which may be heeded in a sober and serious sense. It Is
observable that Homer brings in crooked Iliad. 2. v. 212. Thersites yet alone
did unmeasureably brawle.
Thersites, as one full of uncomely Garrulity, and as a mover of Sedition in
the Army, (...). And afterward giving in his description of him, says thus --
(...), etc. He was the most deformed man that came to Troy, goggle-eye ^ame of
one foot, crook-shouldered, his breast bending forward.

Besides this natural deformity which some bring along with them into the
World, there is another cause of it, that is accidental; viz. a spirit of
infirmity and weakness, through some diseases: as the poor woman in the Gospel
that had bin Luke 13.11.
bowed together 18 years. Sometimes through constant bearing of weighty
burdens. As Genesis 49.15.
Issachar is represented couching down between two burdens, and bending down
his shoulders to impositions. Hence is it that sorrow, and mourning, and
oppression of spirit is resembled to Psalm. 44.25, and 145, 14. etc.
bowing or bending down to the Earth. In all which respects, such as serve at
God's Altar should be persons of generous erect spirit, calm, 2 Timothy 2.24.
gentle, easy to be entreated: full of kindness, overcoming by meekness,
those that oppose themselves. Neither should yield their shoulders to the
weight of worldly cares, which depresse the mind down to the Earth, and hinder
the soul's contemplation of divine Mysteries.

Neither must he be a Horat. Sermon. l. 2. Sat. 3. v. 309.
Dwarf: such as by way of contempt were called by the ancients, moduli
bipedalis, pigmies of two-foot high. Although it be a great sin for any to mock
and jeer at natural imperfections, for such Prove. 17.5.
reproach the Maker, more then those who contemn the poor: yet because that
Dwarfs in stature more low then ordinary, are usually taunted at by wicked and
profane spirits; The wisdom of God thought fit that no such should be
exercised in Temple-services. Though God might sometimes order it in the course
of nature that such deformed persons might proceed from the line of Aaron: yet
they were not to be advanced to the dignity of service. Our Lord may invite
little Zacheus to the Gospel-feast, yet we read not of his being sent into the
work of the Ministry. The Children of Aaron though afflicted which any of these
deformities, were yet admitted to enjoy, sustenance to Lev. 21.22.
eat of the most holy things. But certainly the intention of his was to
signify of what spiritual growth the Ministers of the 2 Pet. 3.18.
Gospel are required to be; Men well grown in grace, and in the knowledge of
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

Further, he was to be void of any blemish in his eye. Many are the Blemishes,
Distempers, Diseases of the eyes, reckoned up by the Learned Riolani System.
part. 2. p. 119. Edit. Basil. 1629.
Physicians. The word in the Hebrew for blemish is usually translated Suffusio,
from (...) to confound, or mix confusedly; and it signifies either that
disease which is called (...), Suffusion or a Cataract vulgarly, being a humor
engendered betwixt the two coats or membrans of the eye, the Cornea and the
Uvea, so called by Anatomists; or that which is called Id, Anat. p. 281. Judge.
Bat. 1649.
(...), Albugo, a white spot or Cicatrice after the cure of an Ulcer, which is
seen in the black of the eye, or in the Iris; that little fibrous circumference
about the Pupil. We see what great care there is taken about the eyes of the
Priests. As they must not be blind, so neither have any imperfections in their
eyes. Seers ought to be qualified with acuteness of eyesight, spiritual
watchmen have need of clear and bright knowledge. Ordinary Christians may
perhaps make shift to get to heaven, though with confused knowledge: but
Ministers must beg for a distinct and choice visive faculty; The eye that is
blood-shot cannot see clearly: The mind that is vexed with Choleric suffusions
cannot discern in Judgment. If Act. 9.18.
Paul be sent of the Gospel-messages, behold scales do fall from his eyes. If
any be Angels of Churches, let them pray to Rev. 3.18.
Christ for a (...), an ointment for their eyes, that they may understand the
truths of God fully and clearly.

Again, the Priests of old were not to be tainted with Lev. 21.21.
scurvy or scab. The Hebrew is (...) and (...) Arias turns them by purulenta
scabies, and scabies perpetua. The Vulg. jugis scabies and impetigo, the 70 by
(...): The first is translated a Deuteronomy. 28.35.
sore botch, If the 70 have rightly expounded it by (...), then it is the dry
Itch; as P. 269.6.
Riolanus explaines it, and so Buxtorf out of Rab. Solomon calls it the
Malignant-Scab, dry within and without. The other is the foul creeping Scab,
which the last expounds to be the Scab that cannot be healed, of near kind to
the Leprosy. But the matter is not great about terms: The meaning seems to be,
that Priests ought not to be infected either with the ordinary Itch, or the
incurable Scab, which is seldom-healed. Now as Itching-eares are 2 Timothy 4.3.
tokens of men of corrupt lusts, and full of novel fancies; every day new
itches and lustings after strange things, and new doctrines: So a Priest that
is itchy, is much more abominable, who is defiled with this pruritus novitatis,
an itching desire of venting new high-flown follies. This disease proceeds
Medicinal exposit. ex Hippoer. Gal. etc. p. 516. Edit. H. Steph. 1564.
(...), as one has noted out of Galen, from a sharp corroding humor, a thin
^erous matter not fit for nourishment? If men's blood were sound, and their
digestive faculty good, this Psora or scabbed-disease would not so
importunately afflict them. If the blood royal of truth ran pure in such a
one's veins, he would not be so foully corrupred with this itchy temper of
error.

The last thing mentioned is, perfection as to generation, the Vulg. translate
the text by herniosus, the 70 by (...). Gospel Ministers are to be spiritually
qualified for the bringing in Sons and Daughters to Christ: Paul had his
Children of the Cor. 4.15.
Corinthians and Galathiaus. John had his of the Asian Gal. 4.19. 1 John 2.12.
Churches: That Christ may see of the Isa. 53.
travel of his soul and be satisfied, Let us all pray that quickening and
enlivening virtue may never depart from the Gospel in England. That Ministers
may indeed be 1 Pet. 1.3.
Fathers in God and beget thousands to a lively hope of glory.

From all this preceding discourse, (although spiritually to be interpreted in
the main; yet) we cannot but deem it a most lovely and decent thing for
Gospel Ministers to have even bodily perfections, especially such as may give a
convenient capacity for the work of the Ministry, as in the case of eyesight:
without which many Church Matters cannot be well transacted. Although its true,
the perfections of the soul are the main and principal qualifications of a
Minister: yet it were well it might not be said by any scoffing Ismael, as was
once of Socrates, Anima [praeconis Evangelici] malo habitat. But certainly,
greatly to blame are such Parents, who will offer the Mal. 1.8.
blind, and the lame of their Children to Gods Sanctuary.

The Person thus qualified with such external bodily perfections, and
descending from the loins of Aaron, might be admitted into this sacred College
termed a Priest, and put on the holy garments and officiate in the significant
services of the Sanctuary, of all which in their due place and order. First I
shall speak a word or two of the name, the common Hebrew term is (...) Cohen,
which some derive from (...) to fit and dispose and order, viz. the rites and
ceremonies of Sacrifice. But as to the English term, Priest, which is derived
from the Saxon word Priester, and that from the Greek (...), Presbyter, it
signifies, as to the origination of the word, an Elder only: and in this sense
Priest may be given as a denomination to a Gospel-Minister, very honorably
according to the new testament Style in many places, as in the Acts of the
Apostles, where in one Act. 20.17.
verse the Ministers of the Church of Ephesus are called Elders, and in another
V. 28.
verse Overseers, in the Greek (...), Bishops, there being it seems in the
Primitive time several Bishops or Elders in one City, and so at Philippi, where
the Apostle in the inscription of his Epistle, dedicates it to the Saints,
Phil. 1.1.
Bishops, and Deacons, in that City: and therefore our famous Dr. Whitaker
concludes with the generality of the Divines of the reformed Religion in these
words. Calvinus nostrique omnes hanc Metropolitanorum and Primatum hierarchiam,
non a Christo vel Apostolis institutam, sed Ecclesiae authoritate introductam
esse scribunt. Calvin, and all ours, do write that this hierarchy of
Metropolitans and Primates, was not instituted by Christ or his Apostles, but
introduced by the authority of the Church. And again, out of Novellus, Dr.
Whitaker. Tom. 2. operum p. 525. Col. 2.
Archiepiscopus authoritatem omnem, non Divino, sed Ecclesiastico jure tenet.
An Archbishop holds all his authority by Ecclesistical, not by Divine right.
And Ibid. p. 526. Col. 2.
afterward, clearing this out of Jerome that Bishops and Presbyters were the
same in ancient times; he produces a testimony of that learned Father, out of
his Ibid. p. 540. Col. 1.
Comment upon Titus. Noverint Episcopi, se magis consuetudine, quam
Dispositionis dominicae veritate presbyteris esse majores. Let Bishops know
(says Jerome) that they are greater then presbyters by custom, rather then the
true institution of our Lord: where he is showing that the same person who is
called an Tom. 9. Fol. 153. b. Edit. 1530. Lugd. Tit. 1.5.
Elder in the 5th verse, is termed a Bishop in the 7th. So that Elder or
Presbyter is the proper Scripture-name of a Gospel-Minister, or else Bishop,
Overseer, etc. but by no means to be called Priest in any other sense then
according to the origination of the word before spoken of. For as the term
Priest is now detorted from its primitive notation, to signify one that offers
sacrifice: So it is a word of indignity, scorn and contempt, which wicked and
profane spirits do cast upon the faithful Servants of Christ, who disown any
sacrifice under the new Testament, save that one only, which our High Priest
after the Order of Melchizedeck did offer up Heb. 7.27, and 9, 12, 25, 26, 28,
and 10, 10. 1 Pet. 3.18.
once for all. Wherefore in the whole Testament (for what ever yet I could
observe) we shall not find the Gospel Ministers directly called (...), that is,
Sacrificing Priests, but by other terms. Although the Jews had one High Priest
over all the rest: yet it follows not that we must under the Gospel have such
a one, unless it be Christ himself, who ever lives to make intercession for us.

But to discharge this point, it is high time to proceed, and not to suffer the
Priests to stand so long unclothed: and here I shall delay no longer by recital
of various opinions, concerning the differences of the garments, wherewith the
High Priest and his inferior attendants were adorned: but speak to that in each
particular Vestment.

In the first place we read of linen Breeches, which were common both to Exodus
28.43. Levit. 6.10.16.4.
Aaron the High Priest, and to his Sons the ordinary Priests: They were made
of Exodus 39.28.
fine twined linen. But why of linen? I shall not say for the same reason,
which De Iside and Osiride Tom. 1. Moral. gr. H. Steph. 80. p. 528.
Plutarch mentions, wherefore the Priests of Isis wore pure white linen:
(...), etc.] For the color sake, which the flower of flax does put forth like
the brightness of the Heaven compassing the world. The true cause of all these
things is (says he), It is a wicked thing for that which is pure to be defiled
by an impure, as Plato speaks. But the excrements and reffuse of the al^ment
are not chaste and pure. But all wool and hair are bred and increased by
excrements: and therefore it was ridiculous for them that cut off their own
hair as a token of chastity, to be covered with the wool of cattle.

Besides, flax grows out of the earth-which is immortal, etc. and yields
matter for thin, and clean Vestments, which press not with their weight, and is
fit for all seasons of the year, and does least of all breed small vermin in
the body, as they say.

Now I shall not apply this of the Garments (which the superstitious Priests of
an Idol did wear) to the Holy Priests of the most High God: only thus far we
may take notice, that as in hundreds of other things; so likewise in this of
Vestments, Satan did endeavor to ape out the solemnities of the Worship of the
true and living God at the Temple. And therefore as Truth and true Worship is
elder then Error and false worship: so the grounds of some exterior
circumstances might be the same; As in this, Linen being a most cleanly,
light, and convenient wearing for the Priests: nay, God himself expressly
commands the use of Linen in the Priests, and forbids Woollen by name, that so
their garments might not cause Sweat.

But let us rather consider the end of their garments, which was, says the text
to Exodus 28.42.
cover their nakedness, and that they Verse. 43.
bear not iniquity and dye. The former declaring what comely and decent
addresses should be made, when the Priests drew nigh to the service of the
Altar: the other, that they bear not, that is, Rivet. in Exodus page 1551. a.
that they commit not iniquity; For so did any of the Priests who presumed to
minister without them. And as to the Gospel Ministry, they might signify that
Reverence which ought to be upon their hearts who deal in the things of God: It
signifies our nature, defilement, and impurity, and what need we have of a
Covering when we draw nigh to God. The chastity and purity of the mind is
required in the administration of sacred affairs.

Secondly, The next garment was a Exodus 28.40.
Coat (...), which, Jerome Tab. Tom. 3. p. 60.
Jerome says, was (...) talaris down to the ancle or foot, and was fitted to
the body with close sleeves, and had no plaits. This Coat was made of Exodus
39.27.
fine linen for all the inferior Priests: but for Aaron, or the successive
High Priest, it was embroidered, as we read in the 39th. verse, where the Coat
for Aaron is mentioned as distinct from the common one for the ordinary
Priests, verse 40. So that it differed not from the other as to form, or
fashion, and use; but as to the curiosity: being made of linen and
embroidered. And that we should not mistake it for the Robe of the Ephod; it is
mentioned distinct from that in the 4th verse: where Moses was commanded to
make Vestments for Aaron, an Ephod, and a Robe, and a Exodus 28.4.
broidered Coat.

The learned Ainsworth on Exodus 28.4. would have the word (...) to note only
the working of the linnen-coat, opere ocellato with eylet-holes, and not
embroidered. Yet Buxtorf, and Pagnine, do turn it also by tesellatum and
intertextum checkered or inter-woven-work: possibly the Gold or any other
thread might be woven in the form of Eyes: but however, it seems it had a
different work.

Now then, as the High Priest had a broidered or curious straight Coat, when
the inferiors had only a bare linnen-coat: we may thence note the
super-excellency of Christ our High Priest in the curious Embroidery of his
Graces above all his Ministers and servants in the work of the Gospel: As
Joseph, a great type of Christ, had a Genesis 37.3.
parti-colored Coat, above all his Brethren. We may take notice of Christ
represented to St. John in a Vision, clothed with a garment (c) down to his
feet: that is, his pure, spotless Righteousness; it was (...) down to the
feet, i.e. Perfect and complete Righteousness. Of him the Angels of the
Churches should buy their Rev. 3.18.
white Raiment, that they may be clothed, that the shame of their nakedness do
not appear. That these linen garments, which were to cover the bodies of the
Priests, did signify the Righteousness of Christ to cover the soul, seems to
be hinted by that allusion of the Psalmist, when he prays, that the Psalm
132.9.
Priests might be clothed with Righteousness. So the people of God who are
made Rev. 1.6.
priests to the Father, shall walk with Christ in Rev. 3, 4, 5.
white raiment: Yea, the wife of the Lamb is to be arrayed in fine linen,
clean and white. For the Rev. 19.8.
fine linen is the Righteousness of the Saints:: O blessed is that man, whose
nakedness (by reason of sin) is covered with these pure Robes of Christ's
imputed Righteousness; and Happy is he that watches and Rev. 16.15.
keeps his garments, lest he walk naked and they see his shame, who having
Romans 13.13.
put on the Lord Jesus Christ Ephesians. 4.24. Gal. 3.27.
in righteousness and true holiness, Psalm. 32.1.
do hate Jud. 23.
the garments spotted by the flesh.

The third thing mentioned in the Array of the Priests, was a Girdle: and was
common both to the High Priest and the inferiors: That the ordinary Priest had
this Exodus 28.40. and 29, 39, 29. Lev. 8.13.
girdle, is frequently mentioned. That the High Priest had the like girdle to
gird his forementioned-coat close to him, is clearly recited, and that in
contradistinction to another girdle, viz. that of the Ephod, which was peculiar
to him alone: as may be observed, when he was orderly clothed by Moses with
all the Holy Vestments: First ye have a coat put upon him, and that girded to
him with a Lev. 8.7. Hieronym. de vest. Sacerdot. Tom. 3. page 60.
girdle. In the next place, Moses puts the Ephod upon him, and girded him with
the curious girdle of the Ephod.

This Girdle which we are now speaking of, was called (...) Abhnet; by the 70.
(...), which Jerome in the forecited place describes thus: It was like the skin
of a Snake, with which she puts off her old age; it was woven in a round shape,
that you would take it to be a long purse (in those kind of girdles the
Ancients used to put their money.) The woofe of it was made of threads of
Scarlet, purple and blew colors, and the warp with Byssus; silk, as some, but
rather a fine sort of flax: or as we translate it Exodus 29.39.
fine twined linen. For strength and beauty: It was so elegantly distinguished
with embroidered work, that you would think various Flowers and Gemms were
added to it, and not weaved in it by the hand of an Artizan.

They were to bind the linen Coat beforementioned, with this Belt or Girdle,
between the Navel and the Breast: It was of the breadth of four fingers: and
hung down to the legs on one side: [When there was need of haste for
Sacrifices, they cast it over their left shoulder]. I know there be that hold
there were two sorts of these Girdles; the one of white linen only, mentioned
in Lev. 16.41
Leviticus: when the High Priest was to lay down his own costly and beautiful
Garments on the great Humiliation or Expiation-day, and to enter into the Holy
place with the garments only of an ordinary Priest, to signify his humility
and lowliness of spirit. The other, that girdle, which was even now described
and used by the High Priest only. Indeed, where Moses relates the making of the
Vestments, he mentions Coats, Bonnets, Breeches in the plural, being for Aaron
and his sons: Exodus 39.27, 28, 29.
but of the Mitre and Girdle in the singular only: as if there were but one of
those made, viz. for Aaron: where the Make of the Girdle is mentioned, as
before described; But I shall leave this nicety to others determination, and
only propose my conjecture as to that place of Levit. where it is to be
observed, that the Text does not say, the girdle was all of white linen, but
barely linen and so it does not distinguish: for the various-coloured girdle
mentioned often before in Exodus was all made of linen; only of threads of four
various and different colors: For the fine-twined linen, I take to be white
and untinctured with any color.

But to proceed to a more material enquiry: and that is, What was signified by
the Girdle; and herein we shall consider the various ends or uses of a Girdle.

1. A girdle is of use to Is. 5.27. and 22, 21,
strengthen the body, and preserve it in hard labor and straining-services:
and therefore when the Apostle exhorts Christians to stand to the truth
manfully, Ephesians. 6.14.
he bids them to stand having their loins (c) girt about with truth. As a
girdle strengthens the body, so does truth the mind: Acts 12.8.
It signifies activity and promptness in business.

Prove. 1.9.
2. A girdle is for ornament and beauty: in which sense we may apply what
Solomon speaks concerning instruction: that it should be an Ornament of Grace,
and as Chains ( viz. of Gold) about the neck.

3. As the Girdle served of old for a purse to put the money in, Take no money
in your girdles, in the Greek Mat. 3.1, 9. Dr. Arrowswith. Tact. Sacr. l. 2. c.
1.. 6. page 104.
Rich are they, who are well fraught with Truth; I know thy poverty (said our
Lord to the Angel of Smyrna, Rev. 2.9.) but thou art rich, In truth, the
chiefest Riches. We must Prove. 23.23.
buy the truth at any rate, and never sell it: we must trade for the truth laid
up in Scripture, dig for it as for hid Treasures; Gospel Ministers especially
as they must be girt about with the girdle of truth; so they must always walk
with the precious pieces of truth about them.

4. A Girdle binds-on the Garments, and keeps them from loosnesse: from
unhandsome and uncomely flying out, that the nakedness be not discovered:
Error and Sin make men naked; When the Israelites had worshipped the golden
Calf, they unloosed the girdle of truth and sincere worship: When Aaron made
them Exodus 32.25.
naked to their shame. Those that are shaken from the truths of the Gospel,
their garments fly loose Ovid. met. 1.
Sinuantur flamine vestes) by the winds of corrupt and pernicious Ephesians. 4.14.
Doctrines: and when once this Golden girdle is let fall from about their
heart, usually men turn often to loose and extravagant courses; and once being
ungirt from the girdle off Truth, at length prove unblest. It is an Emblem of
chastity: as, Solvere Zonam was used of old for married persons.

5. A Girdle keeping the garments close to the body, is a means of warmth in
cold seasons: Truth well settled to a man's heart, makes him zealous for God in
stormy-times.

6. A Girdle helps a man to continue and persist in his labors, and may
therefore hold forth perseverance and constancy. Gird up the loins of your
minds, be sober and hope to the 1 Pet. 1.13.
end, says holy Peter. Let your loins be girt about, and wait for the Lords
coming, Luke 12.35.

But to conclude: The variety of colors mentioned in the Girdle, signify,
says Ribera page 188.
Ribera, all the various Virtues, which tie the life of a good man together.

I shall not be so curious, as to think that the white noted Innocence, and the
blew Heavenlinesse the Scarlet persecution, the purple, a holy maity of Spirit;
as that was an Emperial color. But rather as the Girdle in general noted
Truth; So the variety of colors, that Saints, especially Ministers, must be
sound and Orthodox in all points of truth, they must hold fast 2 Timothy 1.3.
the whole form, or Synopsis, the Encyclopoedia, the enriching Girdle of
wholesome words, in faith and love in Christ Jesus.

4. The fourth parcel of Array mentioned in order, Leviticus 8. was the Robe of
the Ephod, and this was peculiar to the High Priest only, which had hanging at
the bottom of it, the Bells and Pomgranates: It was made all of Exodus 28.31.
blew or sky-colour, to note, say some, the Heavenliness of Christ our
High Priest. Some think this garment noted Christ's Exodus 28.31.
personal Righteousness. [The threads thereof were twelve-times double, as
Romans 10.17.
Ainsworth notes out of Maimondes) the hole thereof (through which the head was
put) was woven at the beginning of the weaving; It had no sleeves, but was
divided into two skirts from the end of the neck unto beneath, after the manner
of all Robes, and was not joined together, but about the neck, only.] And so he
observes the garment of Christ to be a Coat John 19.23.
without seam, woven from the top throughout, [which though not a Priestly
garment, yet, says he, it was mystical,] and is usually applied to unity.
Jerome says Vbi supra, page 63.
Significat rationem sublimius patere non omnibus, sed majoribus atque
perfectis]. It signifies that the reason of Heavenly and sublime things, is not
known to all, but to those that are of the high form and perfect.

At the bottom were the Pomgranates: The juice of which fruit is Dioscorid. cum
Mathiola. l. 1. c. 137.
cooling and binding. So we read of but a touch of the hem of Christ's garment,
cooling and refreshing the heart, when scorched with the burning wrath of God
for sin, and of a binding nature to stop the Mat. 9.20.
bloody issue of the soul.

As it contains within its shell or rind, multitudes of grains or kernels: so
does the Cant. 6.7, 11.
Church contain many members who are drawn into a body by the Prophetical
Office of Christ or his saving Doctrine.

And as there were many Pomgranates at the hemme of Christ's garment: so there
be many instituted Churches in the World: but all depend and hang upon the
garment of Christ, and are taught by him. The fruit is sweet and pleasant: the
smell is fragrant and delightful. The teachings of Christ have mixed, in them,
utile dulci: not only beauty and sweet scent, but as in flowers there is
hony-likenesse. We must draw nigh to Christ, not only for the pleasantness,
but the profitablenesse, not only for the smell, but the food of Truth.

Betwixt each Pomgranate (which some say were 72 in number) but others that the
Bells and Pomgranates both put together were 72. Prideaux, page 14.) did hang a
golden Bell, which seems further to clear up the accommodation of this garment
to Christ's Prophetical Office. For the Bells were to sound when Aaron went into
the Exodus 28.31.
Sanctuary. So when Christ comes into his Church in teaching-work, the sound of
the Gospel Bells is most melodious, converting our brutish natures into mild
and ingenuous tempers: For by our hearing of this Gospel-sound is Romans 10.17.
Exo. 30.10.
Faith engendered in the heart to believe on the Son of God.

The High Priest never went into the Holy of Holies with this and the other
sumptuous garments: For he went into that most sacred place Rev. 16.34. Heb.
9.7.
but once in the year. And at that time he is expressly charged to vest himself
with the Lev. 16.4.
common garments of ordinary Priests: but when come out, to Ver. 23.
lay them down, and to wash himself, and put on his own proper pontifical
Ornaments. In the like manner our Lord Jesus when he went into Heaven,
signified by the Oracle, He laid down his pontifical garments as to his
Prophetical or Teaching Office in his own person to the outward man. For when
he ascended into Heaven, he gave Psalm 68.18. Ephesians. 4.8.
gifts to men, instituting Teachers for his Church to supply his bodily
absence: although he never ceases Teaching the heart, and helping them to Isa.
48.17, and 57.12.
profit by the outward Ministry of the Word. The sound of the golden Bells
ringing the glad tidings of peace is gone forth to the end of the World. Psalm
19.3, 4.
There is no Speech nor Language, where their Voice is not heard by the
Ministry of his faithful Ambassadors: who do 2 Cor. 5.20.
pray us in Christ's stead to be reconciled to God.

To conclude, as there were Pomgranates joined with the Bells at the hem of
Christ's garments: so ought there to be joined the savoury fruits of
righeousness in life and walking, with the melodious and pleasant sound of the
Gospel, in every Ministers preaching of the truths of Christ to the Church.

It is observable that in the Book of Leviticus, there is one thing omitted,
and that is the Breeches which were first put on, as has been manifested in
the first Paragraph of this Discourse of Vestments. The reason whereof, the
Learned Jerome conjectures at, in these following words: Jerome ad Fabiolam de
vest. Sacerd. Tom. 3. page 64.
Desolis faeminabus nihil diciur, hac (ut arbitror) causa, quod ad genitalia
nostra and verenda Lex non mittit manum, etc. Which with the rest I shall
render in English.)

Of the Breeches only there is nothing spoken, for this cause (as I conceive,
says Jerome) because the Law does not intermedle with the more secret parts:
but we our selves ought to cover and vail our more hidden members, worthy of
confusion: and to reserve the conscience of the purity of the thighs to be
judged of God. Of other Virtues, (as for example) Wisdom, Fortitude, Justice,
Temperance, Humility-Meekness, Liberality; even other men may give a judgment.
The conscience only knows our chastity, and humane eyes cannot be certain
judges of these things, without which they are exposed to lust even as brute
beasts: Wherefore the Apostle says, Concerning Virgins I have no Precept from
the Lord; as if so be Moses should say, I cloathe you not with Breeches,
neither impose I necessity on any, he that will be a Priest let him cloth
himself]: Thus far Jerome. A little different from that is the fancy of Origin,
Homil. 7. in Levit. cap. 8. page 148. edit. Froben. 1545.
Origin, which he that pleases may consult. I shall not meddle with any
censure: but ctave leave to interpose this as my thought in this matter, why it
is left out in Leviticus, because in that 7th. verse he is discoursing of and
putting upon Aaron all the Highpriests garments, distinct from the others:
whereas the linnen-Breeches only were common to both: or rather, because it was
not so convenient for Moses to put on these more secret Vestments: but both
Aaron and his sons put them on apart, Dr. Prideaux, Orat.
and privately by themselves.

Now having spoken a little by insertion of that which was before omitted: I
come to the Ephod it self.

The 5th. part of Array, mentioned in that orderly Method in the Book of Lev.
8.7.
Leviticus, where Moses did cloathe Aaron the HighPriest, according to Gods
Institution, was the Ephod it self.

page 14.
The Description whereof, together with its various and curious Ornaments we
have at large recited in the Book of Lev. 8.7.
Exodus. The word (...) Ephod comes from (...) Aphad, cinxit, superinduit,
amicivit: To cloathe, cover, and compass with a garment; And thence the Greeks
had their word (...) to fit and make complete. The 70 do render this word Exodus
29.5.
by (...) to fit or close together. The 70 turn it by (...) a garment for the
shoulders: Aquilae (...), assumentum and vestis sutilis, a garment sowed
together of two or more pieces, as Ut supra. p. 61.
Jerome relates. Some translate it by Pallium, a cloak or little vest for the
shoulders, and thence came both the name of Pall, and the ground of its
donation by the Pope, at the consecration of an Archbishop or High Priest of a
Province.

The matter whereof this Ephod (for the Jewish High Priest) was made, we read
to have been of five things: Of Gold, Blew, Purple, Scarlet, and fine twined
Linen. Of the Gold, Jerome in the forcited place, says thus: Aurilaminae id
est, bracteae mira tenuitate tenduntur ex quibus secta fila torquentur. Little
lamens, plates or small leaves of Gold, are stretched-out of a wonderful
thinness: out of which threads (being cut out) are wreathed into wire.

The blew is called (...) the 70 turn it by (...), the color which we see in
the common blew field-Hyacinth. Some expound it of the Violet color: but
generally they agree that it was blew, although one takes it to be yellow, but
that seems not to be true, because of the gold were of the same color. Some
think it was made of the blood of a certain fish: but how the Jews did dye or
give the blew tincture to wool or thread, I have not read any certain relation.
As for the manner of performing it among the Romans, Vitruvius has lest upon
it record in his Architecture, l. 7. c. 11.

The other is Purple in the Hebrew (...) which some derive from (...) to wear,
the 70 turn it by (...), and others generally consenting with the Vulgar Lat.
render by Purpura, purple. The color was anciently made by these means. In the
Tyrian seas there is a kind of shellfish, Pancirol deperdi. Tit. 1. page 61.
that has a very white vein in the midst of its jaws, which being cut, there
issues out a precious liquor, with which they did tincture wool and silk of
old. This blood mixed with a little water they put into leaden Vessels, and
placed them in a Furnace moderately heated, and thence did arise that beautiful
color, like to a deep Clove-gilly-flower, mixed of red and black. The cause of
the loss of this ancient curiosity, Pancirollus takes to be, because Syria and
those neighboring places have come into the hands of the Turks and other
barbarous Nations: I shall not need to mention what Salmuth upon him, Pliny, c.
36.
Pliny, Vitruv. l. 7. c. 14.
Vitruvius and others have written copiously on this Subject.

The fourth color mentioned, is in the Hebrew (...) Tolagnath Hashani, which
Arias Montanus turns, Vermiculum cocci, the worm of Scarlet: and from thence
all deep red-colours, are called by the name of Vermilion. The 70 render it by
(...), The Scarlet color. Exodus 25.5, 6.
It was of a deep red, as is evident by the Prophet Isaiah, speaking of sins
(...) red as Crimson, as we render it: the word is the same with this here in
Exodus translated Scarlet. Indeed the former word in Esaias, translated Scarlet,
is, Isa. 1.18.
(...) and by the vulgar Lat. here in Exodus turned, bis tinctum twice died:
and by some (...). As for the story we have it in Dioscorides. That there is a
small shrub growing in Galatia, Armenia, and other places, Dioscor. l. 4. c. 43.
to which there sticks little grains or seeds, which are of a red color, and
contain a reddish liquor or moisture in them, and abound with little red worms:
and therefore Mathiolus notes out of Li. 24. cap. 4.
Pliny, that it is called Scolecion from the little worm, with which clothes
were colored in ancient times: And he further notes out of Serapio, that it is
the very same thing which the Arabians call Chermes, of which as the principal
ingredient, that noble Confection of Alkermes is made, so famous among the
learned Physicians for its cordial virtue. Some call them in their
Dispensatorie,s grains of Paradise, for their excellent use and benefit; and it
is observable, 2 Chronicles. 2.7, and 3, 14.
that where mention is made of the like preparations of Materials as to the
Temple, in the Book of Chronicles, that which we read Crimson, is in the Hebrew
(...) Carmeil, Cant. 7.5.
and being mentioned in the Canticles, is in the Marginal notes translated
Crimson. Schindler hinting a likeness in the word to the Arab.. Kermes says,
Schindl. col. 912. Scaliger Contr. Cardan. exercit. 325. 13. p. 997. Edit.
Hanov. 1620.
it was a sort of color, which he turns Ezekiel. 27.7.
Carmesinus, and Pagnine, in the word says, it signifies that color which is
commonly called grains, or died in grain.

The last thing is called by our Translators, fine linen, and fine
twined-linnen: in the Hebr. (...) Shesh, which the 70 turn by (...) Byssus,
fine flax, or as some, silk. In the Prophecy of Ezekiel, we find the Markets
of Tire did trade in this Commodity brought from Egypt, a place famous for
flax, as is noted other where in Scripture, and by our modern Travelers in
those parts: Thence also we may note, that the blew and purple was brought into
Syria from the Isles of Elisha, that is, of the Aegaean sea: and therefore
Amorgus, one of the Sporades is very famous for these colors: as Bochartus at
large, Exodus 9.31. 1 Chronicles. 15.29.
part. 2. l. 1. c. 14. page 449. where Argaman the former word for purple, and
Amorgus the name of the Isle, are by him deduced from the same Original
beforementioned. The Chaldee paraphrase on the 25 of Exodus, v. 5.6. renders
this word by (...) Buza, and thence probably the word (...) was derived; and
where, in the Hebrew, David is said to be clothed (...) Megmil Buz, in a Pal
or Robe of Byssus. We turn it, a Robe of fine linen. Now in that the Scripture
mentions it as coming from Egypt, which was not famous for silk, but for
linen; therefore we conceive that linen is the proper meaning of the word.
Besides, the word Shesh is used for the purest sort of white Marble, where
David relates his preparation of 1 Chronicles. 29.3.
Marble-stones in abundance, the 70 turn it (...), Marble of the Isle Paros,
which was the purest and whitest in account of the whole world: and hence we
may conceive that the word is truly turned by Linen, for its pure whiteness:
whereas the silk of the Seres among the Indians (as we know by the worms,
brought thence by degrees, at length to Naples and at last to us) is twined
from webbs or round balls generally very yellow, and none pure white at all:

Hitherto have we enquired of the several colors, and the materials of the
woven work of this Vestment before us.

Now it rests to speak in a word how the Gold-wires, the twined-linnen, and the
blew purple and Scarlet-threds were woven together.

The cunning workman, (so called in Exodus,) Exodus 35.35.
took one thread of pure gold, and joined it with Ainsworth in Exodus 28.6.
6 threads of blew, and twisted these seven threads into one.

In like manner he did with one of gold and six of purple, and one with six of
Scarlet, and one with six of fine white linen. Thus were there employed 4
threads of gold, 24 of the rest, and 28 in all: but were reduced into 4 great
threads of a twisted line, with which he wove the Breast Plate and the Ephod, as
Ainsworth in Exodus 28.6.
Ainsworth has observed out of Maimonides.

The colors of these several threads representing blood of all sorts, did
signify (says the same Page 99.
Author) that the Church and all her actions should be washed and dyed in the
Blood of Christ, into whose death they are Rev. 1.5, 7.14.
Baptized. Nay, Christ himself warring against his enemies, appears in garments
died Isa. 63.1, 2. Rev. 19.13.
red in blood from Bozrah; Dr. Tailor of Types, p. 103.
A Reverend man has applied this garment of the Ephod to that Holy flesh of
Christ, which veiled his Deity as a garment; and that it was taken not from
Heaven, but from his Mother on earth: as the matter of that garment grew
imediately out of the earth: which is therefore so spoken, because he mentions
it to have been made only of linen, and so to signify the purity and
unspotted innocence of his person. The Robe of the Ephod is termed Megnil in
the Hebr. and the very same word is used of Christ, that he was clad with a
Megnil or cloak of Zeal. Is. 59.17. 2 Samuel 6.14.
Zeal properly and strictly taken, is the Ardor and boiling fervency of all the
affections, when alarmed by the superior Faculties to perform some noble
design: though indeed its usually taken for a quick and warm mixture of love
and anger, to revenge a friend upon an enemy. But as it is the Ebullition or
incensed keenness and sprightliness of all the affections: so might the various
colors in this Pall or cloak of the Ephod, signify the great and ardent love
that Christ bears to his Church in undertaking the great work of the Priestly
Office on her behalf. Some thought there is, that it might hold out his
Prophetical Office: for in all these garments there was some special note, and
the same thing might be hinted by various Symbols to teach the dull spirits of
the Jews: But why the Prophetical Office is hence gathered, because King David,
who was a Holy Prophet, wore a linen (a) Ephod, and Samuel, 2 Samuel 6.14.
who was no Priest by extract, but a Levite, and constituted a Prophet and
Priest extraordinary upon the death of Eli, had, when a little one, a linen
Ephod; I shall leave to the Authors of that opinion.

But generally it was the note of a Priest, as is observed from the stories of
Gideon, Micah, Samuel, Abiah, Doog and Abiathar; and therefore when we find
Priests with Ephods, its thought it was a Badge and Cognizance of that part of
their Office which lay in teaching and instructing of the people, when they put
on an Ephod of linen.

But to lay all these Conjectures aside about Common Priests, Levites, or
Kings, their wearing of Ephods: when as we know by Gods appointment, there were
but four garments which the Priests themselves might wear, the Breeches, Coats,
Girdles, and Bonnets: this of the Ephod was peculiar to the High Priest alone;
and therefore who ever used it without particular dispensation, did presume
against God's Command: or else, which is the more soft solution of it, that the
Jews had a small light and short garment, Dr. Prideaux Orat. 2. p. 14.
which they cast over their shoulders, and was common amongst them, being
called an Ephod, a term for a garment that is very common, as was spoken to, at
the beginning in its Etymology. Whereas the High-Priest's Ephod was thus
curiously wrought as has bin declared: none daring to have one of the like
work; whereas of linen or woollen, or any other matter possibly they might
commonly wear garments of that name and shape in making.

Besides, this Ephod was very different from all others in that curious and
significant Ornament, of the two Onyx stones engraven with the names of the 12
Tribes of Israel, Exodus 28.10.

Casaub. ad Annal. Baron. p. 169.


six of their Names on one Stone, and the six other Names of the rest upon the
other stone according to their birth. Each stone was set in gold, and placed on
the shoulder pieces of the Ephod. The Onyx stone is called in the Hebrew (...)
Shoham. The 70 calls it (...), the Smaragd. The Vulgar lapis Onychinus, the
Chaldee-paraphrase (...) the Beryl. Others, Crystal. By Jerome ub^ supra. p. 61.
Aquila, Symmachus, and Theodotion, the Onyx. By Josephus and Junius, the
Sardonyx; and further Jerome adds that the names of the six elder sons were
engraven on the stone of the right shoulder, and of the six younger on the
left. But Ainsworth observes out of the Rabbis, that they were graven in this
order: the name of Reuben the eldest in the first place, on the right shoulder,
and Simeon the second son in the first place on the left shoulder; Levi, the
third son, in the second place 1. Reuben. 2. Simeon. 3. Levi. 4. Judah. 9.
Issachar. 10. Zebulon. 6. Naphthali. 5. Dan. 7. Gad. 8. Asher. 11. Joseph. 12.
Benjamin. on the right; and so on in this series, according to their birth. But
to enquire a little into this stone: I read that there was a famous Castle
called Du-Sohaim, in former times in the land of Chaulan or Havilah in Arabia,
mentioned by Bochart. Phaleg. l. 2. c. 28.
Bochartus out of the Arabian Geographer: which had its name from the plenty of
these stones in that place, or the stones from the name of the City, for they
are found in that Land, as Genesis 2.12.
Moses has asserted in the description of Paradise, where the 70 translate it
(...); The stone called Prasinus, because its greenness was like the leaves of
Leeks, and is a kind of Smaragd. In the Book of Job 28.16.
Job where the Shoham is turned by us the Onyx, and called precious, the 70
render it (...), it cannot be compared to the precious Oynx. In three Exodus
28.9. and 35, 25. and 39, 5.
places of Exodus they turn it by the Smaragd. In Ezekiel. 28.13.
Ezekiel they translate it Sapphire, In other Exodus 28.20, and 39, 11.
places, by the Beryl, by the Exodus 35.9.
Sardius. And lastly, in 1 Chronicles, 29.2. they translate, and the stones Soham,
expressing the very Hebrew word. So that the incertainty of their version being
so great, we cannot fix upon any thing from them. But the general current of
interpreters runs for the Onyx, so called from its likeness in color to the
Nail of a man's hand; although there want not varieties of colors in them: But
as to the Arabian kind, Pliny. lib. 37. Cap. 6.
Pliny writes that it is black with white circles. And Solinus. Cap. 36. ad
finem.
Solinus of the Sardonyx, found near a bay of the Arabian Sea, speaks largely.
So that the plenty of these stones in Arabia, not only mentioned there to be
found by Moses, but by Pliny and Solinus do somewhat fortify our Translation.
Besides, it was requisite that those stones should be somewhat large as the
Onyx is, to engrave the six names orderly in them; and accordingly it is
related concerning them, that beyond many other sorts they are of the largest
cize. For at Boethius de gemmis lib. 2. c. 92. p. 243. Edit. Lugd. Bat.
Rome there be six small Pillars made of this Onyx stone in the Church of St.
Peter. And at Collen in Germany, in the Cathedral Church, in the Chapel of the
three Kings of the East, there is one exceeding a palm or a hand-breath.
Mithridates King of Pontus had two thousand Cups made of this stone, in his
Treasury. Pancirollus de Myrrhinis. Tit. 7. p. 23.
Pompey brought thence a pair of Tables three foot broad, and four foot long,
made of this stone. Wherefore being induced by these three probable grounds,
the place of its Original, the quantity, and the common consent of many learned
Authors; It will do well to rest in the version of our Reverend Translators, as
to this gemme of the Onyx. Placaeus de Typis p. 96.
Placaeus would derive it from (...) the gift of the multitude, for its worth
and price; or, from (...) to make equal, even, or to polish. Of all precious
stones this was chosen by God to be placed upon the shoulders of the
High Priest: In which all the Children of Israel were represented and equalized
among themselves in the same stone, and therefore was most convenient to
represent that precious stone, in which both Romans 10.12.
Jews and Gentiles, Greeks and Barbarians, bond and free, male and female Gal.
3.28. Col. 3.11.
are all one, even in Christ Jesus. As Aaron was the Type of Christ, so the
Children of Israel the Types of all Believers; the New Testament Saints being
called the Israel of God. As Romans 9.6. Gal. 6:16. John 1.12.
Aaron carried their names into the Sanctuary before God: so does Christ bear
his people before the Father in his intercession for them. As the stones were
of equal bigness, and each of the Tribes had the same portion of place in the
signature or graving: So, whoever believe on his name have the same prividedge
to become the Sons of God, and all have a share in the like precious 2 Pet. 1.1.
faith, and a Joynt-stock in the same Jude 3.
common salvation: Wherefore it is observed by Exodus 28. v. 13.
Mr. Ainsworth that this Shoham or Onyx, (which he, following the Chaldee,
calls the Beryl) being the last save one in the twelve stones, and second of
the fourth row in the breast plate, on which the name of Joseph (the youngest
Son of Jacob but one) was engraven, was therefore taken for the stone of the
Ephod; for that Joseph in supporting the Church of God, the Patriarchs in
Egypt, was a principal Type of Christ, on whose shoulders the Isa. 9.6.
Government is laid, who presents his People pure and holy unto God in his
glorious Meditation and intercession for a perpetual Exodus 28.12. John 17.20.
memorial through all generation: Accordingly, every Gospel-Minister is to bear
in mind the requests and petitions of the people, and present them to God,
always making 1 These. 1.2.
mention of them in their prayers. They ought likewise to bear them on their
Luke 15.5.
shoulders, as the good Shepherd does his sheep; to nurse them, as a Nurse
that carries her 1 These. 2.7.
Children in her arms: Gal. 6.2, 6.
bearing their burdens, and so fulfill the Law of Christ.

I shall now proceed to the 6th part or parcel of the Priestly Ornaments, which
is called the Girdle of the Ephod. Here some stumble to admit of two girdles:
but Origin of old was for it, as may be seen in his Homilies upon Origin. Hom.
6. in Levit. p. 146.
Leviticus, and Ainsworth. in Exodus 28. v. 8. p. 112.
Ainsworth and Ribera p. 220.
Ribera of our modern Commentators. But what need Testimonies: seeing both the
name and the materials are something distinct? The name is in the Hebrew (...)
Cheshebh, and it is called the Exodus 28.27. Lev. 8.7.
curious girdle of the Ephod. The materials of this were Exodus 2^.8.
Gold, Blew, Purple, Scarlet, and fine twined linen: even as the Ephod it self
was, whereas the other underneath-girdle wanted the gold-wire. Besides, if we
will believe the Rabbis, as cited by the fore-expressed Author, the very make
and fashion of this was very different from the former. For the Ephod (as they
say) was woven with two hands, slips or pieces going out from it, one on this
side, and another on that, with which they girded the Ephod together close to
the High-Priest's body: which seems to be hinted in the words of the Text,
(...) which Arias Montanus has turned thus. Et artificium superhumeralis ejus,
quod super illud, sicut opus ipsius ex ipso erit. And the workman-ship of the
Ephod, which is upon it, like the work of it, shall be out of it, and the 70 to
the same purpose, implying some pieces wrought in the same manner of work, and
coming out of it like slips or ribands to tie it together. So that though it
might receive the name of a girdle, because of its girding or tying the
vestment together: yet I suppose it was not like to the other, nor a distinct
piece, to be loosed from the Ephod at pleasure, but was of the same piece and
constantly annexed to it. But for that it performed the office of a girdle,
therefore is it generally so styled and called the golden girdle in distinction
from the former. Accordingly we have Jesus Christ our glorious High Priest girt
about the paps with a Rev. 1.13.
Golden girdle, and in a vision represented to the Prophet Daniel, with his
loins girded with fine Dan. 10.5.
Gold of Vphaz.

The Prophet Isaiah has expounded the Mystery of Christ's girdle to us, when
treating of his glorious Kingdom, he says, that Isa. 11.5.
righteousness shall be the girdle of his loins, and faithfulness, the girdle
of his reins: which a Cramer. Schol. Prophet. Clas. 4. p. 13. Ed. 8o.
German Divine interprets of righteous and faithful persons who should stare in
Corona, Encircle and surround him in the days of the Gospel. But surely it is
rather to be construed of his personal justice and equity, in judging the cause
of his people. And as persons that do prepare and make themselves ready for
some service, do gird up their garments close to their bodies, and fit them for
service, as Acts 12.8.
Peter was bid by the Angel to gird up himself and follow him: and as our Lord
in two Gospel Luke 12.37, 17. and 8.
parables sets forth persons girt, and so fitted for their work and service:
Even so our blessed High Priest is always in procinctu, girt about with his
golden girdle in a readiness to help and assist his people that cry unto him.
Lastly, as we read that the girdle did compass his breast, it was about his
loins and reins. To show his Chastity, purity, holiness, and unspotted
integrity; his constant care, diligence toward, and love unto, his Church.

7. I now come to the 7th piece of the Highpriests glorious attire, and the
most eminent of all the rest, called Exodus 28.15.
the Breast Plate of Judgment. As to which, I shall omit any discourse upon the
smaller attendants of this Sacred piece, Ver. 22.
the Chains, Ver. 23.
Rings, Ver. 25.
the Ouches, Aperturae, the Holes in which the ends of the Chains were
fastened, its Ver. 28.
blew lace: its being Ver. 16.
four square and double, of the extent of a span on each 4 sides of the square
or of the 12 several Ver. 17.
seats, or hollow places, or Ouches (called so, v. 11.) made of Gold, wherein
each of the 12 Stones were placed and fastened. I shall rather spend the
succeeding lines, first upon the stones themselves, and then speak to the
Mysterious meaning of the Vrim and Thummim, and so go off to the Mitre, the
last thing to be treated on in the Pontifical habit.

As to the stones; first I shall speak to their names, and then apply them to
the 12 Tribes.

The first Stone mentioned to have bin in this Breast Plate according to our
translation is the Exodus 28.17.
Sardius, 1. Sardius.
though in the margin we read instead of it The Ruby. It Is called in the Hebrew
(...) Odem, from (...) Rubere, to be red, and thence is the reason why many
have bin deceived in the explication of this Stone, and applied to this name,
many others that are of various mixtures of redness. It was first found at
Sardis in lesser; Asia, as many Authors write out of Pliny; But Anselm. Boethius
de gemm. and lapid. l. 2. c. 80. 83. p. 230. and 233. Edit. Lugd. Bat. 1647.
Boethius, whom I shall name principally in this business of the 12 stones, one
who has written accurately on this Subject, affirms that the stone which the
Lapidaries call the Carneolus or the Cornelian from his color like bloody
flesh, is the true Sardius of this place; the most excellent of which kind (he
says) are brought from the Island Sardinia. Many medicinal virtues are by him
and other Authors ascribed to it, one Prideaux ut supra. p. 18.
says that Reuben's name was engraven therein, to note humility: Another,
Ainsworth.
that it foreshewed the warlike State of that Tribe, which lay upon the enemies
frontiers, they went armed before their Josh. 4.12.
Brethren into Canaan, and in the days of Saul 1 Chronicles. 5.10.
conquered the Hagarites, and dwelt in their Tents.

Those that are pleased with such curiosities, may trace the life of Reuben,
and the Story of his Posterity: and, having examined the virtues ascribed to
this stone, by the most Eminent and Judicious Writers, accordingly try what
success may be had in the application. I dare not say peremptorily, there is
no mystery in these things, and yet I much fear, unless we have some special
guidance of the holy Spirit, that men's nice and over curious-fancies may shoot
a hundred times before they hit the mark. Wherefore I shall speak but briefly,
and rather recite the opinions of others in these matters, than vent any
private Conjectures.

This Odhem here in this present Text of Exodus before us, as it is here turned
(...), by the Septuagint, so also by the same Translators in two other Exodus
39.8. Septuagint. Edit. Francof. 1597. Ezekiel. 28.13.
places of Scripture. I know Josephus calls the first a Sardonyx, the same
which he had before placed on the High-Priest's shoulder. But the Hebrew word,
does by its signification of redness, the Septuagint and Jerome in the forecite
placed, concerning the vestments of Priests, and other good Authors, confirm
it to be the same which we have pitched upon, viz. the Cornelian. The same is
mentioned under the name of (...), in one Rev. 4.3.
of the Revelation-Visions, and in another the Rev. 21.20.
6th stone of the 12 foundations of the wall is called by this name, and
distinguished from the Sardonyx, which is the 15th and is no other then an Onyx,
and therefore so called, as Jerome notes; Jerome de vest. sacerd. p. 61. 2. Topaz.
ut vel colorem, vel patriam demonstraret, either to show the color, (from
(...), being like a man's nail) or its Country (from Sardis a City of Asia the
less).

The 2d Stone is in the Hebrew, is (...) Pitdah; by the 70, (...). It Is
mentioned in these following Scriptures, Exodus 39.10. In Job its native place
is recited to have bin in Cush or Aethiopia, Job 28.19. The King of Tire we
read to have bin adorned with it, in Ezekiel. 28.13. Some think that the Greeks
derive their Ainsworth in Exodus 28.27. Rivet in eund. loc.
Topaz or Topad from the inversion of the Letters of the Hebrew name Pitdah.
Pliny l. 37. c. 8. p. 738. b. Edit. Genev. 1631.
Pliny relates that the Arabian Troglodytes, being pressed with hunger and
tempests, in digging up of herbs and roots met with this stone, this he relates
out of Archelaus: and further, that Juba writes of an Island in the Red Sea
about 300 furlongs from the Continent, which being much troubled with mists and
fogs, and therefore seldom hit upon by Seamen, is called Topazion, which in
the Language of those wild Arabs he says signifies to seek and search out, and
hence is the name of this precious gem, being much sought after for its
refreshing color and beauty. Wherein the Author does agree with Job. For the
Aethiopians or Cushites in Scripture, are those which dwelt in Arabia of
ancient times, and afterward propagated into Africa: whereof I have spoken
before.

As to our present stone the Topaz. It is of a green color and Diaphanous,
which if mixed with golden rays is called by the name of a Chrysolite, and its
difference from the Smaragd lies, in that it is of a more dilute and waterish
greenness) and tends a little to Boet. c. 92. l. 2. p. 207.
yellowish green. It cures, say authors, Lunacy and (b) Phrenzy, and signifies
Clemency: and on it was graven the name of Simeon, whose Tribe performed no
great Achievements that we read of; the greatest was that in the days of
Hezekiah, Prideaux page 18. 1 Chronicles. 4.42. 3. Emerald.
when he took Geda, smote the Amalekites, and possessed their habitations.

The third stone in the Breast Plate was the (...) Bareketh from (...) to
lighten or shine bright. The 70 here and in the 29 of Exodus, (...). and so
Jerome and Josephus here notes that Symmachus translates it by (...), the
Thunder-stone: Others turn it by the Carbuncle, as our Translators but the
general current of Expositors hold it to be the Smaragd. In Ezekiel that which
is here in the Hebrew Bareketh, and is the last of the stones in the Otnaments
of the King of Tire; the Septuagint (as our Copy is) not being constant to
themselves have there turned it by (...) the Onyx, and we the Carbuncle, as in
this place: translating Nophec, the first of the second row by Emerald or
Smaragd. But with the 70, Josephus and Jerome agree; of our modern Authors,
Ainsworth, Prideaux, Rivet, etc. that it is the Smaragd, and the name does not
very much dissent: although the Greek derive it (...) to shine, and thence
(...) and (...). Among all the precious Stones, none so lovely as this for the
admirable refreshing greenness that is in it, called by Jerome Virens Smaragdi
Gemma, from its grass-green color, in his Epistle to Pammachius. Tom. 1. It
does comfort the eyesight beyond all the Herbs and green Fields, by its
pleasantness. It is a Pellucid or clear Stone, there is neither blewnesse in
it as in the Turcois, nor yellowness as in the Topaz, of the Ancients. Its
counted good for an Amulet, to hang about little children for the Epilpesie,
and was the stone on which Levi's name was graven: So the Covenant of Grace
which is opened by the Gospel Ministers is compared to an Emerald- Rainebow
round about the Throne in the Book of the Rev. 4.3. 4. Carbuncle.
Revelations.

The fourth Stone in number, and the first of the second Row in the Hebr. is
called (...) N^phec, which we translate by the Emerald: but we shall see the
generality of Writers hold it to have been the Carbuncle, and that one sort of
them being the Chalcedony, is mentioned in the Revelations in stead of this,
Rev. 21.19.
in the third place, where Judah is set in the room of Levi, because of the
everlasting Priesthood of Christ; The Emerald of Levi, being set in there in
the fourth place.

Now the Chalcedony or Carchedony is but a dark or blacker sort of Carbuncle,
as Boet. l. 2. c. 9. p. 141. etc. 87. p. 238.
Boethius has observed. The word in the Hebr. some hold to have affinity with
(...) fucus, a paint or dye of red for the face, and therefore sometimes taken
for the Carbuncle it self, being of a fiery red color: so that what the Hebrew
styles 1 Chronicles. 29.2.
(...) and were glistering stones, some translate Carbuncles: In another place
its rendered by Isa. 54.11.
stones of fair colors. Arias Montanus by the Carbuncle: the 70 in this place
of Exodus do call it (...) the common name of a Carbuncle: because it is like a
Coal red-hot with fire, and such is its color, shining like fire and is the
true and proper stone of Judah, the Progenitor of the royal Race: Of which
Tribe came Caleb, Othniel, David, Solomon, and all the Kingly posterity of that
Noble House, and above all, the Lord Jesus Christ, who appeared in a Vision in
a humane shape; in the likeness of Ezekiel. 1.27.
fire, his eyes like a Prove. 1.14, 15. and 2.18. and 19.12.
flame of fire, his feet like fine Brass burning in a Furnace. This stone, the
Carbuncle or true Rubine resists poison and has many excellent qualities: it
shines in the dark most radiantly, and is a most proper resemblance of the
warlike Tribe of Judah.

The fifth stone is called Exodus 20.18.
(...) by Arias Montanus, the 70, the vulgar Lat. Josephus (though mis-placed)
and by Jerome, nay by general consent is termed the Sapphire, following the
Hebrew in express words; some hold the word to have affinity with (...) to be
fair and beautiful; It comes from (...) to number, Rivet. in Exodus 24. p. 1103:
6 Edit. Tol.
and because of the excellent and rare blew tincture wherewith it is adorned,
resembling the color of the Firmament; therefore Rivet says, it has its
denomination from the multitude of Stars which shine in the Heavens: and
because of its Heavenly color, is usually brought to resemble the Throne of
God who sits in the Heavens. Exodus 24.10. Ezekiel. 1.26. and 10.11.
It is, says page 133. Ainsworth Rivet.
Boethius of an azure or bright blew color, clear and transparent, and much
resembles the delicate colored Flower of the little plant called
Mous-ear-Scorpion-grass: There is no redness at all in them, as is found in
the Amethyst. But some are of a little paler blew and are called the females:
Others of a more illustrious and deep tincture, and are called Masculine
Sapphires. Some, following the Rabins, put the name of Issachar upon this
stone, but Dr. Prideaux the name of Dan the fifth son of Jacob according to the
order of his birth, I suppose upon this apprehension that the same order was
observed in these stones, which was commanded expressly to be in the two
shoulder-stones of the Ephod. This indeed seems more probable than that of the
Rabbis, who place all the six children of Leah first, and then those of the
two handmaids before the children of Rachel, the free woman; I am sure
Josephus, being himself a Priest, and one surely well acquainted with these
matters, says, they were engraven Joseph. Antiq. l. 3. c. 8. p. 85.
[(...).] according to the order, in which it happened every one of them to be
born. And so Jerome, who lived in the Holy Land, [In singulis lapidibus secundum
aetates duodecim tribuum sculpta sunt nomina.] Jerome, page 61. Tom. 3.
The names of the 12 Tribes were graven in each of the stones, according to
their ages.

Accordingly, I shall crave leave to place the name of Dan upon this excellent
stone of the Sapphire. For that his posterity were Seafaring men, and had
their coasts upon the Mediterranean-sea, where Ekron Josh. 19.43, 46. Judge. 5.
Japha or Joppa the chief port of Judea with others were their Cities, and
therefore that Expostulation may take place of Dan's not coming up to help the
Lord against the mighty: but remaining in Ships, when the Battle went against
Sisera. Ezekiel. 27.19.
Dan and Javan, i. e. the Grecians, did go to and fro for precious Commodities;
The Sapphire is reckoned by Dioscorides. Genesis 49.17.
l. 5. c. 114. an Antidote against the stings of Scorpions, and Adders: and
seeing Dan is compared to a Serpent, this stone for Dan might hint at
Sampsons's stinging of the Philistines, and being the cure of Israel, according
to the Talisman Signatures of the Oriental Nations.

Against those of Dan the Prophet Zephany denouncing judgments, among other
Cities mentions Ashdod and Ekron two Cities of Dan: Zeph. 2.5.
He cries out woe to the Inhabitants (d) of the Seacoast, which the Targum of
Jonathan reads (...) Bissephar Jamma. In the Sapphar or port of the Sea;
Lending possibly a reflection upon this Sapphire of Dan, which might be a blew
color inclining to a Seagreen. They that toss in Ships upon the Ocean, can
see nothing, when out of sight of Land, but Sea and Air, whose colors are
much resembled by this stone. Besides, as the Sapphire stone is mentioned for
the pavement of the Throne of God in Prophetical Visions, wherein he sits as
Judge of the earth: So was Dan declared Genesis 49.16.
Judge of his people by the good old Patriarch, his Father Jacob: which was
verified in Sampson, who was born at Judge. 13.2.
Zorah in this Tribe; and much more in Christ the Antitype of Sampson, into
whose hands all judgment is committed by the Father.

John 5.22.
The sixth Stone in this glorious Breast-plare of judgment, is in the Hebrew
Exodus 28.18.
(...) Arias turns it by Adamas, the Adamant or Diamond and so do we in our
translation. The 70 by (...) and in the same Track treads the vulgar Lat.
Josephus, and Jerome, I suppose, eying their Translation: But Pagnine had
learned from a great Hebrew Doctor of Spain, that it is the same which we call
the Diamond, and has its name from (...) to break in pieces: it being the
strongest of all precious stones, and is used in the cutting of others, and
boring of Pearls: His powder also is useful in the polishing of other stones:
Ainsworth renders it by the Sardonyx, and yet says, that it is like the
Adamant. But Junius, Buxtorfe, Arias, Pagnine, Schindler, Avenarius, do all
count it to be the Diamond from the notation of its Name, which if truly
derived, does very properly fit its nature. This stone is known to all, and
being cut by a skilful Lapidary is exceeding radiant: some rare virtues are
ascribed to it by Boethius and others: but the principal thing hinted by it, is
the Emblem of Boet. l. 2. c. 6. p. 138.
Fortitude, Constancy, Innocence, and has been used to that end in Devices by
Cosmus de Medices the great Duke of Tuscany, Borsus Duke of Modena, Frederick
Duke of Mantua, and other of the petty Italian Princes. On this Stone was
graven the name of Napthali the sixth son of Jacob according to the order of
birth. Prideaux, p. 18.
Fortitudinem exantlantem difficultates invenias, In him you may find Fortitude
overcoming difficulties. Napthali was a forward Tribe under Barak Judge. 4.6.
(one of the same generation) in the Judge. 5.18.
jeoparding his life unto death in the High Places of the field. Of this Tribe
came 35000 with 1 Chro. 12.34.
shield and spear, commanded by 1000 Captains for the service of King David at
Hebron, that great and glorious Hos. 3.5.
Type of Christ.

The seventh in the general number, and first of the third row, is called in
the Hebrew (...) Leshem, by Arias Lyncurius, the Vulg. Ligurius. The 70 (...),
by Josephus and Jerome, Lyncurius: Junius Cyanus, a blew stone, and by
Ainsworth, the Jacinth or Hyacinth, induced by the consideration of the Jacinct
in the Revelations: But the generality of the Hebrew Lexicographers, and most
of the Ancients: whom we find reckoned up in a very learned Discourse upon this
stone in Martius Lexicon in voce Lyncurius.
Martinius. The general Harmony induces me to believe it to be that stone which
is called Ligure, from its native place Liguria a Country in Italy near the
Alps, and not from the urine of the Lynx, a story not incredible. It is of the
color of Amber, which the ancient Germans called Glesse, and does not abhor
from the Hebrew word Leshem, Boethius, l. 2. c. 158. page 321.
as Rivet observes. Boethius has noted that the Ligure is a Species of the
Jacinth; and so like Amber, that it cannot well be discerned from it by the
color, but Martius Lexicon in voce Lyncurius.
either by its hardness, or not drawing of strawes to it, as that will. Those
yellow Jacinths he takes to be the Ligures of the Ancients: Id. l. 2. c. 30.
Stones that are not very clear and perspicuous. Some think the name of Dan was
graven thereon, and fortify the conjecture by Josh. 19.46.
Leshem, a City which Dan conquered: But when the whole story is mentioned at
large of that War which the 600 Danites made upon the secure City of the
Zidonians, it is there constantly called Judge. 18.
Laish, and signifies an old (f) Lion, as is well known: and thence possibly
may be the name of this stone Leshem, the color thereof being somewhat like to
that of a Lions-hair. But I shall rather follow the former order according to
the birth, and apply it to Gad, of whom Deuteronomy. 33.20.
Moses speaks thus: Blessed be he that enlarges Gad, he dwells as a Lion,
and teareth the arm with the Crown of the Head. Genesis 49.18.
Though a Troop should worst him at first, when he set down in his Lot, yet was
he to overcome at last. The people moreover of this Tribe, that came to David
at Ziglag, 1 Chronicles. 12.8.
men of Might and men of War fit for the Battle, that could handle Shield and
Buckler, their Faces were like Faces of Lions.

The eighth Stone is in Hebr. (...) Schebho, and is by general consent
translated Agate, from Achates, a River in Sicily, near which plenty of them
are related to have been first found; Some take it to be called from Shebah,
and the Sabai in Arabia, from Shabah to lead captive. For among the Sabaeans
the Kingly dignity it self was but a kind of Bochart. Plaleg. l. 2. c. 26. p.
150.
captivity: for when once he was inaugurated into his Office, it was by an old
Oracle, forbidden him to come out of his Palace into public view, under the
pain of stoning. The Sabaeans themselves, what were they generally but a stock
and generation of Robbers? who lay in wait to take men captive, and to dispoyle
them of their goods: This Stone possibly might have its Hebrew name from this
Country whence they received it. For the Merchants of Ezekiel. 27.22. (...)
Shebah brought to the Market of Tire all precious Stones and Gold. The Greek
name is deduced from Heb. Bochart. Canaan. l. 1. cap. 29. page 606.
Varium maculosum, various or spotted: there being no stone of such multitude
of various spotted colors as this, giving an admirable resemblance of things
in nature. In some ye may behold with great delight, the Images of Pliny, l.
37. c. 10. page 741.
Rivers, Woods, Cattle, Chariots harness, and Ornaments of Horses: Boet. l. 3.
c. 95. p. 246.
Sometimes Trees, living Creatures, Fruits, Flowers, Herbs, Clouds and Cities,
and almost whatever may be thought upon: Solinus. c. 20. p. 228. Edit. Lug.
Bat. 1646.
King Pyrrhus had a Ring made of this Stone, in which sat the nine Muses, with
their distinct symbols or devices: and Apollo holding a Harp. Boet. ibid.
Camillus Leonardus reports, that he saw one pleasantly resembling seven trees
standing together in a Plain. Boethius relates that he himself had one, that in
the midst of a circle had the shape of a Bishop adorned with a Mitre, which
being turned upside down represented two shapes; one of a man, another of a
woman. Many of the like nature are seen every where, and particularly in the
famous Library, as I remember, at St. John's College in Cambridge. Some are
mixed with Ainsworth in Exodus 28.19.
green lists, and Solin. ibid.
spotted with Gold, and these are termed therefore by the name of Chrysoprasus,
one of the stones answering to this in the Revelations. The Agate Boet. ibid.
differs from the Jasper in hardness and smoothness. For although the Jasper
have all the colors which the Agate has, yet is it softer and more dark, and
consists of more terrene matter, and cannot therefore be so exactly polished.
Sometimes the Agate is semi-pellucid or half-transparent, which is very rare.
The chief excellency of this stone is, that it is useful against the wounds of
Vipers and Scorpions, as some affirm. As it is the 8th. in order of nomination:
so it did signify, and had engraven upon it the name of Asher, the 8th. son of
Jacob according to his birth. Prideaux. p. 18.
Dr. Prideaux applies Tolerantia or patience to Ashers's Agate. But the variety
of colors and resemblances in the Agate, seem to reflect upon Asher, whose
name is happy, and he blessed with all the varieties that Sea and Earth could
afford. Jacob prophesied of him, that his Genesis 49.20.
bread should be fat, and he should yield royal dainties. Moses in his
Swan-like song foretold of Asher, that he should Deuteronomy. 33.24, etc.
be blessed with children, acceptable to his brethren, and dip his feet in oil;
his shoes should be iron and brass, and as his days, so should his strength
be. His habitation was by Judge. 5.17.
the Seashore, and his abiding place by the breaches thereof.

The ninth Stone, and last of the third Row, is called (...) Achlamah coming
from (...) Chalam, to dream: it being reported by some, that those who carry
this stone about them, shall be happy in Prophetic Dreams and Visions of
things to come. Arias, The vulgar Lat. The 70. Josephus (though he misplace it,
and set it before the Agate) Jerome, Buxtorf, Junius, Rivet, Ainsworth, our
translation, and generally all, consent in the translating this by the
Amethyst: which name it obtained of the Greeks, from another property which
they relate concerning it, that it hinders drunkenness, or the ascending of
intoxicating fumes of wine into the Brain from the Stomach, and say that there
is a tacit indication of this quality in the color, which it retains like
to wine: others Boethius l. 2. cap. 34. page 166. and Racus, l. 1. c. 11. p. 125.
add that it hinders evil though^s, renders a man of a happy wit, makes him
watchful and industrious and gracious with Princes, which somewhat accords with
the Fancies of the Hebrews, that it purifies the Brain, and makes it fit for
Visions. But it is derided by Pliny as a Magic vanity, l. 37. cap. 9. It is of
a Violet-colour, which proceeds from a rare mixture of red and blew, and yet
there are several varieties: for the Indian kinds have a Id. c. 32. page 162.
tincture of yellow, upon which account they are reckoned among the sorts of
Carbuncles, and are near-a-kind to the Jacinths: and therefore the Hyacinth or
Boet. l. 2.
Jacinth of Pliny, is in these days counted among the Amethysts. Even as the
Amethysts of the Ancients are at this day called Granates from the color of
the pulp of a Pomegranate, and are properly referred as a species id. l. 2. c.
23. p. 152.
to the Carbuncle. This gemme is transparent, only somewhat dark, considering
the color of it. According to the Heb. Notation, as it is the ninth in number;
so it may be referred to the ninth son of Jacob, according to the order of
birth, and the fifth by his wife Leah, called Issachar. This Stone, as some
hold did occasion Visions in dreams: so the men of 1 Chronicles. 12.32.
Issachar are related to be such who had understanding of the times, to know
what Israel ought to do.

Besides, the Amethyst is by Theophrastus in these words [(...)] Theophrast. de
Lapid. p. 23. edit. Lug. Bat. 1647. cum Joh. de Laet. de Lapid.
(...)] related to be of the color of Wine, which I conceive to be of the dark
red Wine of Palestine and Greece: but the red Grape, when ripe, is of a
purplish color between red and blew, as Tertullian (de Pallio) calls the neck
of a Peacock, Purple-colour'd: So Vines are by Ovid, Et de purpureis collectae
vitibus nvae. 1 Chronicles. 12.32.
Martianus Capella calls the Amethyst Flucticolor, Wave-colour'd imitating
Homer, who of old calls the Sea by the former Epithet which Theophrastus gave
to this Stone Iliad. a ver. 350. b 613. e. 771. e 88.
(...) The Wine-coloured sea, and Iliad. ps. chapter 316. etc.
(...) otherwhere; Aleandri. Tab. Heliac, page 69.
the same which one of his Scholiasts turns (...) the black or dark, and he
himself in other places (...) the Purple-colour'd wave. Accordingly Issachar
who was planted by the sea-shores may be set forth by this Stone: and is
prophesied of by Moses that he should Deuteronomy. 33.19.
suck of the abundance of the seas, and of Treasures hid in the sands.

The tenth Stone, and Exodus 28.10.
first of the 4th. or last Row in the Breastplate, is called (...) Tarshish
which Arias, the Vulg. and the 70. Ainsworth turn by the Chrysolite, and so do
many others: Buxtorf, Junius, Rivet, by the Beryll, and so do our Translators
in this place, and Exodus 39.13. Ezekiel. 1.16. and 10.9. and 28.13.

Some deduce the Etymoligie of the word from (...) which is a Synomous term
with (...) to make poor, Iliud. a. ver 482. ph 326. etc.
(...) by way of contraries (a usual figure, as bellum, q. minime bellum, and
lucus q. minime lucens.) Because Tarsus was a rich Country, and this precious
stone is of great value. Others from (...) the exploration or trial of Marble.
Upon what grounds either are founded I leave to the Grammarian. But seeing in
Scripture this word is sometimes put for the Sea; Psalm 48.7. and Isa. 2.16.
Gregor. Lex. Sanct. p. 270.
therefore learned Authors do conceive that the precious stone of the same name
is so called from its seagreen color, such as the Beryll is, resembling a
color mixed of blew and green. If it have any golden Rays in it, it is called
a Chryso-beryll which some do refer to the Chrysoprase. But this is a general
Note, that different stones of several colors, if they have any streakes or
spots resembling Gold, are by some Authors presently called Chrysolites. But of
that stone which bears the name of the Chrysolite, Boet. l. 2. c. 65. p. 210.
I made mention before in the Discourse about the Topaz. Hereby we may see the
reason why so many have read the Hebr. Tarshish in this place by the
Chrysolite: and that the Chrysolite properly so called is not the Beryl, is
evident, in that these two are distinctly reckoned in the Revelations, Rev.
21.20. All Beryls are transparent, but of a dilute or waterish color; but if
they be deep tinctured, they are taken for other gemmes. As for the origination
of the word Beryl, Isodorus, l. 16. c. 27.
Isidore of Sevil has noted it to be from the Indian-tongue and our word pearl
is thought to be thence deduced, of which those that are skilful may give an
account; whilst we considering its color and name in relation to the sea, may
very aptly refer it to the 10th Son of Jacob, whose name Zebulun was engraven
thereon. Which agrees with the Marine habitation of this Tribe according to the
Prophecy of Jacob. Genesis 49.13.
Zebulun shall dwell at the haven of the Sea, and he shall be for an haven of
ships, and his border shall be unto Zidon. To which purpose Moses tunes his
dying song when joining him with Issachar in the Book of Deuternomy.
Accordingly in the partition of the Land of Canaan, we have recited the Towns
of his Province, bordering upon the Mediterranean and the Galilean Seas; the
former on the West, and the other on the East. This Tribe and tract was famous
for the birth of Jonah the Prophet, who was born at 2 King. 14.25.
Gathhepher, or Josh. 19.13. Mat. 12.41.
Gittah-Hepher, in the Land of Zebulun, He that fled from the Tarshish of
Canaan, the presence of God, to the Tarshish of the Gentiles. But behold (c) a
greater then Jonah is here, who was conceived here, often crossed this Sea of
Galilee, and taught in these parts. The Beryll of his doctrine shone most
gloriously in the Esaias 9.1, 2. Math. 4.13, 15.
the borders of Zebulun and Napthali, by the way of the Sea. The people that
sat in darkness saw great light, and to them which sat in the Region and
shadow of Death light is sprung up. To conclude: As Zebulun was a great
Traveller and Merchant by Sea; so had he often occasions of sending orders and
accounts in writing, and therefore he is recited to be good at the Pen. Judge.
5.14.
Those that handle the pen of the writer came out of Zebulun to the War against
Siserah.

11. The 11th Stone in order is (...) the Onyx, whereof before. On this was
graven the name of Joseph. Which expressed, (as Dr. Prideaux.
one speaks) his humanity. Sure we are, he was the kindest Brother that ever we
read of; and therefore the two Stones of the shoulder had all the names of the
Children of Israel in them, to show as was noted before, that kindness, love
and compassion, which Joseph manifested to his Brethren, in providing a
habitation, and nourishing them in the Land of Egypt. This is a stone of great
variety, and moderately transparent. Oh how Genesis 49.22. Deuteronomy. 33.13.
manifold are the blessings of Joseph: He had Deuteronomy. 21.17.
two portions in the Land of Canaan, which was the right of the firstborn. For
good Jacob adopted Genesis 48.5.
his two sons for his own, and made them to bear equal share in all the
privileges of his immediate sons, and that Joseph might not lose the blessing
of the Genesis 49.24.
Stone of Israel; we have Joseph himself in one Stone among the 12 tribes on
the Breast Plate, and two Onyxes on the two shoulders of the High Priest for
Ephraim and Manasseh, whom the Holy Patriarch brought into a relation of
immediate filiation to him.

The twelfth and last is called in the Hebrew (...) Jashpheh. Wherein all
consent for the Jasper: A stone well known, whereof some are of various
colors, spots, rings, and streaks: some are very dark and opacous, those are
the worst; some are clearer, but none fully transparent. Its difference from
the Agate I mentioned before. The word some do derive from (...) to be eminent,
Buxtorf.
and according to the Chaldee signification to break in pieces: how appositely,
Rev. 4.3.
let others judge. We read in the Revelations, that he who sat upon a
visionary Throne, was to look upon, like Jasper: signifying the admirable,
stupendous, and various excellencies of the divine attributes: and as this
stone is not transparent, so neither is it possible for any mortal eye to dive
into the bottom of those unspeakable Mysteries. The Learned Paraeus conceivs,
that the person sitting on the throne was Paraeus in Rev. 4.3. p. 662. b. edit.
Francof. 1647. Col. 3.1.
Jesus Christ, God blessed for ever, into whose hands the Father has cowmitted
all judgment. Then does it properly fit Benjamin whose name was engraven on the
Jasper in Exodus. The Lord Jesus being the true Benjamin of the Father, the Son
of his right hand, who sits * on the right hand of God. In the 21 of the
Revelations, the Jasper of Benjamin is named first, well suiting with our
spiritual Benjamin, who is the head of the body, the Church; who is the
beginning, the firstborn from the dead, Col. 1.18.
that in all things he might have the pre-eminence. Accordingly, in the portion
of the Tribe of Benjamin stood the glorious Temple at Jerusalem, the Type and
Figure of Christ, according to the Prophecy of Moses: The beloved of the Lord
shall dwell in safety by him, Deuteronomy. 33.12.
and the Lord shall cover him all the day long, and he shall dwell between his
shoulders. His ravening like a Wolf, noted (say some) the Altar's devouring and
consuming multitudes of Sacrifices: Paul, the chief and first of the Apostles,
was of Benjamin, the Jasper first mentioned in the New Testament.

So much for the several stones, with the engravings of the names of the
Children of Israel according to their birth, on the breast plate of Judgment, I
shall now represent them in this following Scheme. Sardius Topaz Emerald The
first Row. Carbuncle Sapphire Diamond The second Row. Ligure Agate Amethyst The
third Row. Beryl Onyx Jasper The fourth Row.

Now it will not be amiss, to see how variously the names of the Tribes are
disposed in the reckonings of them up in several places of Scripture, which I
shall exhibit by the 12 first figures or Ziphres.

The first place after the narration of their births is that, wherein we have
recited their descent into Genesis 46.8.
Egypt, and then they are reckoned thus. 1.2, 3, 4, 9, 10, 7, 8, 11, 12, 5, 6.

When in Egypt they are Exodus 1.2, 3, etc.
thus varied. 1, 2, 3, 4, 9, 10, 12, 5, 6, 7, 8, 11.

In the blessing of their Father Jacob, we find them Genesis 49.3, etc.
thus disposed. 1, 2, 3, 4, 10 9, 5, 7, 8, 6, 11, 12.

After their Exodus or coming out of Egypt, when God commanded the numbering of
the Congregation of Israel; we read the heads of the tribes to be Mum. 1.5.
etc.
thus placed, Levi being left out, and the two sons of Joseph adopted in the
room of their Father, both which shall be noted with the figure 11, 1, 2, 4, 9,
10, 11, 11, 12, 5, 8, 7, 6.

But the tribes themselves to be Number. 1.20. etc.
thus set down with some variation. 1. 2, 7, 4, 9, 10, 11, 11, 12, 5, 8, 6.

When the orders of the Tribes in their Tents, and encampings in the
wilderness are mentioned, then are they placed in this Number. 2.3. etc.
Method, 4.9, 10, 1, 2, 7, 11, 11, 12, 4, 8, 6.

When the Princes of the tribes presented their offerings at the dedication of
the Tabernacle, the series of their names Number. 7.12. etc.
is managed in this order, 4.9, 10, 1, 2, 7, 11, 11, 12, 5, 8, 6. according to
the former.

When Moses sent persons of every tribe to search the Land of Canaan, they are
Number. 13.4. etc.
recited in this manner, 1.2, 7, 4, 9, 10, 11, 11, 12, 5, 8, 6.

At another time when near their entrance into the Land of Canaan, the sum of
the Congregation being taken, they are set in Number. 26.5.
this posture, 1.2, 7, 4, 9, 10, 11, 11, 12.5, 8, 6.

When mention is made of their inheritance, then some of them who dwelt on the
East of Jordan were thus Number. 32.33.
placed, 7.1. and half Manasseh the 11th, and when the recital is made of them
according to the division of the Land, Number. 34.19.
thus 4.2, 12, 5, 11, 11, 10, 9, 8, 6. when they were to stand on mount Gerizim
and Ebal, to bless and curse, they were thus ranked, 2.3, 4, 9, 11, 12, 1, 7,
8, 10, 5, 6.

When Moses the servant of the Lord who was King in Jeshurun, drew nigh to his
dissolution, he blessed the 12 Tribes of Israel in this Deuteronomy. 33.6. etc. Deuteronomy.
27.21.
order, 1.4, 3, 12, 11, 10, 9, 7, 5, 6, 8. and leaves out Simeon wholly.

When Joshuah the Captain of the Lords Hosts, settles the Tribes in their
habitations, they are computed after this order in several Chapters, beginning
at the Josh. 13. etc.
13th, and ending with the 19th of that Book, 1.7, 11, 4, 11, 12, 2, 10, 9, 8,
6, 5.

In the Book of Chronicles, supposed by some to be written by Ezra the Scribe
after the Captivity of Babylon; when there was a Catalogue made of the
Genealogies of the Israelites, we find them first in general thus, 1 Chronicles.
2.1, 1, 2, 3, 4, 9, 10, 5.11, 12, 6, 7, 8. and then placed thus, 1 Chronicles. 4.1.
etc.
4.2, 1, 7, 11, 3, 9, 12, 6, 11, 11, 8. and there Dan is omitted.

In the days of David when the Rulers or Princes of the Tribes are mentioned,
they stand 1 Chronicles. 27.16.
thus, 1.2, 3, 4, 9, 10, 6, 11, 11, 12, 5. and there Gad is omitted.

The portions of the 12 Tribes in the visionary Land of the Prophet Ezekiel,
are recited Ezekiel. 48.1.
in this method, 5.8, 6, 11, 11, 1, 4, 3, 12, 2, 9, 10 7.

Further, in the same Ezekiel. 48.31.
Chapter when the Gates of the City Jerusalem (presented in that glorious
vision to the same Prophet) are recited according to the names of the Tribes of
Israel, they are thus ordered, 1.4, 3, 11, 12, 5, 2, 10, 7, 8, 6.

When the sealed ones of all the Tribes of Israel are computed, behold the Rev.
7.5.
method, 4.1.7, 8, 6, 11.2, 3, 9, 10, 11, 12. Where it is observable, that there
is no mention of Dan.

The last place where they are marshalled, is in the 21. of the Revelations,
without the annexion of names according to the 12 Stones in the Breast Plate,
but varying in order according to the good pleasure of the Spirit of God.

1. The Rev. 21.19.
Jasper (...), which plainly presents Benjamin in the first place, who was the
last in the story of the Breast Plate. To such dignity and honor does God
raise the lowest and meanest of his people some times, Mat. 9.30.
Many that are last here below shall be first in the Kingdom of Heaven, and in
the new Jerusalem. When Christ Psalm. 68.18.
ascended up on high, then we find little Ver. 27.
Benjamin, with his Ruler mentioned in the first place before all others. Some
think because Paul the 1 Cor. 15.^0,
chief Apostle was of this Tribe, therefore is it first mentioned. For as the
names of the 12 Tribes were graven of old on the Breast plate; so now the names
of the 12 Apostles of the Lamb, are graven on the 12 Foundations of the new
Jerusalem.

2. Sapphire, for Dan the 5th.

3. Calcedony a sort of Carbuncle, for Judah the 4th.

4. Smaragd or Emerald, for Levi the 3d.

5. Sardonyx, being one kind of the Onyx, for Joseph the 11th.

6. Sardius for Reuben the first.

7. Chrysolite, which indeed is the name of any Stone that has the mixture of
a golden color. And forasmuch as some Adamants or Diamonds are somewhat
tinctured with this color; and for that the adulteration of the Adamant is
sometimes performed by the Chrysolite as Boethius Boet. l. 2. cap. 1. p. 118.
lin. 1.
notes, it being a Stone of admirable hardness; and seeing that all the other
Stones in this Chapter seem aptly fitted to the several Tribes, I shall, till
clearer light arise, refer the Chrysolite to a kind of Adamant, and set the
name of Napthal^ upon it, which was engraven of old on the 6th Stone of the
Breast Plate.

8. The Beryl, for Zebulun the 10th.

9. The Topaz, for Simeon the 2d.

10. The Chrysoprase or Agate, for Asher the 8th son: whereof before in the 8th
precious stone of the Breast Plate.

11. The Jacinch or Ligure, for Gad the 7th; according to Ierom, as before
recited.

12. The Amethyst, for Issachar the 9th. So that the order in this last place
stands thus at one view, 12.5, 4, 3, 11, 1, 6, 10, 2, 8, 7, 9. All these do
concern and relate to 12 Gates, 12 Angels, 12 Tribes, 12 Foundations, and 12
Apostles mentioned in the 12 and 14 verses of the same Chapter of holy John's
Revelations.

But upon all this discourse of the various Situation of the names of the
Tribes of Israel in several places of Scripture, which we have collected
together, What may be observed? seeing in above 20 places of holy page recited
in the Margin, there are but two that agree with one another in the orderly
recitation. Shall we think that these things have nothing of the contrivance of
the Spirit of God in them? and that nothing worth noting can be thence ^educed
according to the various times, wherein the alterations are made? which might
possibly respect either some eminent sins of those Tribes, for which they were
afterward in their enumeration set behind others in dignity; or that some more
eminent services for God and his worship, and some notable opposition against
the enemies of his truth might occasion the Spirit of God in the next dictates
of Holy Writ, to leave a memorial of such services upon such Tribes, by stating
their praecedencies accordingly. But this Province I shall at present freely
resign to such as have more ability, and are at better leisure to digest their
observations upon this enquiry, and content myself at present with this, that
we hence take notice that God is no (...) no respecter of persons, but as in
every Nation, so in every Tribe, Act. 10.35.
He that fears him and works righteousness, is accepted of him.

From what has bin spoken about these stones, I would crave leave to add a
word or two for explanation of a dark place in the Prophet Ezekiel, Where
judgments are denounced against Tire that Lady of the Nations. When God there
comes to reckon with her, He recounts her mercies, that her King had bin Ezekiel.
28.13.
in Eden the Garden of God, and that every precious stone was his covering, and
then names many of them in order,

The Sardius, Topaz, Diamond, Beryl; The Onyx, Jasper, Sapphire, Carbuncle and
the Emerald; which are all of them such as are mentioned to have had the names
of the Tribes engraven in them, and according to our explanation stood for --
Reuben, Simeon, Napthali, Zebulun, Joseph, Benjamin, Dan, Judah, and Levi. Here
we have seven Principal Tribes mentioned under the names of those stones, and
of Napthali and Zebulun the borderers of Tire. Thou art the anointed Cherub
that covers (says the Prophet) etc. v. 14. Thou wast upon the holy monatain
of God, thou have walked up and down in the midst of the stones of fire. That
is, thy habitation and dwelling has been among the Tribes of Israel, so often
represented by precious stones, which by reason of their radiant and refulgent
beams, are called Stones of fire. It was his happiness to have been so nigh
in-habitation to Gods presence among his people in his worship and Ordinances:
but his misery was, that he did not improve those glorious opportunities and
advantages. Hiram the King of Tire, assisted David and Solomon with Cedar and
Fur from Lebanon, and was upon the Mountain of God (as may seem probable
from this place) to view that stately structure which was prepared at Jerusalem
for the sacred solemnities.

To speak a few words about the radiancy of Stones, and the various colors
which they represent, taking our hint from the expression of Ezekiel, terming
them stones of fire; Let us observe that common notion, that color is nothing
but the various reflection of Light upon Bodies: as Alhazen a great Master in
Optics has fully noted Alhazen Optic. l. 1 c. 3.
[Color variatur pro lucis qualitate] Color is varied according to the quality
of Light.

To this purpose speaks Bartholinus de luce. Animal. c. 2. p. 5. Edit. Lug.
Bat. 1647.
Bartholinus in his second Chapter, concerning the light of Living Creatures,
spending a whole Section upon this point in hand. Besides it is very manifest
from the various cuttings of precious stones: Of Crystal and Venice-glasse, and
the like, which reflect the Light from one side to another, and cause those
pleasant varieties of Rain-bow-colours in them: as Solinus of old has
observed, speaking of Sex-angular Crystal [quae Bartholinus de luce. Animal. c.
2. p. 5. Edit. Lug. Bat. 1647.
radiis icta solis, rutilo aeris repercussu, coelestis arcus ex sese jacit
spectem.] Which being illustrated with the Sunbeams, yields the species, or
representation, Solinus cap. 36. p. 97. Edit. praefat.
of the Rainbow, by the shining repercussions of Light. Bartholinus de luce.
Animal. c. 2. p. 5. Edit. Lug. Bat. 1647.
In like manner of the cutting of Beryls by the Indians in a sexangular-form:
ut hebetem coloris lenitatem angulorum repercussu excitent ad vigorem, cap. 55.

To conclude, it is mentioned also by Boethius concerning the Beryl in these
words: Boethius, ^. 2. c. 69.
[Sculpuntur Berylli pluribus angulis, ut illorum repercussu vivaciores siant
magisque fulgeant] Beryls are oftentimes cut in many angles: that by their
repercussion (of light) they may prove more lively, and shine more oriently.

The story of these Stones in the Breast Plate of the Jewish High Priest did
dart such glorious and glittering Rays throughout the world, that the Priests
of false gods did at length endeavor to imitate these excellent and radiant
Ornaments. For so does Aleander, Tab. Heliac. p. 13.
Aleander in his Heliack Table, declare out of Albricus, that they pictured
Apollo of old, with a Crown of 12 precious stones: and out of Matianus Capella
applies it to the Sun, affixing 3 to each quarter of the year. Id. p. 67.
Diodorus Siculus relates that the chief Judge, (...)] did carry about his neck
an Image (or Zodiac) of precious stones hanging on a golden Chain, which was
called Truth.] As this of the High Priest, was called the Vrim and Thummim,
Light and Perfection: whereof more anon. The same story is amplified by Diodor.
Sic. l. 1. c. 75. p. 48. Edit. H. Steph. Aelian. var. Hist. l. 14. c. 34. p.
288. Edit. Argentorati.

1647.


Aelian, who telling that the Judges among the Egyptians were the same with
their Priests, says thus: (...). The chief Priest wore an Image about his neck
of the Sapphire- stone, which was called Truth.] Thus was the Vrim and Thummim
called by the Septuagint and Philo Iudaeus, (...), Manifestation and Truth.

But to leave these stories of the Heathens apish imitation, and descend to the
signification of these Stones in the general: Wherein we may observe, that as
the High Priest carried the 12 Tribes on two stones upon his shoulder: so it
might denote the Government and imperial Rule of Christ over his Church, on
whose shoulders the Government is laid. And whereas the same Names are engraven
on stones which were placed on his Breast: Isa. 9.6.
so might they denote how near the Church is to the heart of Christ; He being a
most compassionate High Priest, a Shepherd that Isa. 40.11.
carries his Lambs in his Bosom. His love is so strong and ardent that the
Church his Spouse is set as a Can. 8.6.
seal upon his heart: Even as the gravings of the Names of the children of
Israel on the precious stones is related in the Scripture, to have been after
the manner of a Seal Exodus 28.21.
or Signet. With these stones he entered into the Sanctuary, and bore them upon
his heart before God in prayer. So that as Christ was the Exemplar and pattern
of every Gospel-Minister to follow: In like manner must they always mind the
spiritual state of their flock before God in their supplications. Besides, as
these stones were not only precious for value and worth but radiant and shining
also: So must the virtues and graces of a Minister be manifestative and
resplendent before others: wherefore the stones of the new Jerusalem, (which as
we have observed, do hold an allusion to, and a parallelism with those of the
Breastplate) were gra^en with the names of the 12 Apostles of the Lamb, Gerhard
loc. Commun. Tom. 9. p. 546. Edit. Genev. 1639.
and are by a learned German Divine interpreted, to hold forth so many rare and
excellent gracious endowments of his soul: whereof I cannot stand to recite the
particulars.

But now I shall descend to the difficultest point of my whole Task; and that
is to endeavor the opening of the meaning of the Vrim and Thummim, which Moses
was commanded to put into the Breastplate. The words are these (...) Arias
Montanus turns it, Et dabis in pectorali judicii, Vrim and Thummim. Exodus
28.30.
And thou shall give on the Breastplate of Judgment the Urim and Thummim. The
70 (...) and thou shall add or put to, or place upon, etc. Now if we take the
Hebrew word (...) strictly in his first and primitive signification, it is, to
give: though it must be acknowledged, that it often signifies to set, fix,
place, or apply to any thing. To this end I speak it, because it is the
judgment of many learned Authors, that there was no material added, but a
consecrated blessing given to it by Moses from God, that when the High Priest
did with Reverence, holy and humble submission appear before God, to crave the
manifestation of his Will, in a dubious point enquired after, that God would
then declare his blessed mind to the people by the High Priest standing before
him with this Breast Plate of Urim and Thummim. The answers being for
clearness and perspicuity like Urim, lights: and for truth and integrity like
Thummim, most perfect and unerring.

Here I might tire my kind and ingenuous Reader as well as my self, if I should
take the pains to transcribe the multitudes of various opinions upon this
point: which I have collected together in my observations. But I shall not be
so bold with his patience, not conceiving that it would redound to much profit
in conclusion, when all the opinions are marshalled in their parti-colored
garments before them, which would but confound the weaker judgments: and give
occasion to the Learned, either to scorn or pity so needless a labor.
Therefore I shall only mention some of the Authors, where those that please may
consult the varieties, and take what likes him best. Philo Judaeus, Josephus,
Origin, Jerome, do all go in one Tract in the several places before cited. Dr.
Rivet on Exodus, p. 11.46. Mr. Shecingham on Jima p. 181. Amama in his
Antibarbar Biblic. p. 566. Edit. prior. Dr. Prideaux, Cunaeus de Rep. Hebr. p.
130. Sckickard Jur. Reg. Hebr. p. 11. 12. etc. Harphius in Mist. Theolog.
Gregor. Pholos Nicol. Fuller. etc.
of the Aaronical Vestments. Mr. Ainsworth on the place. Dr. Gell on the
Pentateuch, p. 259. Ribera of the Temple, p. 210. etc. Dr. Molin in his Vates,
l. 1. c. 22. Mr. Mede, Vol. 1. p. 372. etc. Dr. Tailor of Types, p. 106.
Besides many others, who have either (...) by the way in other Tracts, or else
as Commentators have written directly on the place. I am not willing to insist
any longer on the very nomination of them.

Herein I shall not presume to infringe upon the limits of modesty, so far as
to determine: I am sure it is most safe and sober, (...), to haesitate in this
point. But if I may without offense, and that with all humble submission
declare only that which likes me best, and savours to me most probable; It is
the Judgment of Molin and Rivet much to the same purpose, with that whereof I
spoke before the recitation of the Authors, viz. That there were no stones,
names, words, or any new materials added to the Breast Plate by this Urim and
Thummim: But that, for as much as in the former part of that 28th Chapter of
Exodus we have related to us, the form and fashion of the Breast Plate, its
materials, woven work, Golden Ouches and precious stones; so here in the
addition of these two terms, the Lord was pleased to signify the end for
which it was assigned and appointed, that when Aaron or the successive
High Priest Exodus 28.30.
should go in before the Lord he should bear upon his heart the Judgment of the
Children of Israel continually. The meaning whereof may possibly be this, that
when the Priest did enquire of God concerning War or Peace, and all matters
of great concernment, he should stand before his Majesty in the Sanctuary, with
this glorious Breast Plate upon him; that the Lord either viva voce, by a
lively voice, or by immediate suggestions upon his Spirit, would give a clear
distinct answer, illuminating his mind with the Urim, or the light of the
knowledge of the divine will in such particulars, and satisfying his dubious
and perplexed thoughts with the Thummim of a perfect and complete
determination of the difficult matter in question before the Throne of God. If
it were for the revealing of some unknown truth, or the predicting and
foretelling of some future event or issue, it was a most infallible and
unerring Oracle which God gave forth by the Priest unto his people, whereof
they might rest so perfectly assured, as if it were fulfilled already.

I am somewhat the more confirmed in this conception, because after the
praecept of making all the curious vestments of Aaron, when Moses is commanded
to put them on in the next Exodus 29.5. etc.
Chapter, There is no mention made of this Vrim and Thummim. Again, when the
ingenious Artificers Bezaleel and Aholiah are mentioned to be at Exodus 39.21.
etc.
work upon these choice vestments of the High Priest, we have no recital at all
of the making of any such thing as Urim and Thummim. True it is, (which I must
not omit) that in Leviticus when Moses brings his brother Aaron, and clothes
him with all his Gorgeous attire, that there is mention made of his Lev. 8.8.
putting on the Breast Plate, the Urim and Thummim. But yet we must remember
that the word there in the Hebrew, is no other radically then what was spoken
to before, in the first place of Exodus, and it is (...) and dedit, and he
gave, or affixed to it this excellent qualification by the Commandment of God,
that it should be for the manifestation of the decisive and determinate mind
and will of God in all controversies, and enquiries which they might lawfully
bring before his Majesty. Besides in that place there is no mention at all of
the 12 Stones, but in room thereof, the Vrim and Thummim, whereas the
Breast Plate it self was particularly described, Exodus 29.15. distinct from the
stones that were set in it.

To conclude then: this signified Typically the Revelation of the mind of God
unto his Church, by Jesus Christ the great High Priest of our intercession,
unto whom all the Prophets and Apostles do give witness. For the stones did
cease to shine, and give forth any radiant luster in the days of Josephus,
when Christ the true High Priest was manifest in the flesh, as he himself does
testify, l. 3. Antiq.

So much may then suffice to have spoken to this excellent and mysterious
Piece. I shall now come to the last Ornament of the Priests, and the
High Priest, which was to be about their heads, and is the 8th in number.

8th, The 8th and last parcel of Priestly-aray respecting the Sons of Aaron,
and the inferior Priests is called a Exodus 28.40.
Bonnet for Glory and for Beauty: The matter of it was Exodus 39.28.
fine linen, The form or fashion of it seems to be hinted in the Hebrew word
(...) which is derived from (...) Scyphus, a great cup or goblet that is round
with a copped Cover, Ainsworth. p. 117.
as Mr. Ainsworth observes out of the Hebrew records, that the Bonnets were of
linen Cloth wrapped about the head in a round and high crowned fashion,
according to the manner of the East. The High-Priest's covering is called by a
different name (though of the same matter, Exodus 29.28.
fine linen) (...) Cidaris from (...) Circumvolvere, to roll about; the
difference being only this, as the former Author has recited out of Jewish
writers, that, whereas the former for the common and ordinary Priest^ was round
and copped, this was more flat and close to ^he head. Much to the same purpose
does Hottingeri jus Hebraeene.
Hottinger speak out of the Hebrew records, that the former was like a Head
piece; this last for the High Priest was like the headgeare of a woman,
somewhat long behind, and closer on the crown of the head. Besides, he had a
holy Ezod. 29.6.
Crown upon the Mitre, and in the Ver. 39.30.
plate of the crown (for so it is called) was graven Holiness to the Lord. The
word is (...) a flower, that is, a flowred plate of gold bound to the mitre
with a blew lace, and reached but from ear to ear, on the fore part of the
head, in the fashion of the Crowns of some of the Roman Emperors in their
coins, being indented Diadems of Gold. Here I might show how the Papists have
received the attire of their Bishops and Priests from the Jews; and
particularly their Mitres, which they have appointed to be made with two
horns, as Polydor. Virg. de inventoribus rerum l. 4. c. 7. p. 285. Edit. Lug.
Bat. 1644.
Polydor Virgil, one of their own Authors has attested. [Adduntur duo Cornua,
quoniam Moses acceptis tabulis quibus mandata Dei inscripta erant, visus est
suis cornutus.] Two horns are added, because Moses appeared horned to the
people when he received the Tables, in which the Commandments of God were
written.] When alas, the Hebrew Text is miserably wrested, which tells us that
the skin of Exodus 34.30.
Moses his face shined in these words (...) The skin of his face shined the
word being indeed deduced from a horn, that is, it was clear like a horn. But
to leave this discourse: let us see what these Ornamen^s of the Head did
signify, and herein we have no great task to undertake, seeing the covering of
the head among most N^tions, is a token of Liberty and Dignity, and when
adorned with a Crown, usually denotes Kingly and Princely Authority. In which
respect we may apply it to the Regal and Kingly Office of Christ; and therefore
it is, that in one of St. John's Visions, we find one like unto the Son of Man
sitting upon a Cloud, Rev. 14.14.
having a Golden Crown upon his head.

But now wherefore the High Priest appeared before God with this Golden Crown
inscribed with Holiness to the Lord, the reasons are given at large which we
shall, in 3 particulars, briefly apply to the Lord Jesus.

1. The Exodus 28.38.
Text says, that this excellent Ornament was commanded for the High Priest to
use for this end, that he should bear the iniquity of the holy things of the
Childen of Israel. It is not said, the iniquity of their gross and more
scandalous sins, (such were to be expiated by Sacrifice, whereof there is no
doubt that they cannot be pardoned without Christ's appearance before God on
the behalf of his People. For Heb. 9.22.
without blood there is no remission, and Christ in his mediation does
impetrate and obtain the pardon of all their sins for which his blood did
satisfy:) But to show that the Saints contract impurities even in their most
holy services. There are no sins so small as to be, in their own nature,
venial, No! all sins are mortal, if God should vindicate his Justice upon us
according to the guilt of them, and our merit of wrath. But to mind the people
of God, even of the least sins, wandering thoughts in duty, want of zeal, warmth
and fervency in their holy approaches. We want a High Priest even to deprecate
God's wrath in behalf of such; For as his death did work out mercy and pardon,
for all the sins of the Elect: So likewise does he continually interpell, and
intermediate at the Throne of Grace, for the constant issuing out of pardons
for our daily weaknesses and infirmities.

2dly, Another end of the Priest's [appearing with his gorgeous Ornament before
God, was, says the forecited Text, To take away the sin of their holy gifts,
which they hallowed and consecrated unto God: To show that in our most free
will-offerings of Praise and Gratitude, there is a mixture of the old leaven of
sin, which must be purged out by Christ's intercession. When the soul of a
Saint is upon the wing of heavenly influence mounting up to God in its choicest
ravishments of spirit, there is a tincture of the flesh that must be expiated
by Christ's appearance before God.

3dly, This Ornament was to be always upon his forefront, especially on the
expiation-day (unless when he went into the Holy of Holyes) that the Lord's
people may be always accepted of his Majesty. Thereby noting as the
continuance of our sins and imperfections, while we remain in this Earthly
Tabernacle, so likewise the constancy of his Mediation.

Now forasmuch as our Lord the eternal Priest of the most High God, has a
Crown of Gold upon his head when he mediates, it shows that Genesis 22.38. Hos.
12.3.
like a Prince he has power with God. He does it not in a low and precarious
way, but with Majesty and Authority, Phil. 2.6.
counting it no robbery to be equal with God. And therefore (although upon the
Earth) in the State of his exinanition and poverty, we see He prays like a
Prince. John 17.24.
Father I WILL, that they also whom thou have given me, be with me where I am,
that they may behold my Glory which thou have given me, etc. Oh then, how
triumphantly and victoriously does he now intercede, when sitting at the right
hand of his Father: having subdued Principalities and Powers, and led them
Captive at his Chariot Wheels. For if the Father Joh. 11.22, and 42.
heard him always when in the days of his flesh, nay, he was answered in the
things Heb. 5.7.
that he feared, having divine support, a hand from Heaven to carry him through
his agonies: How then may our souls rejoice in hope, nay, in the full assurance
of Faith, that whatever we ask in his name, Christ has promised, that John.
14.13, 14.
he will do it.

In the conclusion of this discourse, I might speak a word to that common
error, that the High Priest did go into the Oracle or Holy of Holyes, with
these his stately Garments before God on the expiation-day. For the Text in
Lev. 16.4. Ribera p. 223.
Leviticus expressly mentions but four Vestments, and all of linen, wherewith
he was to be arraied on that day. But the manner of his service on that
solemnity, is to be handled in next Section. Here likewise, if time would
admit, we might discuss that question, Whether Gospel Ministers are to use
distinct Garments or not? I confess the Enquiry is of no great moment and
weight; but for that the Pontificians, and others too much addicted to external
Pomp in worship, have raised such a dust in the Christian World about these and
other niceties, imposing insupportable yokes upon their weak Brethren, for Romans
14.15.
whom Christ dyed.

The small difficulty of this point lies upon the right stating of this Quaery,
Whether Church-Rulers have power to take away the indifferency of rhings (which
are such in their own nature) by a positive Ecclesiastical Ordinance? and then
it comes to be discussed under the notion of a Caeremony: But I shall forbear,
and at present only recite some passages out of Dr. Rivet, that Learned and
Judicious divine, treating upon this very business. Rivet in Exodus p. 11. 38.
Edie. Fol.
[In spiritu and veritate Deus vult a nobis coli; nec hoc tempore requirit,
quae rudi and carnali populo convenerunt, aut pueris sub tutela detentis, etc.
Which with the rest following I shall give in the following translate. God will
be worshipped by us in Spirit and in Truth; neither does he at this day require
those things which please the rude and carnal People, or Children detained
under pupillage. Wherefore we must argue otherwise, if the outward Ornament of
Priests under the old Law were so great, how much greater were the internal and
spiritual accomplishments of Christ Jesus our High Priest. If the Spouse of
Solomon under the old Law was so gloriously adorned with Gold and Jewels; how
much more should the Spouse of Christ, ( Psalm. 45.
who is all glorious within) be beautified with all manner of virtues. If the
Priests under the old Law were clothed with known Garments: how much more
should the Ministers of God under the Gospel, be adorned with a holy
conversation (becoming Godliness) and with the knowledge of divine things. Let
the Jesuits hearken to their Pope Coelestine in his 2d Epistle to the Bishops
of France, Chapter the first: We are to be distinguished from the people or
others by Doctrine, not Garments; by conversation, not habit; by the purity of
the mind, not clothing. For if we once begin to study Novelty we shall trample
under foot our order delivered to us from our Fathers, that we may make room
for superstitions: This is now done in the Popish Dominions. But certainly this
manner of arguing from the Vestments of the Aaronical Priesthood either the
Apostles were ignorant of, or they provided very ill for the Church; when as
they themselves did not Minister holy things, being clothed in Garments
dedicated to that use only: neither have they instituted or commended it to be
so done by others, etc. But we (says Rivet) do commend an honest and
convenient habit for Pastors; and, where the Church may meet freely, do think
it comely that the Ministers of God do use that kind of Garment with modesty,
which becomes Learned Men. Neither do we approve of their scrupulosity or
rusticity that cannot bear it, that a Minister should ascend the Pulpit with a
long Cloak, or Gown. No doubt but Garments that are grave and sober, are most
proper for persons engaged in so serious an employment as is the
Gospel-Ministery. But when as Gideon's linen Ephod (as he speaks) shall be
imposed with mulcts and censures in case of neglect, though the conscience be
never so weak and sincerely-tender of sinning against God: certainly such
Impositions will become a Judge. 8.27.
snare to all their house, that dare to bring in the relics of Judaism; or
for conceited and affixed Mysteries to such kind of Vestments beyond others,
will take away that Christian Liberty, which Christ has purchased. Happy is
the people that agree in the fundamental Principles of Doctrine; and happy is
that Church where the civil Magistrate shall put to his Sanction, like Asa, 2 Chronicles. 14.4.
Commanding Judah to seek the Lord God of their Fathers, and to do the Law and
the Commandment. When they shall, like 2 Chronicles. 19.9.
Johosaphat charge the Officers of Church and State, to act in the fear of the
Lord faithfully, and with a perfect heart: or, like godly Hezekiah, Command the
People to give a portion to the Priests and Levites, that they may be 2 Chronicles.
31.4.
encouraged in the Law of the Lord. Or lastly, like tender Josiah, 2 Chronicles.
34.33.
make all that are in their Israel to serve, even to serve the Lord their God.
That Magistrates may be like fenced Isa. 5.5.
Walls round about the Vineyard of the Church. That Church shall never want
errors, and those dangerous, that wants the fence of Discipline, and the wall
of a godly, faithful, and zealous Magistracy: and that Church shall never want
Rents and Schisms, breaches and disorders where Circumstantials are rigidly
pressed, and where external niceties (wherein Saints that Col. 2.19.
hold the head may safely differ without breach of communion) are, with too
warm and self-conceited a spirit, imperiously urged upon the consciences of
meek Brethren, who desire to walk in all the ways of Holiness, Psalm. 35.20.
Soberly, Righteously and Godlily, and to rest quiet in the Land: Yet doubtless
union in externals is very beautiful, if it may be had.

But that I may draw to a period of this discourse concerning the Priestly
Vestments, on which I have so long insisted: It is sure somewhat worth our
notice that there is no mention made of any shoos or sandals, or any such kind
of covering for the feet of the Priests, who, in the cold of Winter, and heat
of Summer, performed all their services barefoot. Indeed the Winter's cold was
seldom vehement in that Climate: but the Summer's heat might be somewhat more
offensive by reason of the stone-pavements, which might be very hot by the
reflection of the Sunbeams. However it were, they were to officiate in this
manner. The feet when covered are subject to contract filth by sweat: but
possibly that of Moses his being unshod because Exodus 3.5.
the place was holy, may suit this our observation concerning the Temple. As
the feet are sometimes in Scripture put Eccles. 5.1.
for the affections: sometimes for holy walking in the life and conversation:
So ought the Gospel-Ministery to walk unblameably, Psalm. 119.59.
to have a conversation naked and open before the World, in all simplicity and
godly sincerity; and then Romans 10.15.
Oh! how beautiful are the feet of them that Preach the Gospel of Peace, and
bring glad tidings of good things.

Having treated thus largely of the Vestures of the High Priest, and the
Inferiors under him: It is high time to remove to the 3d and last thing hinted
in the beginning of this Section, concerning the Consecration of this prime
Officer of the Temple, together with the rest, his attendants, which consisted
principally in these 3 Ceremonial performances; Washing, Anointing, and
Sacrificing; all distinctly laid down in the 8th Chapter of Leviticus: and
thereof I shall treat very briefly in their order.

First, We read that the Lev. 8.6.
Priest was to be washed with water. So was Christ baptized with water, Mat.
3.16.
and the Holy Spirit descended upon him, when he was initiated into this great
work of his Ministry. So ought the sons of Aaron likewise, the Children of
Christ (as he is sometimes pleased to call his Apostles and Disciples) they
must be washed with the water of Regeneration, if ever they expect to do great
services for Christ. A Ministry baptized with the spirit of fire in their
hearts, may through God be enabled to cast down the strong holds of Satan.

2dly, We read of the Priests Unction, first of the chief Priest, Lev. 8.12.
verse the 12th, and after of the inferiors, verse. 30.

Now here before I proceed, I would beg leave to speak a little to the
materials, and the composition of the holy anointing Oil, because formerly
omitted in the History of the Temple.

The ingredients and their quantities we read to be these: Exodus 30.23.
Of pure myrrh, 500 shekels, sweet Cinnamon 250, sweet Calamus 250. Cassia
500, and of Oyl-Olive an Hin. Concerning the measures we have spoken before at
large. As for these materials, there is no great difference among Expositors,
worth the noting. All of them are designed to set forth the graces of the
Spirit. But first a word of the several Species, or, as we translate them,
Spices, in their order.

1. (...) mor derir, The myrrh of liberty or freedom, that is, the Gumm which
sweats freely out of the Tree of the same name: whereof Pliny treating in his
12th Book and 15th Chapter, tells us that the Gumm which comes naturally out of
that Tree without incision, is called Stacte: whereof formerly.

2. The second is (...) Kinnemon, the name whereof is retained at this day, and
commonly known. Concerning which the cited Author speaks at large in the 19th
Chapter of the same book, which I shall not transcribe at present.

3. The third is (...) Kene-Boshem, Calamus Aromaticus; The Seventy, (...) the
sweet-scented Cane. I cannot say, it is the same which is called in shops, at
this day, Acorus, the root whereof is used in aromatical mixtures. Of this,
speaks Matthiolus upon Dioscorides lib. 1. cap. 17. out of Pliny,
Theophrastus, and others, manifesting its principal native place to be in
Arabia, and that it is a sort of Reed of a very fragrant scent. The Prophet
Jeremy speaking of Incense brought from Sheba adds, And the sweet Cane from a
far Country; Jer. 6.20.
which seems to be meant of the same place, being but an additional expression
to Shebah. For so that Queen, who is related to have governed Sheba, 1 Kin.
10.1.
is by the Evangelists reported to have come from a far Country indeed, even
Mat. 12.42. Luke 11.31.
the uttermost parts of the Earth.

4. The fourth Ingredient is called (...) Kiddah: The Seventy translate it by
(...), the Iris or sweet scented Flower de lice of Florence, whereof the Orice
powder is made. But the general harmony of Interpreters carries it for the
Cassia, a wood now in use, and easily wrested from Kiddah, seeing the Chaldee
version turns the into in that word which they use for this Aroma, (...) it
being counted but a Chaldaean de^orsion of the same word: although now found
from another root by Lexicographers.

The Plant grows in the same Countries where Cinnamon, says Pliny in the
forecited place, and is but three Cubits high, usually: It is called with us
Cassia-lignea, being brought into our Country by our Asian Mer^hants, and and
is indeed, when burned, of a most Aromaticall and fragrant Savor.

5. The last is Oyl-Olive, known to every one.

But here it may seem somewhat strange that Balsame, (the peculiar rarity of
Judaea, no other Country affording it besides, as many Authors write), the
Prince of Oils or Unguents (as the name imports) should be left out in this
choice composition. Wherefore some have apprehended it to be concluded in the
first words: for that which we translate, Principal Spices, the Hebrew terms
(...) Beshamim Rosh, Aromata capitis, the spices of the head, that is the chief
and most eminent. But because these words seem to be only general terms,
comprehensive of the particulars presently enumerated, therefore others have
thought that the Balsame is couched under the name of free and pure Mirrhe.
However it be this is evident, that the choicest ingredients for such a
composition are commanded by God, wherewith the Priests were to be anointed.

But as to the spiritual signification of this Unction, we have the guidance of
the Holy Spirit him self to direct us: who in the New Testament does frequently
intimate, that the participation of his Gifts and Graces, is thereby shadowed
forth to us. The High Priest upon the account of this legal Unction is called
(...) the Messiah: Lev. 8.3, 5.
and by the Seventy in the 3d verse (...), and in the 5th (...), Christus, the
anointed: clearly hinting to us our Gospel-High-Priest, the Lord Jesus Christ,
the true Messiah or Anointed of the Father, with the Ps. 45.7.
Oil of gladness above his fellows; which place is (...), distinctly and
expressly applied unto our Lord and Savior, in the Heb. 1.9.
Epistle to the Hebrews. The glorious Antitype of David, being Psalm. 89.20.
anointed King as well as Priest of his Church: The same person, the Apostle
Peter asserts to have been Act. 10.38.
anointed with the Holy Ghost and with power. Nay, all the people of God, who
are Rev. 1.6.
Priests and Kings unto God, are 2 Cor. 1.21.
anointed with the same Spirit. The ancient Unction was external Ps. 133.2.
upon the head of Aaron, and ran down upon the beard, and went down to the
skirts of his Garments. The Gospel Unction is internal, which we 1 John 2.20,
27.
have received from the holy One, and abides in us; the same anointing
teaches us all things, and is truth.

Precious and excellent were the mixtures of that ancient Oil: What particular
Gifts or Graces each might signify, I leave to others; being certain of this,
that Isa. 11.2.
the Spirit of the Lord did rest upon Christ, the Spirit of wisdom and
understanding, the Spirit of counsel and might, the Spirit of know^edge, and of
the fear of the Lord: and it is of this His Joh. 1.16.
fullness that we have received, even Grace for Grace.

This Unction was administered by measure to Aaron in a certain weight of sweets
and a Hin of Oil Olive: Exodus 30.24. Joh. 3.34.
but God gave not the Spirit by measure unto Christ. But unto every one of us
is given Grace, according to the measure of the gift of Christ, Ephesians. 4.7. And
when all the Graces of the Spirit do hold communion together in a Saint's duty,
as the several Ingredients of this Unction in one composition, then are duties
most fragrant.

With this Unction were all the Vessels of the Sanctuary to be anointed, to
signify to us, that all religious exercises and Ordinances under the Gospel,
are no further useful and beneficial then as they are perfumed with the secret
and most precious operation of the Holy Spirit, through whom we are made
partakers of Christ's holiness, and have Ephesians. 2.18.
access with holy boldness to the Throne of Grace.

The last thing in the consecration of Priests was Sacrificing, whereof may be
read at large in the 8th Chapter of Leviticus. The blood of the Sacrifice being
sprinkled upon them; To note, that the Office, Calling, and Execution of the
service of Gospel Ministers are all sanctified by the blood of Christ. The Lord
Jesus died to purchase a Gospel Ministry; his precious blood consecrates and
sets them apart to that excellent function. Oh how dreadful a sin is it, for
vile wretches to trample upon and scorn that Office which was dedicated by the
blood of Christ? who, when ascended up on high, Ps. 68.18.
received Gifts for men. He gave not only Ephesians. 4.8, 12.
Apostles, Prophets, and Evangelists; but Pastors and Teachers also, for the
perfecting of Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the
body of Christ. For how long time? Till we all come in the unity of the Faith
and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of
the stature of the fullness of Christ. The Gospel Ministry, anointed by God,
and consecrated by the blood of Christ, and receiving gifts by the benefit of
Christ's ascension, is (we hence learn) to continue till all the Members of
Christ's mystical body are gathered into one, which work will not be completely
finished till the end of the world. For some Saints shall remain alive at the
second coming of our Lord, 1 These. 4.15. etc.
when he himself shall descend from heaven with a shout, with the voice of the
Archangel, and with the Trump of God, etc. Then those which are alive and
remain, shall be caught up together, etc. in the Clouds to meet the Lord in the
air, and so shall they ever be with the Lord, who had promised at his
ascension to be with his Ministers always, Mat. 28.20
even unto the end of the World.

The High Priest among the Jews was consecrated with blood, he needed Sacrifice
for his sins: but our High Priest is holy, harmless, undefiled, Heb. 7.26.
Ver. 24.
separate from sinners, and made higher then the heavens; he continues for
ever, and has an unchangeable Priesthood. He was without sin, and therefore
the Sacrifice of himself, whereby he was consecrated to all his glorious
Offices, was to make entrance for others into the holiest, by his blood, in a
new and living way, which he has consecrated for us. Heb. 10.20. Joh. 17.19.
Heb. 10.14.


For their sakes he did [(...)] dedicate and sanctify himself, that they might
be sanctified through the Truth: For by one Offering has he perfected for ever
them that are sanctified.

On this excellent subject I might enlarge amply: but considering there are yet
several things behind in the two last Sections of this Chapter, which refer
somewhat to this point: I shall speak but a word or two of the other
Temple-Officers, and come to the close of this 4th Section.

Having spoken thus much concerning the Priests, Let me in brief hint at the
rest, and I shall conclude.

They were the Levites and Nethinims, whereof at large in the former story of
the Temple.

The Levites according to four distinct charges were divided into Singers,
Porters, Judges, and Treasurers,

Here some might expect possibly, that I should assign to each of these some
distinct Church-Offices under the Gospel. But I shall not love time and offend
the sober with such niceties. I know that several of the Ancients, as Jerome,
Prudent. (...). hymn. 3. p. edit. Hanov. 1613.

Rein. adv. Heart. 84. p. 463.


Prudentius, and others, do assign the Deacons Office, under the Gospel, to the
Levites of old. I confess, the work of the Gospel-Deacon mentioned by Luke, in
the first designation of their Office, is to Act. 6.1, 2.
serve Tables, and to look after the daily ministration to the poor: as there
were among the Levites anciently Treasurers, that managed the disbursements of
the Temple. But of these and other inferior Officers, as Hewers, and Drawers,
though some may conceit a parallel betwixt them and inferior servants of the
Church: yet I rather referr them to the Grandeur and Pomp of the ancient
Temple, which needed many servitors and attendants, in respect to the great and
arduous employments of Sacrifices, and all the (...) and services of that
ancient Worship.

If any shall bring more light into the world concerning these things,
conformable to Scripture, and the dictates of the holy Spirit, I shall rejoice
to light my dimm Lamp at their more splendid and radiant Luminaries: being
desirous in the mean while to be a Doorkeeper of the House of God, rather then
to dwell in the Tents of wickedness.

SECT. V. The Services of the Temple spiritualized.
THis Section I shall divide into two Paragraphs, according to the preceding
History, and speak very briefly to each: because this would require a large
Volume of it self, if completely and fully handled: and therefore I shall but
succinctly touch at things in this following method and order.

1. Of the several Services and Solemnities according to stated times.

2. Of the various Sacrifices, with several attendant Rites and Ceremonies.

As to the first particular, the Services may be distinguished into such as
were constant without intermission, or such as fell out in their several
appointed stations and periods.

The constant Service was that of the Porters in watching at the Temple-gates,
night and day. Blessed is the man (says Wisdom) Prove. 8.34.
that hears me, watching daily at my gates, waiting at the posts of my doors.
Happy are they that, like holy Anna, depart not from the Temple Luke 2.37.
but serve God with fasting and prayer, night and day. Such as wait for the
consolation of Israel and look for Redemption in Jerusalem, shall have their
expectations satisfied with the marrow and fatness of his House.

The daily Service of the Temple was the Juge Sacrificium, the daily Sacrifice
of a Lamb, morning and evening. Which hinted at the constant and daily
approaches of the People of God to the Throne of Grace, night and day. The Lamb
signified Christ, Joh 1.29.
taking away the sins of the World, who is represented in the
Revelation-Visions as a Rev. 5.6, 12.
slain Lamb, slain from Rev. 13.8.

Tertull. de pudiciti^ p. 475. Edit. Par. Tom. 2. 1566.

Heb. 13.20.


the foundation of the World, in all the Sacrifices of the ancient Patriarchs
and of the Jewish Paedagogy. To note, that all our prayers and addresses to God
must be put up in the name of this holy Lamb of God, if ever we expect to find
acceptance at the door of heaven. Tertullian mentions the ingraving on the
Cups of the Primitive Christians, the figure of a Shepherd carrying a Lamb on
his shoulders; He that was the Lamb of God was slain, that he might rise from
the dead [an (...)] a Chief-Shepheard to carry his poor Lambs, some in his
bosom, some on his shoulders, to heaven. We in our daily Sacrifices must look
up to this Lamb, as only able to carry away all the defilement of our prayers,
and reader us as unspotted before the Father through his mediation.

The weekly service was on the Sabbath or seventh day; and therein the
Sacrifices were doubled, to set forth a more extraordinary service unto God in
the public Ordinances on that day under the Christian dispensation. As for the
change of the day from the seventh to the first day of the week, it is not my
work to handle that controversy here: But whosoever pleases to be settled and
confirmed in the truth about this matter, may consult that Learned and
Judicious Treatise of Mr. Herbert Palmer, and Mr. Daniel Cawdry, who have given
a Supersedeas to other men's labors in that particular, where they may receive
abundant satisfaction, who are capable of rational arguments and clear proofs
from Scripture, and the practice of all the primitive Churches.

Besides, this Sabbath, we are now upon, Heb. 4.9.
might shadow the eternal Sabbatism of rest, which our spiritual Joshua or
Jesus will bring his people to, at the great day.

The Monthly service was performed on every New Mood; which might signify the
Churches renovation and reformation.

The Church has her spots and vicissitudes, Eclipses, and various Aspects,
while here below. Yet, when at the full of her Glory, all is but by a borrowed
light from Christ the Gospel-Sun, she being fair as the Moon, Cant. 6.10.
and perfect through his comeliness, Ezekiel. 16.14. Under the Gospel she is
clothed Rev. 12.1.
with the Sun, and has the Moon (all the Jewish festivals) under her feet.

The Annual Festivities follow, and none must come to them empty handed, but
bring Vitulum petulantiae; Bovem superbiae, Arietem luxuriae, Tho. A-kemp. par.
1. page 119. The Calfe of Petulancy, the Ox of Pride, the Ram of Luxury.

First, The Passover, which signified God's passing us over for the sake of
Christ, and bringing us out of spiritual Egypt. Christ 1 Cor. 5.7. Cloppenb. p.
142. and 144.
our Passover being sacrificed for us. For as it was in the Paschal Lamb, so
in Christ was it verified, () a bone of his was not broken. As the Paschal Lamb
was slain in the Evening; so Christ died in the Evening, Joh. 19.36.
Mat. 27.46.
about the ninth hour of the day. If we divide the day of Joh. 11.9.
twelve hours (according to the computation of those times, they being unequal
hours according to the various length of days throughout the year) into four
parts, then our Lord's death falling out about the ninth hour of the day, his
passion was finished about the end of three fourths, or in the Evening,
answering about Easter, (in that year when as the Sun was in a vernal sign,
past the Equinoxe) to our Afternoon between three and four of the clock, as we
term it. Furthermore, according to the Rabbinical account of the World's
duration, for the space of 6000 years (whereof I have given a hint before): Our
Lord dying in the 4000th year of the World, by the computation of Bishop Usher,
and other exact Computators; as he finished his life by dying for sinners in
the end of the Jewish Paedagogy, so came it to pass also in the approaching
Evening of the World. Nay, in the times presently succeeding, James told them
that Jam. 5.9.
the Judge was then at the door, and generally throughout the Epistles,
Gospel-daies are called the Heb. 1.2.
last days: The 1 Cor. 10.11.

Dr. Whitaker de Sacramentis page 109. Edit. Francof. 1654.


ends of the World being come upon us.

Some there be who conceived that the Passover did typify and praefigure the
Sacrament of our Lord's Supper, wherein the soul of a Believer feeds upon
Christ, the Lamb of God. But doubtless, in the main the Scripture does therein
point at Christ.

The Sacraments of both Testaments do hold forth the Lord Jesus: the former
look forward upon him, as being not yet come, the latter look backward upon
him, as being already come: For hereby we 1 Cor. 11.26.
show forth the Lord's death till he come, that is, in his last and most
glorious Advent, to deliver his people and to judge the World of the ungodly.

The next Annual festivity was the Feast of first fruits, or Feast of weeks,
being celebrated fifty days after the Israelites coming out of Egypt, and
therefore is called in the New Testament, Act. 20, 16.
Pentecost. At the first Pentecost in the wilderness, was the Law given by
Moses. In the last Jewish Pentecost was the Act. 2.1.
Holy Ghost given to the Apostles at Jerusalem: and then the first fruits of
the Gospel were offered up to God through Jesus Christ by that miraculous
conversion of Act. 2.41.
3000 souls by the Sermon of Peter. Which was the earnest of the great Harvest
to follow in the whole world.

The Feasts of the seventh month were these:

1. The blowing of Lev. 23.24.
Trumpets on the first day of the seventh month, and might hint at the
preaching of the Gospel most clearly in the latter end of the world, as some
apprehend.

The Fast of Expiation on the tenth day of the seventh month, was a most clear
presignification of our blessed Lord's Crames.
expiating for sin. Ribera, p. 339.
Some apprehend that this and other Fasts among the Jews, might denote the
solemn fastings for sin under the Gospel, the denial of our selves, taking up
the Cross of Christ, and the constant study of the mortification of Gal. 5.24.
the flesh and all the lusts thereof.

The Feast of Tabernacles, as it reflected backward on the Jews Lev. 23.42.
dwelling in Booths in the Wilderness; so it looked forward likewise on the
state and condition of Christians, while traveling thorough the wilderness of
this World, that we are but strangers in this Earth, 1 Chronicles. 29.15.
as all our Fathers were. Our days flee away like a shadow, we have here no
abiding City. The Lord himself alone is Jerome. Tom. 6. in Zach. p. 347. cum
solice.

Psalm 90.1.


the dwelling place of Saints in all generations, as holy Moses speaks of
himself and the children of Israel, while wandering in the howling Desert of
Sinai. Wherefore Abraham and all the Blessed Patriarchs dwelt in Tents, Heb.
11.14, 15, 16.
plainly declaring, that they sought a Country which is Heavenly. To which God
of his infinite mercy bring us through the propitiatory blood of the Heb. 13.20.
Great Shepherd of the sheep, the Lord Jesus whom he raised from the dead.

On the seventh day of this great Feast of Tabernacles, there was offered the
smallest number of Sacrifices: to note the declining of that ancient legal and
Ceremonial Worship, Sheringham in Codicem Joma. p. 39.
and that a more perfect sacrifice was ready to be introduced in their room.

Besides the presignification of some Gospel-Excellencies by these Feasts; It
is noted by a learned Man, that there was a reason for their celebration among
the Jews, referring to the impetration of some particular blessings upon the
Earth, according to the several seasons of the Year wherein they were
solemnized.

There was an offering of the quantity of a Homer given up at the Passover to
beg a blessing on the Harvest. The first fruits they offered up at Pentecost to
obtain a blessing on the fruits of their trees: at the Feast of Tabernacles
they 1 Samuel 7.6.
powered out water to beg the blessing of Rain upon the Earth, it being then the
seed-time in the land of Judea. These Waters were drawn out of the Fountain of
Shiloah. Whence it is that the Evangelical Prophet complains of the Jews that
they refused the Isa. 8.6.
waters of Shiloah, that go softly, not trusting in Gods gracious promise that
he made to King Ahaz of the true Shiloah, He that was to be sent to them, the
Messiah: Isa. 7.14.
which was given as a firm word for him to rest upon against the Kings of
Israel and Syria. For it was plain, that the Race of David should continue till
the coming of that Immanuel, who was to be born of a Virgin; and therefore the
enemies should not prevail to extinguish the Royal Race of Judah. Hence is it,
that our blessed Lord alluding to this Libation or pouring out of Waters at the
Feast of the Tabernacles, cries out, in the last and great day of the Feast,
John 7.37.
that they should come to him as the true Fountain of Shiloah that gives forth
living waters: which thing he spoke concerning the Spirit. For he that
believes on him, as the Scripture says, (that is, he whose Faith is grounded
on Scripture-promises: for we are not to understand that Text of any citation,
there being no such place extant), out of his belly shall flow Rivers of
living-waters. i. e. There shall be within him a Heavenly spring of Grace, that
shall flow into the Ocean of Glory.

The Heathen had an apish imitation of this great Festivity, Plut. These. gr. p.
19. Edit. 1. Steph. 80. Plut. Romul. p. 66. gr. Aedit. H. Steph.
as Plutarch remembers in the life of Theseus, that the Athenians had their
(...) in memory of the deliverance of their City by Theseus and to implore a
blessing on the fruits of the earth, and moreover concerning the Romans at set
times dwelling under Fig Trees, as the same Author has recorded in the life of
Romulus, and in the fourth of his Symposiacks, mentioning this Feast, foolishly
compares it with the Heathenish Feast of Bacchus, qu. 5.

Here, before I conclude, give me leave to treat a while upon the Conjecture of
some persons, who conceive the 3 solemn Festivals celebrated among the
Christians to have been pre-exemplified in those 3 Eminent Feasts of the Jews.

The birth of our Savior, answering to the Feast of Tabernacles. For so a very
Learned man of our Nation, and others, viz. Beroaldus, Mede Vol. 1. p. 618.
Scaliger and Calvisius conceive, and seem to prove it by good arguments, that
our Savior was born in September, the time answering to the Feast of
Tabernacles. Our blessed Lord when brought forth into the light of this world
according to his humane Nature did then, (...), make his Tabernacle with men.

And so for the other, that Easter and Whitsontide did resemble the Passover
and Pentecost. But I shall not lay stress upon these things. That which is
somewhat more material for such as do sacredly observe these Festivals, to
consider, is this: That at this present day we have utterly lost the true time
of the celebration of them; and truly a great part of the devotion is thereby
extinguished.

For as to the usual and common solemnization of the Nativity of Christ: though
we should grant (contrary to the sense of Mr. Mede and several learned Authors)
that our Lord was born on the 25 of December, between 1600. and 1700 years ago:
yet it may be evident to all that will seriously weigh the Truth, that we are
now several days distant, from the supposed time and point of his birth.

For if so be the motion of the Sun from one fixed point, suppose the first
degree of Aries through the Zodiac to the same point again, be comprehended
within this space of time, viz. of 365 days, 5 hours, 49. minutes, and 4
seconds: and other odd scruples not worth naming in this Computation, According
to Bullialdus, or, as Longomontanus, 365 d. 5 h. 48 min. 55 seconds, Long. l.
1. Theor. c. 5. p. 2227. and other eminent Astronomers; Then there will fall
out 11 min. (letting pass the 2 seconds) to be reserved every year for a
Calculation of certain hours, yea and days at last, wherein the Julian year
will transcend the true state of the Sun's mensuration. For they reserve every
year 6 complete hours to make a day for the Bissextile-year being every fourth
in order, which does not precisely agree with the Sun. For it exceeds by 4
times 11 minutes, which every fourth year arises to 44. Or to speak more
precisely: Buliald. Astronom. Phololaic. ed Par. 1645. l. 2. c. 3. p. 68.
The Tropical year according to exact Computation is determined to consist of
365 days, 5 hours 49. 4. 21. 3''''. which falls short of 6 hours by 10. 55.
38. 57''''. in every year. Now if we compute to the present vulgar year of our
Lords Incarnation 1659: These scruples will arise to 11 days, 13 hours, 58
min. 40. 41. 3''''. Wherein the celebration of this Festivity ought to
anticipate the 25 of December in our common Julian year, and ought to be
celebrated almost 12 days before our ordinary time. As to which who is so
ignorant as not to know that therefore the Pontificians do according to the
Gregorian Emendation precede us by 10 days, in their account which is called
the New Style? But they went no higher than the time of the Nicene Council in
the correction of the year, and so fell short in this point of the true time.
The reason why they went no higher, I leave for them to give.

As for the celebration of Easter, it is not unknown to such as are but
moderately versed in Ecclesiastical History, what stirs there have been in the
Church in the 5th. 6th. and 7th. Centuries etc. between the Greeks and the
Latins: nay, in our Britain, between the Scots and the Saxons, as appears
Bid Eccles. Hist. l. 2. c. 2. and l. 4. c. 5. and l. 2. c. 22.
by the Writings of venerable Bede. The Christians studying to conform the time
of its celebration to the season of the Jewish Passover. What laborious Tables,
Calendars and Canons were framed by Victorius, Hippolytus, Anatolius,
Dionysius, Exiguus, and many others. Whereby it comes to pass, that this
Festival does so vary every year according to that Sabhath which follows the
full Moon next after the vernal-Equinoxe. Whereas seeing the design of the
Christians was therein to commemorate the time of our Lords Resurrection: If
they would have kept the exact time, they should have considered what day of
the year he arose, and what time of the morning of that day as near as may be
to Scripture, and by the best Rules have found out the Sun's place exactly in
the Zodiac, and when the Sun did Return unto that point in every year, to
celebrate it accordingly. Lang. de Annis Christi. p. 415. l. 2. c. 8.
Langius, a learned and laborious Calculator of Scripture-times has stated the
Resurrection of our Lord in the 4746 the year of the Julian period. In the 4th.
year of the 202d. Olympiad, the Cycl. 14, of the 15. the Indiction 6. and on
the 5th. of April according to the Julian Calendar, in the 33d. year from his
birth according to our common Computation. The Aequinoxe in those days fell
out about the 22 of March, and so the Sun will be found in the 14 of Aries upon
the 5th. of April at noon in the Meridian of Jerusalem: or, to come nearer the
point, having examined it by Calculation out of the late corrected Tables, I
find the to have been in. 13. 27. 25. in the noon of the Resurrection-day,
agreeing commonly with the 23 of our March. By which in any good Ephemeris,
every one may judge how far the present Celebration of this annual Festivity,
errs from the Truth, and consequently that of Pentecost, which depends upon
this.

But I have insisted too long on these things. I shall conclude Romans 14.6.
That he who regards the day, says holy Paul, regards it unto the Lord,
and he that regards not the day, to the Lord he does not regard it. As for
these things, as Paul 1 Cor. 7.25.
said in another case, we have no commandment of the Lord. But of such as
endeavor to conform themselves to Jewish Feasts, the Apostle may say as of the
Galatians: Gal. 4.10.
Ye observe days, and times, and months, and years: I am afraid of you, lest
I have bestowed upon you labor in vain. But in this point how far
Ecclesiastical Sanctions have power and Authority over Christian liberty in
matters of indifferency, I leave to the decision of able, grave, learned and
holy men. But yet however, whosoever do incline to keep these times, certainly they
cannot but think their devotion and zeal to be much cooled by the false
assignation of the time of their celebration.

Having thus briefly hinted at the principal Jewish Festivals: I shall come to
the second thing proposed in the beginning of this Section touching the various
sacrifices wi^h their Appendancies. Which, that they did portend and
presignifie the great and only satisfactory sacrifice of the Lord Jesus, is
granted by all sober persons, any thing versed in the comparison of the two
Testaments: For so the Spirit of God testifies expressly concerning him, when he
is brought in by an Elegant Prosopopoeia, speaking to the Father on this wise:
Psalm 40.6. Heb. 10.5, etc. 1 Pet. 2.24.
Burnt offering and sacrifice for sin have thou not required, but a Body have
thou prepared me. Implying, that all the legal Offerings were in themselves of
no validity, only so far as the Offerer did look through them with an eye of
Faith upon the Lord our Savior, who bore our sins in his own Body upon the
Tree.

The chief and principal scope of all those ancient Services, was to bring near
to the view of their Faith, the apprehension of Christ's meritorious sufferings
for penitent sinners. Now as there were various creatures offered: so each of
them held forth some excellent quality in our Lord.

The Heifer a laborious creature might signify his labor and constancy in the
great work which he undertook for mankind: and, because used for the tillage of
the ground with Diod. Sic. Ed. H. Steph. p. 73.
incessant and industrious pains, it was consecrated by the Heathens to Osiris
the Inventor of Fruits and Corn. He was most exceeding laborious and painful in
the sowing the seed of the Gospel of the Kingdom.

The Lamb noted his meekness, 1 Pet. 2.23.
There being no guile found in his mouth, who when reviled, reviled not again,
but committed himself to him who judges righteously. As a Lamb he opened not
his mouth, Isa. 53.7.
but was dumb before the shearer. He was the Lamb slain, Rev. 13.8.
from the foundation of the world, not only in respect of the Eternal decree of
God, and the virtue of his death, reaching even to the beginning of the world,
but in respect also of those Typical Shadows, wherein among the rest there were
Lambs offered up to God. For so we read of Abel, that in the beginning of the
world, he offered of the Genesis 4.4.
firstlings of the flock, and of the fat thereof.

The Goat or Kid, a lively and vivacious creature, might hold out to us the
alacrity and cheerfulness of his Spirit in that great and admirable kindness
of his to dye for sinners.

The Dove his Chastity, Innocence, Purity. Wherefore our Lord bids his
Disciples to be innocent or Mat. 10.16.
harmless as Doves. Nay, the eyes of Christ are compared to the Cant. 5.12.
eyes of Doves.

The Turtle; a mourning, lonely, meditating creature, to show him Isa. 53.3.
a man of sorrows, and acquainted with griefs, who Luke 19.41.
wept over the Daughters of Jerusalem, and was grieved for their hardness of
heart.

These Creatures, though so often and in such multitudes offered up to God,
Mar. 3.5.
were not of themselves in the least measure available to the expiation of sin,
what commensuration can there be stated betwixt the demerit of the sins of
rational beings, and the offering up of poor brute Creatures? wherefore some of
the wiser Heathens whether they received it by tradition from some of the
Families of the faithful, who as Esau, Moab and Ammon, Ishmael, etc. swerved
from the true Worship: or whether some of them, as Socrates, Plato, etc. in
their travels into Judaea and Egypt, had it by converse with the true Priests
of the most high God, or gathering it from the remaining glimmerings of natural
light by speculation and contemplation, I shall not discuss; have declared to
the World, that no sacrifice could expiate for the sin of man, but man himself.
For so Caesar treating of the ancient Gauls, affirms, that they used the
service of the Druides, to offer up men in sacrifice, Caesar Comment de bell.
Gall. l. 6.
Quod pro vita hominis nisi vita hominis reddatur, non posse aliter Deorum
immortalium numen placari arbitrantur. Supposing, unless the life of man were
sacrificed for his life, that the Deity of the immortal Gods could not
otherwise be appeased. But as touching those horrid heathenish rites in the
sacrificing of men, I shall speak no more, referring that discourse to Diodorus
Sicul. in his 5th Book, and 32 Section, to Strabo, lib. 4. p. 198. To Pliny,
lib. 30. cap. 1. Porphyr. de Abstinent. p. 224. And Homer, who Homer Il. ps v.
175.
mentions Achilles his slaughtering of twelve Trojan youths at the Funeral of
Patroclus and others, Zepper de leg. mos. p. 265.
who make mention of several fearful and prodigious actions of the Heathens in
these matters. Alas poor Creatures, so miserably tyrannized over by the Devil,
through his Serpentine persuasions (when he appeared to them, and spoke through
the mouths of their Idols) they were put upon the perpetration of such direful
murders, nay even sometimes of their own Children: which Gods Majesty did so
highly abominate and detest, as the way of the Heathen, whom the Land of Canaan
had spewed out.

There is but one sacrifice of a man, which can be acceptable and pleasing to
God, even the Man Christ Jesus, who being delivered by the determinate Counsel
and foreknowledge of God, Act. 2.23. Act. 7.52. Psalm. 40.7. Phil. 2.8.
the Jews did take, and by wicked hands have crucified and slain. That just
one, of whom they were the betrayers and murderers: whom it behoved to come
(according as it was written of him in the Volume of the Fathers Book) to do
the will of God, being obedient thereunto, even to the death of the Cross. Of
which glorious Sacrifice, the Heathens in those their tremendous rites
forementioned might seem to have had some dark and obscure conception, though
most horribly corrupted by the subtle and most hellish insinuations of Satan.
To which purpose very memorable is that discourse of Acinous with his
Phaeacians (in Homer) assuring them, that the Gods did meditate some such
admirable thing, as the sending down one of their Company from Heaven, and
gives this in as a reason of his apprehension.

Odys. 11. v. 201. etc.
(...)
(...)
(...).
For the Gods (says he) do always before hand manifestly appear to us, when
we sacrifice splendid Hecatombes: moreover, they do feast with us, sitting by
us. Plutarch also in a Book concerning Homer, ascribed by some to him, says,
that the Gods do not only confer together about men, but descend also upon the
Earth, and converse with them: which assertion he manifests to have bin the
opinion of Homer, (whom he there greatly magnifies for his knowledge in all
divine and humane speculations) by producing some passages out of his Poems to
confirm it.

But to return to the work in hand, I shall conclude this Discourse with that
saying of the great Bishop of Hippo: Austin. Contr. Faust. Manicc. l. 20. cap.
21. Col. 376. Edit. Bas. 1569. Tom. 6.
[Hoc interest inter Sacrificia Paganorum and Hebraeorum, quantum inter
imitationem errantem and praefigurationem praenunciantem.] There is as great a
difference between the Sacrifices of the Pagans and the Hebrews, as there is
betwixt an erroneous imitation and a typifying prefiguration. But blessed be
the God and Father of our Lord Jesus, that we are now guided by the infallible
dictates of the Spirit of Grace, who has acquainted us, that the ancient
Sacrifices did foreshew the grand and unspeakably glorious Offering of Christ.
For they all ceased at the Ascension of Christ, which is the Argument of their
being but Shadows, that were to cease at the appearance of the Substance. So
does the blessed Apostle Argue clearly in his Epistle to the Hebrews, and out
of him Orig. p. 125. Homil. 3. in Levitic.
Origin, and generally all both Ancient and Modern, that I have as yet had the
Happiness to peruse upon this Subject, unless such as have drunk deep of the
poisonous dregs of Socinianism.

All those carnal Ordinances (for so the Apostle terms them) were to continue
only Heb. 9.10.
(...), till the season of Reformation, when their obscure conceptions should
be cleared, their crooked apprehensions rectified, in the taking away of all
those worldly and beggarly Elements, in comparison with the Sacrifice of
Christ, who was the beginning of the new Heavens, and the new Earth, by the
Substitution of a Gospel frame of spiritual Worship in the room of all those
ancient Ceremonies. So that what was spoken by the Prophet Esaias in the Name of
God respecting the hypocrisy of the Jews in their worship, may be now spoken
positively of the very Worship it self, since the Offering up of Christ to the
Father. Isa. 1.13.
Bring no more vain Oblations, Incense is an abomination to him; the new Moons
and Sabboths (that is, of the seventh day, seventh year, etc.) the calling of
Assemblies he cannot away with, it is iniquity; even the solemn meeting. Their
New Moons and appointed Feasts his soul hates; they are a trouble to him: he
is weary to bear them. This is the time, even after the apparition of Christ in
the flesh, wherein God will cause to Hos. 2.11.
cease all the Feast-dayes of Judaes, her New Moons, her Sabboths, and all her
Solemn Feasts. When the Dan. 9.26.
Messiah shall be cut off, not for himself, the City shall be destroyed, and
the Sanctuary: and he shall confirm the Covenant with many, and shall Verse. 27.
cause Sacrifice and Oblation to cease. After the dissolution of the ancient
Sanctuary, when Verse. 25.
Messiah the Prince shall build the walls of the New, spiritual Jerusalem, Then
from the rising of the Sun, even to the going down of the same, the Name of God
shall be great even among the Gentiles, and in Mal. 1.11.
every place Incense shall be offered unto his Name, and a pure Offering, etc.
Then shall the people of God in the seven Asian Churches be made Kings and
Priests by Christ unto God and his Father. Rev. 1.6. and 5.10.
To whom be glory and dominion for ever and ever. Now, prayer is not the more
acceptable, because within the Precincts and limits of a holy Temple: But it is
the will of God, that men pray h 1 Timothy 2.8.
every where, lifting up holy hands without wrath and doubting. God has
promised to gather Isa. 66.18.
all Nations and Tongues to come and see his glory, and they shall bring the
Jews as an Verse. 20.
Offering to the Lord, even to to his holy mountain at Jerusalem. Isa. 19.19.
An Altar shall be erected to the Name of the Lord in the Land of Egypt, and
the Lord of Hosts shall bless, saying, Verse. 25.
Blessed be Egypt my people, and Assyria the work of my hands, and Israel mine
Inheritance. The Burnt-Offerings of Isa. 56.7.
strangers shall be then accepted upon Gods Altar. For his House shall be
called a House of Prayer for all people. The Gentiles shall come into the light
of the Church, and Kings to the brightness of her rising. Isa. 60.3, 6, 7.
The Dromedaries of Midian and Ephah, all they from Shebah shall come, and
bringing Gold and Incense, shall show forth the praises of the Lord. All the
Flocks of Kedar, and the Rams of Nebajoh shall come up with acceptance on Gods
Altar. Zeph. 3.10.
His Suppliants shall draw nigh to him from beyond the Rivers of Ethiopia
(which place Fulgent. 2. lib. ad monimum. p. 85. Bas. 80. 1587.
Fulgentius particularly expounds of spiritual Sacrifices.) Zech. 14.16, 17, 21.
All Nations, and all the Families of the earth must go up from year to year to
worship the King, the Lord of Hosts, and to keep the Feast of Tabernacles.
Every pot shall be holy, and all that come to Sacrifice shall sees therein.
Then shall the Mal. 3.4, 1.
Offerings of Judah and Jerusalem be pleasant unto the Lord, as in the days of
old; after the Messenger of the Covenant should be come into the Temple of his
body, when the Aaronical Priesthood Hebr. 7.12.
should be dissolved, and a change made of the Law. Jerusalem the holy City,
shall never be more a singular place to Joh. 4.12.
worship in: Nor Jewish Feasts, the Seasons, for they shall Gal. 4.9, 10 etc.
be disannul'd. Neither shall Sacrifice, properly and strictly so called, be
ever any Heb. 10 2
more offered to God as grateful and acceptable. For we Heb. 13.10.
have now an Altar to eat off, which they have no right to, who serve the
Tabernacle. The Priests of old offered up the souls of irrational creatures:
But now the case is altered (says Pie. Mirand. Tom. 1. p. 54.
Mirandula) For Michael our Prince and Priest does offer our rational souls to
God. His Majesty will not be so served now, as in former times, he expects we
should now serve and worship him Joh 4.23.
in Spirit and Truth. Col. 2 17.
In Spirit without Ceremonies and external typifying Ordinances: In Truth,
without Shadows. The Jews presented God carnal Sacrifices, with spiritual
significations annexed to them, and couched under them. We must give unto God
spiritual services, apart from the Act. 15.10.
unsupportable yoke of numerous Ceremonies. Rain. against Heart. p 491, 493.
They are not to be endured in Gods worship: They savor of a Jewish, carnal,
childish spirit. It Is commonly observable, that those of a Popish strain and
temper, that are highly rigid, and severely tenacious of multitudes of
Ceremonies in Gods service, either deduced from some among the Jews, or others
among the Heathens, and blended together with some new inventions, of their own
innovation, are usually remiss in holy and close walking with God, and are the
greatest persecutors of the Saints, as we see at this day in the Popedom. Paul
Gal. 1.13, 14.
when most zealous of the traditions of his Fathers, then persecuted he the
Church out of measure, and wasted it. It Is a manifest sign of man's departure
from uprightness, Eccl. 7.29.
when he seeks out many inventions.

This being then evident, that after the coming of Christ, and his meritorious
Passion, all ceremonial worship annexed to Sacrifices, and other Injunctions of
God to the Jews, were absolutely to determine. Let us see then what those
Sacrifices did principally hold forth. Now here I shall desire first to speak
somewhat in general, and then descend to some particular Sacrifices with their
appendices, and so conclude this Section.

Several Names are given to Sacrifice in Scripture: as first, (...) Mincha,
Genesis 4.4. not only to that of Mat. 5.23. and 23.18, 19.
Cains offering of the fruit of the ground, but to that of Abels, which was of
the firstlings of his flock. The word is derived from (...) to bring, and
signifies therefore an Offering or Oblation of what kind soever it be; but most
generally it is taken for the Meat Offering. This the 70 in the 4 verse. turn by
(...), a gift: and so it is frequently rendered in the New Testament, and
sometimes Heb. 5.1. and 8.3, 4. and 9.9.
distinct from (...), a Sacrifice. Sometimes the 70 themselves turn it by
(...), as Genesis 4.3. Exo. 29.41. etc. by (...), Ps. 40 6. Another term among the
Hebrews for Sacrifice, is (...), Zebach, from a verb of the same radicalls,
signifying to slay, (whence Avenartus would deduce the Greek word (...).) The
70 commonly translate it by (...) and (...), much to the same purpose. Another
word for Offerings is (...), Korban, and comes from (...) to draw nigh and is
used in the Levitical Law for Lev. 1.2.
Sacrifices of the Herd and Flock, and is in the New Testament used in very
terms Mar. 7.11.
retaining the word, and adding the signification. Some Sacrifices are (...),
propitiatory, others (...), gratulatory. Propitiatory Sacrifices were to obtain
pardon and atonement for sin, and they were always to be with blood, Heb. 9.22.
for without blood was no remission; and therefore Cains Sacrifice was not so
acceptable, (although the naughtiness of his heart was mainly looked at) because
he offered the fruits of the earth, which were only to be Offered in Peace
Offerings and Thanks-givings. But Abel Offered a bloody Sacrifice, looking at
Christ by Heb. 11.4.
Faith, and so was accepted of God. The blood of those Beasts could not make
the Conscience clean: but as the Offerer was received into reconciliation with
God by virtue of that Sacrifice of Christ, who Offered up himself Romans 6.10.
Heb. 7.27. and 92.1. and 10.10.
(...), once for all sins, and instead of all the Ancient Sacrifices. In the
blood of these Beasts there was Heb. 10.3. and 9.7.
(...), a constant remembrance of sins, and therefore reiterated, because they
could not blot out sin; but God has now Col. 2.14.
blotted out the hand writing of Ordinances that was against us: The Blood of
Christ has expunged and extinguished all the terrible curses of the Law against
us for our sins. The Blood of Beasts could never do it, but for the time
present, during that Economy or dispensation, God was pleased to accept of the
remembrance of Christ's Death in the Typical slaying of the Beasts, to all that
looked unto him through the Covenant. But now, That all the faithful among the
Jews who were Rev. 7.4.
sealed and received to Heaven on the account of Christ, had an actual and
clear view of the Messiah, and could pierce through those vailes and shadows,
and behold the Savior to dye for sin, afar off, I will not assert. But that
many of the Ancient Patriarchs did look at Christ in their Sacrifices, seems
moderately clear and evident. Abraham Joh. 8.56.
saw Christ's day and rejoiced. The Apostle also seems to speak pretty
generally, when he says, that Heb. 11.2, 1.
by Faith the Elders obtained a good report: It having bin to them the
substance of things hoped for, and the evidence of things not seen; to wit, in
the Sacrifices representing and exhibiting Christ and the Promises of the
Covenant of Grace to the eye of their Faith. For they all died in Faith, V. 13.
not having received the promises, but having seen them afar off, were
persuaded of them and embraced them. And in this particular, the Priests were
Typical sureties to the Jewish Saints, acting that work to the eye of their
Faith in the Sacrifice of the Creature, which was the Arrha and Tessera, the
token of the Covenant. For sin was imputed to the Sacrafice by virtue of the
sinners imposing and laying his hand on the head of the Beast before it was
slain, who then confessing his sins over it, had a Typical expiation, relating
to the great Gospell-offering, so often mentioned. Indeed these sacrificing
rites of old to such as drew not nigh to God with a holy and fervent mind, were
but a 1 Timothy 4.8.
(...), a bodily exercise that profited little. The Offering of the bodies of
Beasts was of no value in the sight of God merely in it self, taken without
respect and relation to Christ.

But to speak unto the Sacrifices themselves,

The Creatures chosen out for Sacrifice, were to be without spot and blemish,
perfect every way. So the Heathens used to speak of their Sacrifice, Homer
Illiad. a p. 305. and b p. 306. etc.
they were to present (as Homer calls them) (...), perfect Offerings, without
any mutilation. Such a Sacrifice was the Lord Christ, Heb. 7.26.
(...). Holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners.

The Sacrifice was to be slain, and the blood to be cast at the foot of the
Altar. Lev. 17.11, 14. Jer. 2.34.
In the blood lies the life and soul of the brute Creature, though it be
otherwise in this rational; and therefore that was to be shed to make
atonement. Plutar. de Hom. p. 111. modral. p. 1.
Plutarch in his discourse of Homer says; either it is the soul or the vehicle
of the soul. I remember Virgil, speaking of one being slain, says, Purpuream
vomit ille animam, he did vomit out his purple soul, meaning his Blood. Thus
Christ is said to pour out his blood, Aenead. V. 348.
and to make his soul an Offering for sin, after he had bin in an agony heavy
unto the death.

Now because of these expressions in Scripture concerning blood: Isa. 53.10.
and for that there was a prohibition (pro tempore) given by the Council
against it in the Primitive times: Some good men have bin scrupulous as to
eating of blood, or any thing composed of it. But let such remember, that we
are not to call any thing common or Act. 10.15.
unclean now. 1 Cor. 10.25.
Whatsoever is sold in the Shambles, that eat, asking no Question for
Conscience sake. Every thing that is wholesome or nutritive food certainly may
be used: 1 Timothy 4.4.
Every Creature of God is good, and nothing to be refused, If it be received
with Thanksgiving. It is evident that things offered to Idols, and Act. 15.29.
things strangled, are conjoined in that place with blood, where abstinence
from it is commanded because of the Jews, whose Communion with the believing
Gentiles was interrupted by their liberty in those things. As for things
Offered to Idols, the Apostle Paul counts it a mere indifferency 1 Cor. 8.4,
8. Romans 14.3, 20.
unless in the case of scandal or offense to weak brethren. Then indeed there
is an Hypoheticall necessity imposed upon our abstinence: for we must not by an
unreasonable use of our liberty give occasion of offense unto others. Then
indeed we must not eat, 1 Cor. 10.28.
For his sake that showed it, and for Conscience sake, The Earth is the Lords
and the fullness thereof. But this question is more fully spoken to by Chamier
Panstrat. Cathol. Tom. 3. lib. 15. c. 10. p. 528. Hornbeck Sum. Controvers.
lib. 11. de graecis, p. 841. etc. and Grosted our Countryman, de cessat. legal.
p. 134. etc. with others, who determine it in the affirmative, that it is
lawful to eat blood: so it be without offense or scandal to weak Brethren.
But I shall leave this, and proceed to parallel the effusion of Blood (out of
the Sacrifice) with Christ's shedding his Blood upon the Cross. He has Rev. 1.5.
washed us in his Blood for our sins. The Blood came out of the heart of
Christ, our Gospel Sacrifice, to cleanse us from our impurities. The Spear
opened a passage into his breast, that we might enter in at the door of his
Wounds, and be healed by him, and united to him. This is the Zech. 13.1.
Fountain opened to the house of David, and to the Inhabitants of Jerusalem,
for sin and for uncleanness.

Besides in every Sacrifice Lev. 3.16.
the fat was the Lords, It is the best of the Creature, and Theophrast Charact.
p. 249.
perishes not so soon as the lean. To signify that we ought to give the
choicest and most excellent of our services unto God. The inwards also with the
heart and reins were to be washed and then Offered to God by Fire; we must
cleanse our hearts, and then dedicate them to God.

The Head also and the Tail or Rump were to be offered up to God: the Head
Spelman Tithes. p. 72.
as principium, the Tail as finis Actionis. Both the principle and beginning
of all our actions and services, as well as the end must be consecrated to God.

The dung was to be cast away into an unclean place: to show that there is
impurity in our choicest services, and that we ought to fling it away, when we
approach and draw nigh to God. All the filth and defilement of sin is to be
removed as possible from all our approaches unto God.

But putting an end to Generals, I shall descend to some particular Sacrifices,
which though they were various, yet they did all in several ways either
allude to Christ, or else to somewhat of our Gospel Services. For as our
judicious Grosted de Cessat. Legal p. 167.
Grosted, a great light considering the times wherein he lived, does observe
[Vt res una multis signis, ita Christus multis Sacrificijs.] the same thing may
be noted by many signs, so Christ by many Sacrifices.

1. Of the burnt Offering.
1. The burnt Offering was called (...) from (...) to ascend, because being
wholly burnt, it did ascend up to Heaven in smoke and vapor. By the Septuagint
it is termed (...), a whole burnt Offering. There was therefore a constant fire
maintained upon Gods Altar to this purpose. Lev. 6.13.
The Bullock, Lamb, or Kid which was thus Offered upon the account of the
sinner did note our corruptibility; even like the bodies of these Beasts
obnoxious to the consuming wrath of God, and the punishment justly due to us,
even to be tormented in the fire of his indignation. And as the vapor ascended
up to Heaven, to cry for propitious mercy; so it showed the place, from whence
alone we can expect redemption and expiation for sin, even from Heaven in the
acceptance of Christ's offering, who was scorched in the fire of Gods wrath for
sin. Hereby likewise the means of obtaining pardon and grace, are signified by
the two properties of Fire, Light, and Heat. The Light of Faith, whereby the
ancient Jews did foresee Christ the promised Sacrifice, and the Heat of ardent
prayers breathed from the Altar of an inflamed heart, whereby they did in the
name of the foreseen and hoped for Sacrifice, obtain the remission of sin.
Besides these were often reiterated for a constant memorial of the He. 10.14.
great Sacrifice once to be offered for the sins of many: forasmuch as they
were of themselves never able to purge the conscience from sin. Fire was used
in the consumption of these typical Sacrifices, and what might that signify?
Sometimes in Scripture it signifies Grost. ibid. p. 123.
[Virtutem Divinitatis nestrorum vitiorum rubiginem consumentis.] The force and
power of the Divinity destroying the rust of our sins and vices, as it is
expressed in Deuteronomy, (says our Grosted) Deuteronomy. 4.24.
The Lord thy God is a consuming fire. Sometimes it signifies Gods indignation;
as the Prophet Jeremy expresses it against unjust oppressors. Jer. 21.12.
Lest my fury go out like fire, and burn that none can quench it. Sometimes it
signifies the words of God proceeding from the mouth of the Prophets, Jer. 5.14.
Behold I will make my words in thy mouth fire, and this people wood, and it
shab devour them. The words of the Law have the force of fire, burning Cramer.
Schol. proph. 5ta. par. p. 17.
the hearts of men, and stirring up in them the sense of the just wrath and
fury of God against sin.

Now as the fire consumed the Sacrifices, it noted the justly demerited wrath
of God to consume us for our sins, and was a type of the anger of God, that
fell upon Christ our Surety on the behalf of sinners. Cloppenb. Schol. Sacri.
p. 62. etc.
It was anciently the token of the acceptance of their Sacrifices, when fire
came down from Heaven to consume them, as in the Sacrifice of Genesis 15.17.
Abraham, Lev. 9.24.
Aaron, Judge. 6.21.
Gideon, 2 Chr. 7.1.
Solomon, 1 King. 18 38.
Elijah. It was unlawful to use any other fire then celestial, for when once
God had answered by fire from Heaven, the Priests office was to conserve it
perpetually burning upon the Altar, by addition of continual fuel, and
therefore all culinary fire is called strange, and that which the Lord will not
own in his Sacrifices. This was the reason of the sore punishment of Nadab and
Abihu, the Sons of Aaron, because they offered Lev. 10.1.
strange fire before the Lord, which he commanded them not. And therefore
excellent is that place in the Psalmist according to the Psalm. 20.4.
Hebrew (...), Let him remember all thine Offerings, and thy burnt Sacrifice
turn to ashes, that is inflaming of it with his celestial fire, in token of
acceptance. This may hint to us what special care we ought to adhibit, that we
draw not nigh to God with the culinary fire of our own corrupt passions; we
must not lift up hands to Heaven in 1 Timothy 2.8
wrath. If John the meekest of the Apostles, shall desire of Christ to call for
fire from Heaven, to eonfume the wretched Gadarenes, who loved their swine
better then a Savior, even he shall meet with a rebuke together with the rest.
Luke 9.55.
Ye knew not what manner of spirit ye are of.

It is observed by V. ibid. p. 63. Concerning Cain.
Cloppenburg, that Jerome's question is not rashly answered out of Theodotio's
Translation, in these words Hieronym. Tom. 3. qu. in Genesis p. 206.
. [Vnde scrire potuit Cain quod Fatris ejus munera suscepisset Deus, and sua
repudiasset: nisi illa Interpretatio vera esset, quam Theodotio posuit. Et
inflammavit Dominus super Abel and super Sacrificium ejus, super Cain vero and
super Sacrificium ejus non ^ (...), inflammavit.] How could Cain know that God
had accepted the Offerings of his Brother, and rejected his own, unless that
Interpretation were true, which Theodotion has given. And the Lord sent down
fire upon Abel and his Sacrifice, but not on Cain's.

The descent of fire from Heaven upon the Sacrifices of old, Id. p. 65.
was a visible token of the presence of the holy Spirit, who is in Scripture
compared to fire, and therefore in the day of Pentecost, Act. 2.3.
the Spirit did sit upon the Apostles in the shape of fiery tongues. And our
Lord is said by Mat. 3.11.
John Baptist to baptize with the holy Ghost and fire. Hence is that
metaphorical expression in the Apostle Paul, commanding the Saints of 1 These.
5.19.
Thessalonica to take heed of quenching the Spirit, whose warming and inflaming
motions are necessary for the offering up of all our spiritual Sacrifices unto
God: even as the continual fire upon the Altar was for these of the Jewish
Ordinances.

Of this Burnt-offering (concerning which we are treating) I shall at present
observe but one thing more; and that is, that there was nothing of it reserved
from the fire but the skin only, and that was given to the Lev. 7.8.
Priests. In like manner, when the Heads of Families were Priests before the
giving of the Law, the Sacrificer had the skin. As Origin Ho. 6. in Levitic. p.
145.
Origin observed of old concerning Adam, that the skins wherewith he was
clothed, were of the Beasts which were offered in Sacrifice. To signify that
by the clothing of Christ's righteousness, the great Sacrifice for sin, our
nakedness is hidden from the sight of God. But why must the Priest in following
times after the solemn introduction of the several Rites of the Mosaical Law,
have the skin of the Sacrifice? To show thereby, that in the first place God
would have the pains and labor of his servants in his worship to be always
rewarded. We learn also hereby, that every man's Offering is to have the outward
skin of profession pulled off, God looks to the heart and inwards of our
duties, what fat and flesh there is upon our services. But the Priest he must
have the skin: he is to take care of and look to the very externals of worship,
that they be managed according to the prescript form of Gods will, and is to
have recompense for such his service. It Is not the skin that will satisfy or
please God in our Offerings: He that searches the heart, expects we should
worship him in spirit and truth.

The performance of the solemnity of this Offering consisted in eight
particulars, as you may read page 116. of this Treatise, whereupon I shall
briefly gloss only by allusion, craving a favorable and candid Interpretation:
for I press not my own apprehensions rigidly at any time, and then shall retire
to the second, the Sin-offering.

1. We are to confess our sins over the head of the Offering, that God may lay
them upon and impute them to Jesus Christ. Prove. 28.13.
Confession must go before pardon; Confess and forsake, and ye shall find
mercy. Joh. 1.9.
If we confess our sins, he is faithful to forgive us, and the Verse 7.
blood of Christ his Son shall cleanse us from them.

2. As the person did slay his Offering; so it is we that by our sins have
crucified the Lord of life.

3. As the Priest sprinkled the blood round about the Altar; so Christ who
offered up himself, sprinkles his meritorious blood upon the Altar, and makes
his Sacrifice acceptable: Nay all our Spiritual Sacrifices are only pleasing to
God, through the sprinkling of his precious blood. This Heb. 12.24.
blood of sprinkling speaks better things then that of Abel. Abel's blood cried
for vengeance against his wicked Brother, this blood of our elder Brother cries
for mercy, atonement and pardoning grace, for such as are elect according to
the foreknowledge of God the Father, through sanctification of the Spirit unto
obedience, and 1 Pet. 1 2.
sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ.

4. As the Priest flayed off the skin: So our great Highpriest by the power of
his Divinity did lay down his life, he did exuere Tabernaculum, lay aside the
thin 2 Cor. 5.1, 4. 2 Pet. 1.13, 14.
Tabernacle of his body for a while, when he gave up the Ghost to the Father,
and commended his Spirit to him. Heb. 10.20.
The vail of his flesh was rent insunder in the day, when he made his Isa.
53.10.
Soul an Offering for sin.

5. As the Sacrifice was cut in pieces, Oh how was his blessed Body mangled by
the nails and spear, his head pierced with thorns! Psa. 22.16
They pierced his hands and feet! Oh how was his blessed soul under flaming
agonies in that hour, when he cried out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken
me!

6. Fire was laid upon the Altar, and fuel to preserve it. The wrath of God
was the fire and sin the fuel to keep it burning: till this blessed Savior had
fully satisfied for all the sins of the elect.

7. All the parts were laid in order upon the Altar: even as Christ our Lord
was stretched out upon the Cross.

8. The inwards and legs were washed in water, and then burnt, Interanea diluit
qui conscientiam purgat. Orig. Hom. 1. Lev. p. 116.
being an offering made by fire of a sweet favor to the Lord. For Incense was
joined with Sacrifice to give a sweet perfume. This might allude to the
cleanness and holiness of Christ's heart, he was a most innocent person; The
water of the Spirit ran always through him, and noted the purity of his
walking, the spotlesness of his life, and therefore he could Dan. 9.26.
not suffer for himself, Isa. 53.5.
'twas for our transgressions that he was wounded, for our iniquities was he
bruised. Upon our account was he scorched in the flames of his Fathers wrath,
when the ardent ejaculations of his soul in prayer, like inflamed Incense, went
up smoking toward Heaven, and giving a most precious sent and favor to his
glorious Sacrifice, Heb. 9.14.
when through the eternal Spirit he offered up himself without spot to God.

Of the Six-Offering.
There is a common name in the Hebrew to all Offerings made by fire, and it is
(...) from (...) fire, because offered by fire. Sometimes it is applied to the
Exo. 29.19 Lev. 1.9, 13.
burnt-offering, as we translate it, an offering made by fire, to Lev.
2.2.23.13.
meat offerings, to Lev. 3.3, 9.
peace offerings, Lev. 4.35.
and to sin offerings. And therefore, because they were Sacrificia ignita. The
proper name of this is taken from the reason or ground whereupon it was
offered, and that was for the expiation of some sin committed, as has been
declared in the Historical part of this Work.

This Sin-offering principally referred unto Christ, who was made 2 Cor. 5.21
Sin for us, that is, as Parisiensis de Legibus cap. 8.
Parisiensis expounds the place, an offering for sin on our behalf; according
to that expression concerning the Priests in the Prophet Hosea, They eat up the
sin of my people Hos. 4.8.
, which seems to allude to the Priests part and share in the Sacrifice. So
likewise when the Apostle declares Rom, 8.3.
, that God for sin did condemn sin in his flesh. For sin, that is (says he)
For the Sin-offering of Christ, God did for the sake, and upon the account of
his infinitely precious Sacrifice condemn and destroy sin, that it should never
have dominion over the Elect, Romans 8.34.
seeing Christ has died.

The Sin offering was usually a Male, to signify the strength of Christ's
merits. Perfect and without spot, to show the integrity and purity of his
Nature. He offered himself without spot Heb. 9.14. 1 Pet. 1.19. Jer. 11.19.
Heb. 9.14. Lev. 16.14.
or blemish, he was a Lamb without spot. As there were Heifers, Goats and Lambs
offered in this case: so is our Lord in Scripture resembled to them in his
blessed Sacrifice.

There were several seasons of the presenting Sin Offerings to God: but the
principal time was on the Expiation day, to which I would speak somewhat
largely. First relating historically the services of the day: and then applying
them in a spiritual manner unto Christ.

The Services of the solemn Day of Expiation, being the 10th of the 7th Month.
In the Morning of this solemn day betimes (as usually on other days) the
ashes were taken off from the Altar, and the wood laid in order. Then the
Highpriest (who performed all the solemnities of this day) putting on his
golden garments slew the Lamb, the constant Morning Sacrifice, and sprinkled
the blood on the Altar; then he went into the Temple, and burnt the Incense of
the Morning, and trimmed the Lamps. After this he comes out and burns the flesh
of the daily Sacrifice, and offers its meat offering and drink offering with
it. Then he proceeds to the extraordinary work of the day, which was the
offering of the Numb. 29.8.
Bullock, Ram and seven Lambs mentioned in the Book of Numbers Then he puts
off his gorgeous attire, and performs the more solemn work of that day in the
atonement, wherein I shall enlarge by it self. After that work is ended, then
he puts on his precious garments again, and Numb. 29.11.
offers the Goat for the sin-offering, mentioned also in Numbers, together
with the Lev. 16.3, 24.
Bullock for a burnt-offering for himself, and the Ibid.
Ram for the burnt-offering for the people. In the last place he offers the
Number. 28.3, 4.
Lamb for the daily Evening sacrifice, and when he has burnt the Incense, and
trimmed the Lamps in the Sanctuary, he goes out, puts off his rich array, and
invests himself with his own common garments, and goes to his own house.

So that on this day, besides the two Lambs for the daily Sacrifice being the
Numb. 29.11.
continual burnt-offering there were slain Ib. ver. 8, 9.
one Bullock, one Ram, seven Lambs for a burnt-offering extraordinary, with
their attendant meat offerings and drink offerings, with a Goat for a
sin-offering Numb. 29.11.
, besides the sin-offering of Atonement. If this tenth day happened on a
Sabbath, then the extraordinaries of the constant Sabbath-offerings were added.
So that (as we shall see by and by) in the Atonement work there was one
Bullock, two Rams, two Goats, which being added to the former makes fifteen.

The several Offerings on the Expiation Day.
Burnt-offerings, Numb. 29 8. One Bullock, Besides the Morning and the Evening
Sacricrifice, and in case a Sabbath fell on the same day, two more, Numb. 28.9,
10 So that here are four Sacrifices of the Expiation, viz. one Bullock, two
Rams and one Goat, with their meat offerings and drinkings to be added to the
Catalogue, page 113. One Ram, Seven Lambs. Sin -offering, Numb. 29.11. One
Goat. The Atonement One Bullock, Two Rams, Two Goats, whereof one a escape Goat.
Fifteen.

The solemn work of Atonement performed on the day of Expiation by the
Highpriest.
In the first place there was preparation made of a young Lev. 16.3.
Bullock for a sin-offering, which was appointed for the Highpriest himself,
and for his Ver. 6.
house (that is) the Ver. 33.
Priests, which were called the house of Aaron in Scripture. There was likewise
to be brought in a Ram Ver. 31.
for a burnt-offering to make Ver. 24.
Atonement for himself. Besides, there were Ver. 5, 24.
two Kids of the Goats to be provided for a sin-offering for the people, one
was to be slain, and the other to escape, and a Ram also for a burnt-offering.

The manner of the performance of this solemnity in its orderly method.
First of all, the Highpriest was to wash his flesh in water, and Ver. 4.
to put on the pure white linen garments, and then to slay the Bullock Ver. 11.
which was for a sin-offering for himself. When that was done then he was to
take a Censer full of burning coals from off the Altar, and a handful of sweet
Incense, and bring it within the vail, and when he was come thither, Ver. 12,
13.
to put the Incense upon the fire, which might cover the Mercy-seat with a
cloud of smoke, that he die not. For he might not presume to draw so nigh to
the Majesty of God sitting between the Cherubims without a cloud of Incense to
interpose. Then he came forth and received some of the blood of the new-slain
Bullock reserved in a golden basin, and carried it within the most holy place,
and Ver. 14.
sprinkled of it with his finger on the Mercy-seat Eastward, and before the
Mercy-seat seven times.

After this, the lot being cast for which of the two Goats was to be slain Ver.
19.
for the sin-offering of the people, he took some of the blood of that
likewise, and brought it within the vail, and did with it, as before he had
done with the blood of the Bullock, and this was to make atonement for the most
holy place. There was to be no man with him, when he performed this Ceremony.
Afterward he went out to the Altar which was before the Lord, that is Ver. 15,
16.
the golden Altar of Incense, Exo. 30.10
and took of the blood of the Bullock and of the Goat mixed together, and put
part of it Lev. 16.18, 19.
upon the horns of the Altar round about, and sprinkled of the same blood seven
times upon it to cleanse it from the uncleanness of the children of Israel.
Thus also was he to cleanse the Verse. 16.
Tabernacle of the Congregation it self, or in after times the Sanctuary.

When he had made an end of Verse. 20, 21.
reconciling the most holy place, the Tabernacle and the Altar. Then he came to
the live Goat, and laid both his hands upon his head, and confessed over him
all the iniquities of the children of Israel, and all their transgressions in
all their sins, putting them upon the head of the Goat, and then sent him away
by the hand of a fit man into the wilderness, that the Goat might bear upon him
all their iniquities into a Land not inhabited.

When he had sent away the Scapegoat into the Wilderness, he comes to the
Bullock and Goat which had been slain for himself and the people, opens them,
Verse, 25.
takes away the fat, and burns it upon the Altar; cuts the flesh in pieces, and
sends it by the hands of others, Ver. 27.
with their skins and dung to be burnt in fire without the Camp.

Then the High Priest Verse. 23.
comes into the Tabernacle, puts off his linen garments, and leaves them
there, washes his flesh in water, and vests himself with the golden Robes
belonging to him as High Priest, comes to the brazen Altar, and Verse. 3, 5, 24.
offers up the two Rams for Burnt-Offerings, the one for himself, the other for
the people; and so finishes the great work of Expiation.

Two things more are mentioned about this work, That the person who carried
away the Scapegoat, and the other who burnt the Sin-Offering, were to Verse.
27, 28.
wash their clothes, and bath their flesh, before they should come into the
Camp.

Another is, That at the end of every 49 years, on this solemn and glorious
day, the Lev. 25 8, 9.
Trumpet was to sound for the year of Jubilee.

The Explanation of the Mysteries of these grand Solemnities.
That the supreme Officer of the Temple, who was to officiate on this great
day, did signify the Ps. 110.4.
High Priest after the order of Melchizedeck, is evident to all that have but
looked on the Epistle to the Hebrews, even Heb. 4.14.
Jesus the Son of God, who is passed into the Heavens, and is the 1 Pet. 5.4.
chief Shepherd and 1 Pet. 2.25.
Bishop of our souls. No man takes this Honor to himself, but he that is
called of God, as was Aaron: So also Christ glorified not himself to be made an
High Priest: But he that said unto him, Thou art my Son, this day have I
begotten thee; says also in another place, Heb. 5.4, 5, 6.
Thou art a Priest for ever after the order of Melchizedeck, that ancient King
of Salem, the great Type of our most glorious High Priest, who is King of
righteousness, and Prince of Peace.

The first thing observable at his initiation into this great work, was to wash
his flesh in water, which possibly might prelude to the Baptism of our Lord,
Mat. 3.16.
wherewith he was baptized of John, before he entered upon his Ministerial
service, of teaching and suffering for his people. But (alas) it was not that
thereby he himself should be cleansed, for he was the innocent Lamb of God that
took away the sins of the world: but rather that he might (as an Ancient
speaks) cleanse the water by the descent of his blessed body into it, and
thereby purify and consecrate the Ordinance of Baptism for the benefit of his
Church, which he intended to Ephesians. 5.26.
sanctify and cleanse with the washing of water by the Word.

The Ancient Priests carrying about them natures defiled with sin, needed
continual washing: but our pure and spotless Priest had nothing of impurity in
him: yet, when being in the form of man, he submits to this Ordinance, and Mat.
3.15.
so fulfills all righteousness.

After washing, the High Priest was not to put on his Lev. 16.4.
gorgeous and rich attire, and to appear in all his splendid Ornaments, 'twas a
Fast and Humiliation day: and therefore he was to execute his place and
function in mean linen garments, figuring thereby the low estate of our Lord
here upon earth, and that he should carry on the work of our Redemption without
any external pomp and worldly glory. Isa. 52.14.
His visage was marred more then any man, and his form more then the sons of
men. He walked up and down in a mean and obscure manner, Phil. 2.7.
making himself of no reputation, and taking upon him the form of a Servant,
and being found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself, and became obedient to
death, even the death of the Cross.

The first thing that the High-Prist did after he was thus washed and clothed,
and had slain the Bullock for the Sinne-Offering, was his entrance into the
most holy place Lev. 16.12.
to burn sweet Incense within the Veil. Our blessed Lord, before he shed his
most precious blood, did prepare his way to the Cross by most ardent and
heavenly Prayers Joh 17.
; and as the Incense was to be beaten small, so did it note the agony of his
Spirit in Prayer: Luk 22.44.
(...), he stretched out his heart in Prayer to the Father; Mat. 26.39.
If it be possible let this cup pass. When he offered up Prayers and
Supplications Heb. 5.7.
with strong crying and tears unto him that was able to save him from death,
and was heard in that he feared, being gloriously raised from death by the
right hand of God. In these his Prayers he interceded for us, and by his
intercession, has sanctified our Prayers, that they also may smoke within the
Veil, rendering us acceptable to God, when our fervent Prayers arise not from
our lips only, but from the Altar of our hearts within, and are inflamed by the
holy fire of the Spirit of Grace.

After this rare perfume had fragrantly towred about the Oracle, in sweet
sented clouds, then did the High Priest enter this most holy place, Heb. 9 7.
not without the blood of Bulls and Goats, which he offered for himself, and
the errors of the people, even as Christ being become an Verse. 12.
High Priest of good things to come, by his own blood entered into the holy
place, having obtained eternal Redemption Verse. 24.
for us. He is not entered into a holy place, made with hands, but by the virtue
of the effusion of his own most precious blood, he is gone into Heaven it self,
to appear in the presence of God for us.

And in that the blood was to be sprinkled seven times before the Lord, it
might signify the copious and liberal effusion of Christ's blood for sinners;
it was Mat 26.28.
(...), not only poured, but plentifully poured out: it did not guttatim
effluere: It came out as from a fountain, to purge away sin and uncleanness
Zech. 13.8.
. The number seven, in Scripture is taken (as Parisienfis, de Leg. c. 9.
some observe) for a number of perfection: And if so, (though I am not much
taken with numbers) then it might point out the perfection and compleatness of
our Purgation and Justification in the sight of God, by the blood of Christ. It
is observed by some (too curiously I doubt) that our blessed Lord had seven
wounds inflicted upon him, which drew blood from his blessed body. (1.) In his
scourging; (2.) in the platting of the Crown of sharp thorns upon his head;
(3, 4.) the nailing of both his hands, (5* 6) and both his feet, and (7) the
piercing of his body with the Spear. Leaving these niceties: Oh that our souls
could bleed for those sins that drew out the vital and most precious blood of
Jesus Christ! Zech. 12.10.
Oh that we did look upon him, whom we have pierced, and mourn for him as one
mourns for his only son, and be in bitterness for him, as one that is in
bitterness for his first born! Who by his meritorious sufferings, is become a
propitiation for our sins 1 John 2.2.
.

Mention is made of the end why the blood of the Bullock was brought into the
most holy place, even to expiate for the sins of the High Priest himself; it
was his Offering. Whereby was signified the insufficiency and invalidity of the
Jewish Priesthood of it self, to impetrate from God any pardon for sin, seeing
it self did need and require an annual atonement and reconciliation for its
own sins in the sight of God. So that the High Priest was to be full of
compassion to the ignorant, for Heb. 5.2, 3.
that he himself also was compassed with infirmity; and by reason thereof, ought
as for the people, so also for himself, to offer for sins. But such an high
Priest became us, etc. Heb. 7.27.
who needs not daily (as those did) to offer up Sacrifice first for his own
sins, and then for the peoples: For this he did once, when he offered up
himself. Now although Christ had no sin of his own, whereupon to expiate for
himself, yet he did personally bear all the sins of the Elect upon him by
divine imputation; and therefore he did imputatively offer up for himself, but
effectively and virtually only for the Elect. And therefore, as the Apostle
says in the last cited place, he did it but once.

Besides, as this blood was sprinkled within the Veil to purify it from
uncleanness, it signified and hinted to us the wonderful defilement, and
contagious nature of sin, that had pierced into the most holy place, thereby
intimating that the highest and most eminent services in our worship may be
polluted with sin, and need purification by the blood of Christ.

Moreover, as the place within the Veil signified Heaven, so the bringing the
blood of Christ thither, shows that Heaven is an Col. 1.12.
Inheritance with the Saints in light, and a Ephesians. 1.14.
possession in glory purchased by the blood of Christ, and therefore the
beginning of glory is called Ephesians. 5.30.
the day of Redemption. For we are not fully redeemed from all our sins and
miseries, till we set foot within the vail by virtue of the price of Christ's
blood. Heb. 6.19.
Let us then lay hold upon the hope that is set before us, as an Anchor of the
soul, both sure and steadfast, which enters into that [most holy place] within
the vail, whither the forerunner even Jesus is entered for us. We may therefore
now have a holy and reverent Heb. 10.19, etc.
boldness to enter into the holiest by the blood of Jesus, by a new and living
way, which he has consecrated for us through the vail, that is to say, his
flesh.

It is to be observed further, That the Highpriest went into the Oracle with
this blood Lev. 16.17
alone, he had none with him. It was his peculiar Office, which none might
presume to perform besides himself. So did Christ enter alone, to show that
there is no other Highpriest or Head of his Church, but he alone. There is none
of the Saints gone into Heaven with body and soul together, and continue there
in so complete a state of happiness possibly, as they shall be after the Day of
Judgment. His glorified body only is in the most holy place, sitting at the
right hand of God. Here we might move a Question about Enoch, Elijah, Lazarus,
and the Saints that rose at Christ's death, Mat. 27.52. Whether they shall
receive a further state of perfection at the Resurrection, seeing Christ
himself is said to be the first fruits of them that slept, 1 Cor. 15.20, 23.
Further, as the Priest entered alone with the blood for purification: So 'twas
Christ that Isa. 63.3.
trod the winepress of his Fathers wrath alone, of the people there was none
with him. It is recorded also that at his apprehension, his Disciples Mark 14.50
all forsook him and fled.

After the Highpriest had reconciled the most holy place, he was to go forth
and Lev. 16.18.
put of the blood of the Ballock and Goat upon the horns of the golden Altar,
and to sprinkle seven times upon it, and do so likewise to the Tabernacle, by
which I humbly conceive is meant the holy place or Sanctuary, at the upper end
whereof near the vail stood the golden Altar. What this golden Altar, and its
horns signified, I have spoken before. The Incense noted Prayer. Hereby in the
first place may be signified, that by virtue of Christ's blood it is, that his
prayers and mediations for the Church are heard and accepted before the throne
of God. H^s Intercession is built upon his passion, and for all that he
suffered, them he prays for. As to the prayers of the Saints, it is to be
noted, that none are effectual but such as proceed through Christ's Censer,
perfumed with the Incense of his intermediation with the Father for us.

The blood put upon it, noted, that the infirmities and sinfulness of our
prayers, are to be purged and taken away by the blood of Christ: As he said,
Domine laeva lachrymas, Lord wash my tears; we must say, Wash them in the blood
of Christ, and perfume our sighs with his precious odours.

The four horns tipped with blood signifies the prevalency and vigorous strength
of his prayers when he treats with his Father on our behalf upon the account of
his precious blood.

As the four horns did look to the four winds of Heaven, and the four quarters
of the Earth, which (to allude) possibly might signify the availableness of
Christ's prayers for all believers throughout the world, who put their trust in
him, and lift up their prayers to Heaven in his blessed name.

The horns of this Altar might set forth the strength of prayer, both for the
good of the Church, and for the ruin of her enemies, and therefore is it that
we read of odours smoking at the golden Altar, Revel. 8.3.
and immediately upon the Saints prayers the seven Angels prepared their
Trumpets to sound war, desolation and ruin to the adversaries of the Church,
and at the sounding of the sixth Angel. There was a voice (or return of
prayers) that came from the four Horns of the golden Altar, Revel. 9.13.
which is before God.

Furthermore, as the Tabernacle or Sanctuary was also to be purged with blood;
this might show to us, that all our holy services wherein we draw nigh to God,
must be washed in the blood of Christ: or else God will find matter enough
therein to condemn us, unless he take away the iniquity of our holy things, we
shall never be able to stand in Gods sight, or to answer him one of a thousand
for all the choicest and highest performances which we yield to his Majesty,
with the most ardent and heavenly frames that our spirits can possibly be in,
while we walk here below in Tabernacles of clay.

When the Priest had finished this work of Atonement for the Oracle and
Sanctuary, he then came out into the Court to the escape Goat, and performs the
work before-recited.

You heard of two Goats, the one by lot was pitched upon for a sin-offering,
whose blood we see was carried into the most holy place.

Prove. 16.33. Act. 2.23.
The lot is cast into the lap, but the whole disposing thereof is of the Lord.
So was Christ delivered by the determinate counsel of God.

But why should our Lord, among other creatures, be set forth by a Goat, a rank
and falacious creature, who himself was not touched with the least shadow of
sin? In the Scripture Mat. 25.33.
wicked men; and cruel Heathen Kings are set out by Goats, Dan. 8.5. Devils by
Satyrs, AEgipans, etc. in many Authors. Possibly upon this account of that
imputed sin and iniquity which he sustained, he being found Romans 8.3.
in the likeness of sinful flesh: For the blood of those beasts was brought
into the Sanctuary by the High priest Heb. 13.10. Rainold against Heart.
for sin.

Some think that the two Goats Parisiens. page 39.
represented the two Natures of our blessed Savior; the slain Goat his
Humanity, the escape Goat his Divinity. I rather suppose they might exhibit the
two States of his Humanity, his Passion, and his Resurrection. For, because the
same creature could not both suffer death, and presently live again without a
miracle. Therefore one was appointed to death, to represent our blessed Lord
his suffering death upon the Cross: The other after the blood of the former had
been sprinkled, was to escape, signifying his Resurrection; He was the slain
Goat Romans 4.25.
delivered for our offenses; and as the living Goat that escaped death, so was
he raised again for our Justification. As the slain Goat he was 1 Pet. 3.18.
put to death in the flesh, as the escape Goat, he was quickened by the Spirit.

The escape Goat, although a poor creature in it self, incapable of sin, yet
had all the sins of the people confessed over its head: So Christ 1 Cor. 5.2.
who knew no sin, yet was made sin for us, that we might be made the
righteousness of God in him. He laid on him the iniquity of us all, Isa. 53.6.

The Rabbis tell a story K. Sheringham. Joma. p. 147. Isa. 1.18.
, that when the escape goat was sent into the wilderness, there was a scarlet
thread tied to the Temple-gate, which when the Goat arrived at the rocks in the
wilderness, immediately turned white, and therein do allude to that place,
though your sins be as scarlet, yet they shall be as white as snow. Which I
leave to their confirmation.

The escape Goat being laden with the sins of the people, was carried from Gods
presence in the Temple afar off into the wilderness: So has the Lord Jesus
removed our sins afar off out of the sight of God, and from his vindicative
Justice carried them into the Land of forgetfulness, it being for his sake, who
bore our sins, that he has promised to remember them no more. As far as the
East is from the West, so far has he removed our transgressions from us. Isa.
43 25. Ps. 103.25.


Lastly, In that the Scapegoat went into the Wilderness, it might denote the
influence of Christ's death, to bear the sins of the Gentiles, who were out of
the pale of the Church then, and aliens at that time from the Covenant of
Promise; But now in Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 2.13.
they who sometimes were afar off, are made nigh by the blood of Christ.

After the work and service of the Scapegoat was finished, then the fat of the
sin offerings was laid and burnt upon the Altar. Fatness signifies grossness
and stupidity of spirit, (Make the heart of this people gross, or Isa. 6.10.
fat.) and so it might signify the consuming of great and gross sins, by the
Sacrifice of Christ offered up for sin. Or rather, as the fat is counted the
choicest of the Sacrifice: So it might denote the giving up to God (as Christ
did) the primest, chiefest, choicest of our spirits in holy services.

Then we read, that the Bullocks and Goats flesh, with their skin and dung,
were all to be burnt without the Camp, or without the precincts and limits of
the Temple; which the Apostle explains ((...)) in express terms, As the
bodies of the Beasts Heb. 13.11, 12.
were burnt without the Camp, so Jesus also suffered without the gate, even
upon Mount Calvary. And therefore those that will stand to the Levitical Law,
can have no share in Christ, according to the Apostles Argument, drawn from the
peoples having Heb. 13.10. Weem. vol. 3. p 66.
no part or share in that Sacrifice which was burnt without the Camp.

After the Priest had ended those services, he puts on his linen clothes,
washes his flesh Lev. 16.24.
in the holy place, and puts on his own gorgeous raiment, and appears to the
people in his rich attire. This might signify the death, burial, and
resurrection of Christ. His death, by the putting off his inconspicuous
vestments. His burial, by the washing and continuing for a while hid and
obscured in the holy place. Act. 9 37.
To wash the body after death, was the manner of the Jews preparation for its
Sepulture. His coming forth with glorious rober, showed his resurrection, when
he rose out of the grave with his glorious body. These things I dare not press,
but mention them only allusively with submission.

When these Solemnities of expiation were finished, then the Lev. 16.3, 5, 24.
High Priest offered up the two burnt Offerings, one for himself, the other for
the people, after sin was fully expiated, then they present their
Burnt-Offerings, which were wholly burnt upon the Altar except the skin,
whereof I spoke before: and signified the dedicating of our souls wholly to
God, in the newness of life, and holy obedience. Our blessed Lord was a whole
Burnt-Offering, he came to do the will of God fully in his complete obedience.
He offered up himself to the Father in all ways of complete righteousness:
and so should we Romans 12.1
present our bodies a living Sacrifice, holy, acceptable to God, which is our
reasonable service. These are called (...); and therefore the Apostle citing
the Psalmist, speaks in the name of Christ: Heb. 10.6, etc.
Sacrifice and offerings thou would not, but a body have thou prepared me. In
Burnt-Offerings and Sacrifices for sin thou have had no pleasure. Then said I,
lo I come (in the volume of the Book it is written of me) to do thy will, O
God. Above, when he said, Sacrifice and Offering, and Burnt Offerings, and
Offering for sin thou would not, neither had pleasure therein, which are
offered by the Law; then said he, Lo I come to do thy will, O God. Our Lord
Jesus saw that the Scribe answered Mark. 12.33, 34.
discreetly, when he said, To love God with all the heart, and with all the
understanding, and with all the soul, and withal the strength, and to love the
neighbor as himself, is more then all whole Burnt Offerings and Sacrifices.

The persons that burnt the two Sin Offerings without the Camp, and the other
who carried the Escape Goat into the Wilderness, were to wash their clothes,
and bath their flesh in water, before they could be admitted into the Camp
again: To show that though we by our sins are the crucifyers of Christ, yet we
may be received into favor, if baptized and washed in the Name of the Lord
Jesus, and afterward be admitted into the communion of the faithful. So the
Apostle Peter tells them, who Act. 2.23.
by wicked hands crucified and slain the Lord of life: yet if they Verse. 38.
did repent, and were baptized in the Name of Jesus Christ for the remission of
sins, they might receive the gift of the Holy Ghost.

Thus was the great work of this reconciling day finished, the sins of Priest
and people pardoned, the Holy place, Altar and Tabernacle purifyed through the
blood of sprinkling. So God in the day of our Lords most meritorious death, was
in and through him, 2 Cor. 5.18.
reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing their transgressions to them.

To conclude, It was in this glorious day, (as I mentioned in the foregoing
story of this service) that the Trumpets were blown for the year of Jubilee, to
Isa. 61.1, 2.
signify that the Spirit of the Lord was upon Christ; the Lord anointed him to
preach good tidings to the meek; he sent him to bind up the brokenhearted, to
proclaim liberty to the captives, and the opening of the prison to them that
were bound: To proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord, Zech. 9.11.
and by the blood of the Covenant, to send forth his Prisoners out of the pit
wherein is no water. Behold 2 Cor. 6.2, 3.
now is the accepted time, behold now is the day of salvation.

3. Of the Trespasse-Offering.
Hitherto let it suffice to have spoken of Sin Offerings, and especially
concerning the great and pompous day of expiation. The next that follows is the
Trespasse-Offering, of which I shall only say thus much, that as thereby there
was an atonement and reconciliation made for more gross and heinous sins, the
Law and manner about the Sin-Offering, and the Trespasse-Offerng being all one
in the main: we may observe, that the greatest sins, for which God is pleased
to grant repentence, are pardonable through the blood of Christ. Only as under
the Law, there was no Offering for sins of presumption: such persons must die
themselves, and their own blood must lie upon them. So under the Gospel,
presuming sinners are under a most dangerous state, especially if they presume
to sin against the holy Spirit. Heb. 10 26, 27.
For if we sin wilfully after that we have received the knowledge of the truth,
there remains no more Sacrifice for sins, but a certain fearful looking for of
judgment and fiery indignation, which shall restroy the adversaries, etc. He
that despised Moses law, died without mercy under two or three witnesses. Of
how much sorer punishment suppose ye, shall he be thought worthy, who has
trodden underfoot the Son of God, and has counted the blood of the the
Covenant, wherewith he was sanctified, an unholy thing, and has done despite
unto the Spirit of grace? Mat. 12.32.
For whosoever speaks against the Holy Ghpst, it shall not be forgiven him,
neither in this world, nor in the world to come.

Having thus briefly glanced upon this, I come next to speak some words about
the Peace Offering.

4. Of the Peace Offerings.
The Causes of the Peace Offering are at large recited Chap. 5. of this
Treatise. I shall only spiritualize some things about them and so conclude.

In this Sacrifice principally were the joyful Feasts exhibited. For usually
they were divided into three parts or Portions: the first part was Gods, who is
the great Peacemaker, and makes a Psalm. 50.5.
Covenant with his people in this Sacrifice: Another was the Priests, as a
reward of his service, and to show his communion and fellowship with God and
his people, 1 John 1.3.
as John says, That ye might have fellowship with us, and truly our fellowship
is with the Father and his Son. Here I might enlarge concerning the manner of
making Covenants in ancient time, by eating together; and especially at
Sacrifices: but this has been copiously and largely handled Cloppenb. sch^l.
Sacrif. p. 8. 175. Coccejus de faedere. p. 100. Molin. ad Greg. Nyss p. 71.
Mede vol. 1. p. 50. 4.
by many Authors, but of all most fully and excellently by the incomparably
learned Dr Ralph Cudworth Master of Christ's Col. Camb. in his true notion of
the Lords Supper: Wherefore I shall retire to some other things.

The Priests part in his Offering was the cheeks, the right shoulder, the
breast, and the maw. Hierom. ad Fabiolam and Rivet in Ps. 40 p. 186. Mal. 2.7.
Jerome in his Treatise of Priestly vestments sent to Fabiola says, The cheek
was given to the Priest to signify [El^quentem eruditumque,] that he should
remember to be eloquent and learned in the Law of God. The Priests lips are to
preserve knowledge, and the people are to enquire the law at his mouth. He goes
on [In brachio bona opera and pugnam contra diabolum] By giving the shoulder to
the Priest, he was thereby taught to have a care to maintain good works, and to
fight against the Devil. Orig. Homil. 9. in Exodus p. 9. 8.
Origin adds, because it is commanded to be the right shoulder, that they must
be [ opera dextra, as well as bona: that is,] good works which a Priest must
perform dexterously; with strength and expedition, he must not be a bungler in
the ways of holiness.

Besides, the breast was his, and therefore Jerome says, [Moneri sacerdotes in
pectore gestare mundas cogitationes, legis notitiam and dogmatum veritatem.]
the Priest was thereby admonished to bear in his breast pure thoughts,
knowledge of the law and truth in his opinions. And lastly, the maw, where he
adds, [ Venture luxuriam, etc.] It denoted his abstinence from luxury and all
manner of excels. These I only propose nakedly for them who please to receive
or reject these ancient notions. If they held forth any thing, then these two,
the breasts and the shoulder, which were Wave-Offerings, given from the people
to the Priest, might chiefly be insisted on. 1. He was to have the shoulder,
because of his bearing the people, and carrying them and their Sacrifices
before God. 2. The breast, the seat of the heart, to note his compassion,
tenderness, and bowels to them, bearing them always in his Prayers and and
ardent sighs to the throne of Grace.

Mede vol. 1. p. 585.
The remainder was eaten by the faithful people (who brought the Sacrifice) to
manifest their incorporation into Christ. For the Saints do not only receive
pardon and remission of sin, upon the account of his precious Sacrifice, but
they feed upon him, and are united to him by faith. 1 Cor. 10.21.
Those that did eat of Idol-Sacrifices, are said to sit at the Table of Devils,
and have communion with them. But such as have a share in the sufferings of
Christ, on whom the chastisement of our peace was laid, he being our Isa. 53.5.
Peace Offering, do participate of this Feast of the Lords Table, and are made
Isa. 56.7.
joyful in his house of Prayer.

Under the Law, the fat was the Lords, the children of Israel were most
severely interdicted the eating of fat, as well as blood: But under the Gospel,
^he Lord will make unto all people a feast of Isa. 25.6.
fat things, of fat things full of marrow. At the Gospel Wedding, the Oxen, and
the Mat. 22.4.
fatlings are slain. The poor Prodigal must feed upon the Luke 15.23.
fatted calf. Our souls shall be Psalm. 63.5.
satisfied with marrow and fatness. And as for blood, Christ himself most
graciously tells us, Joh. 6.53.
That except we eat the flesh of the Sun of man, and drink his blood, we have
no life in us.

This Sacrifice of the Peace Offering was usually added to other fore-recited
Sacrifices: because expiation for sin would be unavailable and unprofitable,
unless there were annexed a particular application of mercy, in our communion
with him in a way of peace and grace. Our blessed Savior as a High priest does
not only as offering expiatory sacrifice for us (...), redeem us from sin and
misery, but he does 1 These. 5.9.
(...), obain salvation for us, and does yield unto us a 1 Pet 3.18.
(...), a manuduction to God his Father, in whom Ephesians. 3.12.
we have boldness and access with confidence through the faith of him.

At these festival Sacrifices there was De. 16.15. Judge. 21.21.
great rejoicing, joined with Songs and Dancing: to manifest what Joy and
Exultation of spirit the Peace Offering of the Lord Jesus does procure for
reconciled sinners, in the sight of God.

To conclude in a word. Gods Majesty had his part in this blessed Offering, as
the Remitter of sin and transgression, as being the Author of our mercy and
deliverance, thereby showing that he was infinitely well pleased with this
glorious satisfaction given to his Justice, his soul smelling a Savor of rest
in the Sacrifice of his Son, will now begin to hold communion with us, who are
brought nigh to him by the blood of his Son. The Priest had his part as the
instrument of atonement between us and God: If you take it for Christ, we may
then here apply that expression of the Evangelist, Luke 24.46.
It behoved him when he had suffered to enter into glory, and the people had
their share likewise, to make them grateful and joyful for this unspeakable
mercy of their deliverance.

5, 6. Of the Meat Offerings and Drink offerings.
These I shall put together in their explication, as they usually went hand in
hand in their oblation. The common name of the Meat Offering was (...) a gift
or present, from (...) to bring or offer. The word for Drink Offering was (...)
or (...) Libamen from (...) to pour out. Hereby was signified the constant
communion that Gods Majesty held with his people. He had his presence Chamber
in the Temple, viz. the Sanctuary, his privy Chamber in the Oracle. He had his
Table, his meat and drink: according to that promise that he made of dwelling
in the midst of his people Jsrael. The yielding of these Offerings to God,
showed the great interest he had in all the things which they enjoyed, and that
in token of homage, they were to give to him of all their choice enjoyments, as
the sovereign Lord of all their Land, and that thereby they might obtain a
blessing upon their outward comforts. Mal. 3.10
Bring ye all the Tithes into the storehouse, that there may be meat in my
house, and prove me now herewith, says the Lord, If I will not open you the
windows of Heaven, and pour you out a blessing, that there shall not be room
enough to receive it: and I will rebuke the devourer for your sakes, and he
shall not destroy the fruits of your ground, neither shall your Vine cast her
fruit before the time in the field, says the Lord of Hosts. Joel 2.14.
Who knows, if he will return and repent, and leave a blessing behind him,
even a Meat Offering and a Drink offering unto the Lord your God, that is, by
blessing of the fruits of the Land, that they may yield such plenty, as
wherewithal you may prepare Offerings for his Altar, which before was Joel
1.9.13. Verse 10 etc.
cut off from the house of the Lord. For the field was wasted, the land
mourned, the corn was consumed, the new wine was dried up, and the oil
languished.

Several Appendices there were unto Sacrifices, under the legal Administrations.

Manifold washings, to denote the purifying of our souls by way of preparation,
for our solemn spiritual worship which we are to perform to God under the
Gospel. In Meat Offerings Lev. 2.15.
oil was used. It was an Emblem of mercy, says Orig. Hom. 2. in Levitic. p.
118.
Origin, and signified the great condescending favor and mercy of our God, to
hold fellowship and communion with his poor people in Ordinances of his worship.

Salt was a constant attendant upon Lev. 2.13.
Sacrifice, every oblation of thy Meat Offering shall thou season with Salt,
nay, with all thine Offerings thou shall offer Salt. No Sacrifice is acceptable
to God, but what is savoury. Salt resists putrefaction, and is a great digester
of crude and raw humors. We must sprinkle Salt upon our Sacrifices, and draw
nigh to God in his Worship, with a serious, savoury frame of spirit. If
Christian conference must be Col. 4.6.
seasoned with Salt, how much more our Prayers wherein we speak to the great
and infinite Majesty of Heaven?

In the sacred pages, the word of God is compared to salt, as wherewith the
hearts and mouths of Christians are seasoned against the waterish and
indigested notions of persons erroneous in principle and practice. Our Lord
does call his Disciples Mat. 5.13.
the salt of the earth; by reason of that sound, soul-preserving Doctrine,
which they should preach in his name throughout the world, and especially that
of repentance from dead works, and remorse for sin, which though it be for a
time smarting and tedious, while men do chasten their own spirits therewith,
yet is it most safe and wholesome, and yields the peaceable Heb. 12.11.
fruit of righteousness to them who are exercised thereby.

Every true Christian is an evangelical Sacrifice, and is to be salted in this
wholesome manner, that he may become savoury and relishable before God. For with
such Gods Majesty will make a Ps 50 5.
Covenant by Sacrifice, and it shall prove to them a perpetual Covenant, Numb.
18.19.
a Covenant of salt for ever before the Lord.

To this ancient Levitical custom of salting the Sacrifices, doubtless our Lord
does strongly allude in the evangelical story, when cautioning his Disciples to
beware of scandals and offenses, he argues a periculo, presenting before them
the danger and torments of hell fire, speaks thus, Mark 9.49.
Every one shall be salted with fire, and every Sacrifice shall be salted with
salt. Concerning which place Camerar. in p. 22. Edit Cantabr. 1642.
Camerarius in his notes on the New Testament, affirms, that in an ancient
Copy, he sound the word (...) added, thus [(...)] Every loaf or cake shall be
salted in the fire; as if there were an Ellipsis of the preposition (...).
According to that copy there seems to be a more manifest allusion made to that
place in Leviticus before cited, concerning the salting of meat offerings. For
the meat offering, which we translate Levit. 7.12, 13.
a Cake in Levit. 7.12, 13. according to our division of the Bible into
Chapters and verses, and is found in ver. 2, 3. of the said Chapter, as the
printed Septuagints are distinguished and expressly called (...), loaves. But it
is no ways safe to allow such varieties of readings in the holy Scripture,
according to every corrupt and musty manuscript, giving great advantage to the
Papists in reference to their Vulgar Latin, as is excellently noted by the
most learned and judicious Dr Owen on the Bibl. Polyg^^^a.
Dr Owen in his useful animadversions concerning the various readings in the
late Bibles. And yet far bolder is the censure and correction of Scal^ger.
442 Edit. Lug^ Bat. 1627.
Scaliger upon this place of Mark, which is extant in his 442. Letter, sent by
him to John de Laet, page 806. where he deals with the sacred Scriptures, as if
he were criticizing upon Theocritus, Pindar, or some other Heathen Poet, and
makes no bones of crying out, here is a fault, and there is another, contra
gentes, it must be thus corrected, and nemo praeter me indicaverit, and crows
too peremptorily and irreverently, Nihil verius esse potest; and all the stir
is, that (...) must be (...), and (...) must be expunged: and says for
certain, the Evangelist wrote thus, (...), etc. making at length a Tautology in
Scripture, and that very unfit and improper, which clearly appears being
englisht thus according to him, Every Sacrifice shall be salted, and every
Sacrifice shall be salted with salt. But well have Cloppenburg. Schol. Sacrif.
Patriarch. page 200.
Cloppenburg and Spanhemius noted, that the word (...) as it is never used by
the Septuagint, or New Testament Penmen, so neither is the word (...) to which
the word (...) should answer, found in that place of Leviticus, and besides
that the Greek word is never used in any classical Author for a Sacrifice
offered by fire. Spanhem. dub. Evang. part. 3. page 453.
Whereas our blessed Lord in that place of Mark, is showing, that it is better to
go to heaven maimed and halt, or blind of one eye, expressing matters
parabollcaly, then for a man to go whole to hell, that will not pull out his
right eye, and cut off his right hand in the case of scandal. For (...), every
one, or every whole man, as some gloss upon the place, that will not submit to
deny himself in the point of scandal, shall be salted with fire, who being made
a Sacrifice to the wrath of God in hell, shall be salted with his indignation
in that fire that shall never be extinguished. Others refer (...) to (...),
every one, that is, every worm, the worm of every sinners conscience in hell
that never dies, shall be salted and inflamed with the fire of Gods wrath, to
make it sting and punish the more accurately and feelingly. A reverend Divine
of our Nation (whose useful Comment on Mark is intended for the Press) speaks
in this place concerning the fire of affliction, and the fire of the Spirit,
Salignis naturam sequitur. Isidor. lib 16 c. 2.
wherewith every good Christian must be seasoned before he can be a meet
Sacrifice for God: and so the sense of the place seems plain and clear, That
who ever shall be delivered from the everlasting fire of hell, must be here in
this life salted and seasoned with the salt of repentance, and the fire of
affliction, that thereby he may be fitted to be offered up as an acceptable
Sacrifice unto God. For as every Sacrifice, which God accepted under the
ancient Law was seasoned with salt (and hereby the citation of that place in
Leviticus comes in properly to good purpose) so every spiritual Sacrifice, that
may be well-pleasing in the sight of God under the Gospel must be rendered
savoury by some spiritual salt, and offered up in some spiritual fire, that
they may prove Sacrifices of mercy and praise, and not of Gods wrath and
justice, Jud 7.
suffering the vengeance of eternal fire.

To proceed: As the charge concerning salt was strict, so the prohibition of
the use of leaven and honey at Sacrifices was very strong: Lev. 2.11.
(b) Ye shall burn no leaven, nor any honey in any offering of the Lord made by
fire. They are both of a fermenting nature, swelling and puffing up. Corrupt
Doctrines are compared to leaven, traditions, inventions of men, false glosses
and expositions of Scripture are set forth by it. Beware, says our Lord, of the
leaven of the Pharisees, which is there expressly interpreted of their Doctrine;
Mat. 16.11, 12.
and so when he forbids them to beware of the leaven of Herod, it is to be
meant of that false Doctrine of the Herodians, who taught that Herod was the
Messiah, Gregor. notes on Scripture, p. 147. on Mat. 22.16. edit Oxo. 1646.
because a King in Judea, after the Scepter was departed from Judah. To add any
thing of man's vain conceptions to the pure Doctrine of Scripture, and to
interlace Divine Worship with Humane Inventions, is a highly provoking sin in
the sight of God, and savours of a monstrous spirit of pride, swelling with
corrupt leaven; wherefore the Scripture does stigmatize erroneous persons who
corrupt the truth, that they usually speak great swelling words of vanity: 2
Pet. 2.18.
We must endeavor to purge out this leaven of pride, corrupt Doctrine, o^
^holiness of heart and life, when we draw near to God, to present our
Sacrifices to him; we must keep Gospel feasts, not with old leaven, which we
fed upon in the house of Bondage in the Egyptian state of nature, Exodus 12.15.
1 Cor. 5.8.
neither with the leaven of malice and wickedness, but the unleavened bread of
sincerity and truth: For hypocrisy is Pharisaical leaven, Luke 12.1.

Yet as to this particular of leaven, though it was generally forbidden to be
used in Sacrifice, yet it was permitted in one case; Lev. 7.13. Amos 4.5.
viz in the Sacrifice of Thanksgiving of Peace Offerings; and here it may be
either taken in a good sense, as sometimes leaven is, where the Kingdom of
Heaven is compared to it, for the increasing and growing nature of the Kingdom
of Christ in the world; or of the work of grace in the heart of a Saint, and so
it may signify the exuberancie, dilatation or swelling of the spirits in joy
and praise, Mat. 13.33. Luk 13.21.
when the soul gives up its thank-offerings to God: or else its taken in a bad
sense for sourness of grief and sorrow, mixture of sin and infirmity, to show
that our praises here in this life are imperfect, not only as to the matter,
there being great cause of mourning and heaviness for the relicts and
remainders of sin in us, are attended with many griefs and sorrows; no
Christian can say of any day in his life (atque ibat sine nube Dies) that there
was no cloud of sin, or storm of trouble, to hinder his visions of peace and
joy. So neither for the manner of the management of our praises, we cannot be
upon the wing in so holy and spiritual a manner, as such a heavenly and
Angelical service (as that of praise is) does require; there will still be a
lump of leaven hanging to our feet, and therefore herein the goodness and
tenderness of Gods love is seen, that he will yet accept our thank offerings
though they have in them some mixtures of flesh, some tinctures of imperfection.

Another thing annexed to Sacrifices was the burning of incense. Now this was
of two sorts, and accordingly called in our translate by two names, Incense and
Frankincense. Incense in the Hebrew is termed (...) from (...) suffire,
adolere, suffumigare, to burn and make a sweet smelling smoke by fire. Exo.
30.35.
This is that which was made of the five ingredients mentioned in the book of
Exodus whereof largely before, and is there translated a perfume. This was
burnt upon the golden Altar of Incense every morning and every evening in the
(a) time of the Sacrifice of the two Lambs every day, Dr. Lightf. Temple
service. p. 111. Lev. 16.13.
and in the Expiation day we read of Incense burnt, before the blood was
brought into the most holy place, whether or no this chief and precious Incense
were generally burnt in a stated quantity, at the offering of every Sacrifice,
I cannot evidently determine from Scripture: In one place its called the
Incense of Rams, Psalm. 66.15. probably, because usually annexed to the
Sacrifices to perfume the air. The other sort termed Frankincense, is in the
Hebrew (...) Lebonah, (...), whereof fully before; and was gathered of the
Frankincense Tree in Arabia; so called, because freely sweating from it as a
gum, and of it self, without any other mixture, gives a most fragrant odor.
Lev. 2.1, 2, 15, 16. and 6.15, etc. Acts 6.4.
This was commanded to be offered with most Meat Offerings, and therefore are
they called Offerings of a sweet savor unto the Lord. In a word, the joining
of Incense with Offerings, signified prayer to attend all our sacred services.
The word must be joined with prayer: Our blessed Lord joined ardent prayers
with his own precious offering on the Cross, when he gave himself for us an
offering, and a Sacrifice to God for a sweet smelling savor.

Ephesians. 5.2.
I have spoken so much about Frankincense in the foregoing lines, that I shall
only allude to what Porta speaks of it, Porta Phyto. nom. l. 5. c. 13 p. 215.
and p. 126.
that it cures any corrupt and foul ulcers of the head by fume, and the flux of
sore eyes. I cannot experimentally seal the truth of that assertion; but of
ardent spiritual prayers, we are sure there is nothing so prevalent and
available against spiritual distempers of both head and heart, as breathings of
a holy soul toward heaven in prayer. Hannah after she had prayed at the
Tabernacle, 1 Samuel 1.18. Psalm. 116.4.
was no more sad; it cured her, and so has it stopped the tears of many a Saint.
After David had called upon the name of the Lord, he finds that rich return of
the deliverance of his soul from death, his eyes from tears, Ver. 8.
and his feet from falling. The mounting up of these fragrant vapors toward
heaven, did signify with what winged speed, with what towering meditations our
souls should soar toward his holy habitation: They must be Preces alatae,
winged prayers, intimated by the ascent of the vapors; they must be broken
hearted, hinted by the contusion of the gum before it be fired; they must be
fragrant, sweetly sented of love, and they must be inflamed, full of ardor,
zeal, and fervency of spirit; and yet all will be of no value, God will smell
no savor of rest in them, unless the great Angel of the Covenant perfume them
in his golden censer: Rev. 8.3.
He is the Priest that intercedes for us, and mixeth of the precious odours of
his intercessions: Ours at the best are but simply (...), bare Frankincense,
and that mixed with many sticks and straws, as the impure sort of that is; but
Christ's is the (...), the compounded incense for the Golden Altar, which the
Priest alone was to offer, the former every man brought with his Meat Offering.
The Saints have but vials, Rev. 5.8.
poor small vessels, stinted measures, though golden, yet but little; but
Christ comes (with his (...)) that he may add or give it to their prayers, and
with them, to make them acceptable: The holiest motions, the most gracious
requests of Saints, are not pure without his incense, which he adds as a free
gift, to render over his merit and holiness to them, that Gods Majesty may
take delight in them through his beloved Son, with whom he is well pleased,
Joh. 11.42.
and whose requests he hears always.

Thus we see, the holy Scripture is pleased to shadow forth the spiritual
Solemnities of the Gospel, by the ancient Ceremonies of the Law. But hence it
does no ways follow, that Jewish Rites must be introduced into the management
of New Testament Worship, as the Pontificians do, thereby loading the Church,
and imposing a yoke of insupportable ceremonies, derived from Jewish
presidents, and mixed with their own carnal inventions, who by their multiplied
traditions do even make void the Commandments of God; and particularly in this
of Incense, Molin de altar, p. 96, 97.
which they have introduced into the Church, that ought not to be used by
Christians: But this the Holy Ghost has foretold us should be the merchandise
of Rome, in her pompous and garish ornaments, to amaze the minds of the
vulgar, and thereby take off the hearts from spiritual service, by their gold,
silver, precious stones, and pearls, fine linen, purple, silk and scarlet, and
all Thyine wood, vessels of ivory, and of most precious wood, Rev. 18.13.
Cinnamon, odours, ointments and Frankincense, etc. whereas now God seeks
such to worship him, Joh. 4.23, 24
that shall wait upon him in Spirit and Truth.

To conclude, The last thing which did accompany Sacrifice, was Music, both
Instrumental and Vocal. In the day of your gladness, in your solemn days, and
in the beginnings of your months, Number. 10.10.
ye shall Blow (says God) with Trumpets over your Burnt-offerings, and over
the sacrifices of your Peace Offerings. Blow the Trumpet in Zion, etc. Call the
solemn Assembly. Joel 2.15. 2 Chro. 29.27
Accordingly in the days of Hezekiah, when the Burnt-offering began, the Song
of the Lord began also with the Trumpets, and with the Instruments ordained by
David King of Israel. It is recorded, that the Levites sang their Songs on the
steps arising up to the great Eastgate of the Priests Court; and therefore are
they called Songs of Degrees: to intimate, that in our ascent to Duties, our
hearts should be prepared for Thanksgiving and Praise. O enter into his gates
with thanksgiving, and into his Courts with praise: Psalm. 100.4. On the Sabbath
day they sang in the morning at the sacrifice of a Lamb (which was added for
that day above the ordinary) the Song of Moses, in Deuteronomy. 32. D. Lightf. Temple
serve. p. 61.
and in the evening, the Song of Moses, in Exodus 15. and finished them in six
Sabbaths, and then began again. Wherefore the New Testament Saints are said to
sing the song of Moses, and of the Lamb, in the time of their eternal Sabbath,
and rest from all their labors.

The Papists have together with many other Jewish Ceremonies, introduced this
also into the Church, enjoining the use of Instrumental Music in Divine
Service. A thing no where commanded in the New Testament, and not practiced in
the Primitive time: Nay Clemens Alexandrinus in his days rejected it, Clem.
Alex. Paedagog. l. 2. c. 4. p. 121. Edit. Lugd. Bat. 1616.
and spiritualizes the ancient Music: (...), etc. Praise him with the
Psaltery; for the Tongue is the Psaltery of the Lord: and praise him with the
Harp; by the Harp we are to understand the Mouth, which is played upon with the
Bow of the Spirit. In a Book likewise ascribed to Justin Martyr, Just. Martyr
Quaest. and Resp. ad Orthodox. 107. p. 308. Commeli. 1593.
though justly suspected not to be his, yet is it ancient; in the answer to one
question about Church Music; the reply is, (...), etc. (...). The use of such
Instruments is taken away from songs in Churches, and of all others; fit rather
for children, or foolish people; and there remains only bare singing. Very
excellent are the expressions of another most famous Worthy of the Church of
Christ on Psalm. 150. Chrysostom. in Psalm. 150. To. 1. p. 909. Edit. Savil.
(...), etc. As therefore the Jews [did praise the Lord] with all Instruments,
so we are in like manner commanded to glorify God with all our Members; by the
Eye, by the Tongue, by the Ear, and by the Hand, etc. The Eye praises him,
when it looks not upon lascivious objects; the Tongue, when it sings; the Ear,
when it entertains no filthy songs, nor accusations against our neighbor; the
mind or soul, when it muses not upon deceits, but brings forth love; the Feet,
when they run not to wickedness, but to the dispensation of good works; and the
hands, when they are not stretched out to rapine, covetousness, and fighting;
but to Alms, and the patronage of the Injured: Then is man a melodious Harp,
yiedling to God most harmonious and spiritual Music. And then he goes on thus,
(...), etc. Such Instruments were then permitted for this cause, even for their
weakness sake, to stir up their minds to perform their external Worship with
some delight.

Instruments of Music were not heard in the Latin Church till the days of
Vitalianus the Pope, as it is manifest by Volaterrane, Platina, Volaterran.
Anthropolog. l. 22. p. 501. Edit Basil. 1559 P^a^n p. 89. Col Agrip. 1626.
Fasc. Temp ad Ann. Chr. 654 p. 60. Edit. Hano. 1613. M. Terry's Voyage to the
Indies, in Pu^ch. part 2 p. 1467. Ephesians. 3.14 21 Phil. 4.6.
and the Author of Fasciculus Temporum, and others; by whom it appears, that
till after 650. years, there were no such things in the Service of God, but
that these began in the depth of Popish darkness. Nay, 'its observable, that
the Turks (great strangers to the Truth) are offended at this custom in the
Christian Churches: As a petty King of Socotora near the mouth of the Red Sea,
coming to the water side, heard some of the Wind-Instruments of the English;
and being a Mahumetan, asked if they played David's Psalms (which he had heard
of) and being answered affirmatively, replied, That it was an ill invention of
him that first mingled Music with Religions for, before God was worshipped in
Heart, but by this in Sound. Which may well be applied to the times of
Vitalianus before spoken of.

Let us rather in a few words show why Temple Music was of old annexed to
Sacrifice: Doubtless for our Instruction, to show that praise and thanksgiving
ought to accompany our prayers and solemn services. The Apostle Paul did so
Bowing his knees (in one verse;) unto the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ: and
in another, ascribin^ glory to him by Jesus Christ: and enjoins the Philippian
Church, in every thing by Prayer, and supplication with thanksgiving, to make
their request known unto God. Further, he advises his Colossians, to teach and
admonish one another in Psalms and Hymns, and spiritual songs, singing with
grace to the Lord in their hearts. Ephesians. 5.19.
He counsels the Ephesians to speak to themselves in Psalms, and Hymns, and
spiritual songs, making melody in their hearts to the Lord. 1 These. 5.17, 18
He enjoins the Thessalonians to join Prayer and Praises together; Pray without
ceasing, in ev^ry thing giving thanks; for this is the will of God in Christ
Jesus concerning you: and exhorts Timothy, That Intercessions and giving of
thanks be made for all men. 1 Timothy 2.1.
In like manner we find the Saints with Harps and Vials full of odours, Pro.
5.8, 9.
praying and praising together: and in another place we find them singing the
Song of Moses and the Lamb, saying Great and mavelous are thy works Lord God
almighty; Rev. 15.3.
just and true are thy ways, thou King of Saints, etc.

Hav^ng now finished the Interpretation of some of the chief Legal solemnities,
I shall put a period to this Section with the recital of some Gospel
sacrifices, which are called so in the holy Scriptures, in allusion to those of
the Temple in former days.

Under the Gospel, Saints have their spiritual sacrifices, as well as they
under the Law had their carnal: Indeed all theirs had some significancy in
them, they were not able of themselves to purge the Conscience. Christ is the
great High Priest that presents his whole Church to himself, not having spot or
wrinkle, Ephesians. 5.27.
or any such thing; but that it should be holy, and without blemish: yea he
has made his people to become a holy Priesthood, to offer up spiritual
sacrifices; and a royal Priesthood, 1 Pet. 2.5.
to show forth the praises of him who has called us out of darkness into his
mavelous light. v. 9.
Singing of God's praises is a most royal and princely service: He has joined
the Crown to the M^ter, and made us Kings as well as Priests to God and his
Father, Rev. 1.6.5.10.20.6.
to whom be glory and dominion for ever. [ Habeat in se (says an Ancient)
defixum and Altar, t^ in quo orationum hostias and misericordiae victimas
offerat Deo. In quo coninentia cultro superbiam quasi Taurum immolet,
iracundiam quasi Ariet^m jugulet, Origin in Exodus Hom. 9.98. Psalm. 100.3.
Luxariam omnemque libidinem tanquam Hircos and Haedos libet.] Let him have an
Altar fixed within him, on which he may offer up to God the sacrifices of
Prayers, and the oblation of Mercy: In which he may slay pride like a Bullock,
with the slaughtering knife of abstinence; he may cut the throat of wrath as of
a Ram, and may make a burnt sacrifice of luxury, and all lust, as of Goats and
Kids

When we enter the Courts of his Temple with the voice of joy, being his
people, and the sheep of his pasture, let us give up our selves as sacrifices
to his praise. All the sheep of Christ's flock (says our Learned Grosted,
alluding to that place in Canticles) bring forth Twins, Grosted de Cessat. Leg.
p. 125. Cant. 4.2.
and there is not one barren among them; and the twins are (says he) the love
of God and our Neighbor.

The first and prime Gospel sacrifice is our heart and soul. Son, give me thy
heart, is that which God principally calls for, and expects at our hands. The
Inwards of the sacrifice were always to be burnt upon the Altar. God delights
in hearty service, when our souls are inflamed with love to him, in communion
with him in the Ordinances. Strabo Geog. l. 15. p. 732. Edit. Cause.
Concerning the Magi in Persia (so Strabo calls their Priests) it is related by
him, that they distributed the parts of the sacrifice to be eaten: (...).
Setting apart no share for the Gods; for they say that God requires nothing of
the sacrifice save the soul. I am sure, whatever superstitious customs were
among the Heathens, that the glorious and infinite God, that searches the
heart, and tries the reins, expects them principally and wholly to be
sacrificed in all our approaches to him, 1 Pet. 3.15.
whom we ought to sanctify in our hearts.

Therefore in Scripture we shall find, that the actings of the several graces
implanted in the soul by the Spirit of God, are called by the name of
sacrifices.

Contrition and brokenness of heart are the sacrifices of God, Psalm. 51.17.
which he will not despise.

Faith is a sacrifice: If I be offered upon the sacrifice and service of your
faith, Phil. 2.17.
etc. which some interpret thus, That the Apostle had consecrated and dedicated
them as a sacrifice to God by believing; and now drawing nigh his Martyrdom,
Dutch notes.
was to have his blood spilt (as the Drink Offering of Wine anciently was
joined with the Meat Offering) upon the sacrifice of their Faith.

Joy is an other sacrifice, alluding to the Peace Offerings: I will offer (says
David) in his Tabernacle, sacrifices of joy, I will sing, Psalm. 27.6.
yea I will sing praises unto the Lord.

Thanksgiving is another. Offer unto God Thanksgiving, and pay thy Vows unto
the most High. He that offers praise, glorifieth me, says God: Psalm. 50.14.
v. 23: Ps. 107.22. Hos. 14.2.
Let them sacrifice the sacrifices of Thanksgiving, and declare his works with
rejoicing. The Church in the Prophet Hosea cries unto the Lord, Take away all
iniquities, and receive us graciously, so will we render the Calves of our
lips. Jer. 33.10, 11.
There shall be heard in this place (says the Prophet Jeremiah) the voice of
them that shall say, Praise the Lord of Hosts; for the Lord is good for his
mercy endures for ever; and of them that shall bring the sacrifice of Praise
into the house of the Lord. By him, that is, by Christ, (says the Apostle) let
us offer the sacrifice of Praise to God continually: that is, the fruit of our
lips, Heb. 13.15.
giving thanks to his Name.

Mercy also is desired of the Lord rather then sacrifice. Hos. 6.6.


Good works and alms are a sacrifice likewise. I have all, and abound (says
Paul) having received of Epaphroditus the things which were sent from you,
Phil. 4.18.
an odor of a sweet smell, a sacrifice acceptable, well-pleasing to God.
Wherefore to do good, and communicate, forget not; Heb. 13.16.
for with such sacrifices God is well pleased.

Righteousness is another. Offer the sacrifices of Righteousness, and put your
trust in the Lord. Do good in thy good pleasure to Zion, Psalm. 4.5. Psalm. 51.19.
build thou the Walls of Jerusalem. Then shall thou be pleased with the
sacrifices of Righteousness.

Prayer is another most excellent and sweet smelling sacrifice under the
Gospel: My house shall be called of all Nations a house of Prayer. Mar. 11.17.
Of this we have treated more copiously above, when handling the service of
Incense. Not only our souls in their several heavenly breathings at the Throne
of Grace, and in all their Divine services presented to God, are represented in
Scripture under the ancient shadows of sacrifice: but our Bodies also are to be
presented as a living Sacrifice, Heb. 12.9.
holy, acceptable to God, which is our reasonable service. As God is the Father
of our spirits, so is he the Creator of our bodies, and expects from both (as
is most due from creatures) all manner of homage, obedience, adoration and
praise for ever: Wherefore let us draw near with a true heart, Heb. 10.22.
in full assurance of faith, having our hearts sprinkled from an evil
conscience, and our bodies washed with pure water.

Also the vocation of the Gentiles, is represented in the Holy Scripture, as a
Sacrifice in the day^ of the Gospel to be presented to God, when in every place
incense shall be offered to the name of the Lord, and a pure offering: for my
name shall be great among the Heathen, Mal. 1.11.
says the Lord of Hosts. The Apostle Paul says, that he was the Minister of
Jesus Christ to the Gentiles, ministering the Gospel of God, Romans 15.16.
that the offering up of the Gentiles might be acceptable, being sanctified by
the Holy Ghost.

Psa. 116.15.
In the last place, Martyrdom is esteemed a Sacrifice, and that which is most
precious in the sight of God Paul compares himself to a Sacrifice, when near to
his death at Rome: Phil. 2.17.
The Souls under the Altar, that were slain for the word of God, and for the
testimony which they held, are related to cry with a loud voice, Rev. 6.9.
saying, How long, O Lord, holy and true, do thou not judge and avenge our
blood on them that dwell on the earth: There being therein a strong allusion to
the blood of the Sacrifices of old, which was poured out besides the Altar, the
warm vapors whereof went up reaking toward heaven: In which sense Cyprian
speaks of the Ministers Exhortations of the godly to suffering in his days,
Cypr. Ep. 2. p. 4. edit. Bas. 1530.
that thereby they might prepare Sacrifices for God.

SECT. VI. The Endowments of the Temple Officers Spiritualized.
WHat Privileges, Possessions and Revenues the Servants of God in the Temple
Worship under the Law enjoyed, I have formerly explained in a set Chapter:
Hieronym. ad Fabio. loc. Tim, 3. p. 58.
The end is set down by Jerome in his Epistle to Fabiola, [Primitiae cibor um,
etc. ut habens victum a^q v^stitum securus and liber serviat Domino. The
Firstfruits of meats, etc. were given to the Priests, that having food and
raiment, he might with security and freedom give up himself to the service of
the Lord: Wherefore such as come up to worship God at the Temple, were charged
never to appear empty before the Lord: Nay, God himself, Exodus 23.15. and 34.^0.
Deuteronomy. 6.16. Lev. 27.30. Number. 18.21.
who challenged the tithes from ^he people of Israel as his own, did make an
act of assignment of them to the Levites in consideration of their service in
his worship. From whence it follows by the same rule of Equity, that such as
serve God in the great work of the Gospel, should have a competent and
convenient maintenance to encourage them in the work and service of God: Nay, A
minori ad majus: By how much more excellent their Dispensation is, and the glad
tidings of the Gospel to be preferred before the shadows and ceremonies of the
Law; by so much the more ought the Christian people to manifest greater love,
countenance, encouragement and obedience to those that watch for their souls.
Heb. 13.17.


But we shall see that the Apostle Paul does draw an inference from the ancient
legal maintenance in behalf of the Gospel-Ministrey, in these words, Who goes
a warfare at any time of his own charges? who planteth a vineyard, 1 Cor. 9.7,
etc.
and eats not of the fruit thereof? or who feeds a flock, and eats not of
the milk of the flock? Say I these things as a man, or says not the Law the
same also: For it is written in the Law of Moses, Thou shall not muzzle the
mouth of the Ox that treads out the corn. Does God take care for Oxen, or
says he it altogether for our sakes? For our sakes no doubt this is written,
That he that ploweth, should plow in hope, and that he that thresheth in hope,
should be partaker of his hope. If we have sown unto you spiritual things, is
it a great thing if we shall reap your carnal things? Do you not know, they
which minister about holy things, liv^ of the things of the Temple? and they
which wait at the altar, Verse. 13.
are partakers with the altar; even so has the Lord ordained, that they which
preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel. Dr. Edw. Reynolds on Psalm. 110.4^
at the end of v 4. p. 479. Phil. 4.17.
This place is gloss'd upon and expounded by a very learned and able hand, who
has discussed this matter clearly and fully. In another Epistle, the great
Teacher of the Gentiles commending the communication of the Church at Philippi
to him in necessities, tells them, it was not therefore because he desired a
gift; but fruit, that might abound to their account. It was not to be accounted
a matter of mere benevolence and favor, which they n^eded not to do; but it
was a piece of justice and equity, thereby demonstrating their obedience to the
faith, and laying up in store a treasure in heaven against the great day of
account. For it is an injunction from God, Let him that is taught in the word,
communicate unto him that teaches in all good things: Be not deceived, God is
not mocked, Gal. 16.6.
for whatsoever a man sows, that shall he reap. Again, in his first Epistle
to Timothy ^e exhorts, Let the Elders that rule well, be counted worthy of
double honor, 1 Timothy 5.17, 18.
especially they who labor in word and doctrine: For the Scripture says, Thou
shall not muzzle the Ox. that treads out the corn; and, The labourer is
worthy of his reward; which brings me to that place of the Evangelist, where,
when our Lord was sending out his Disciples to preach the word of the Kingdom;
he charges them thus, Provide neither gold, nor silver, nor brass in your
purses, Mat. 10.9, 10. Luke 10.5, etc,
nor scrip for your journey; neither two coats, neither shoes, nor yet staves:
For the workman is worthy of his meat: And into whatsoever house ye enter;
first say, Peace be to this house* and if the Son of peace be there, your peace
shall rest upon it; if not, it shall turn to you again: and in the same house
remain eating and drinking such things as they give: For the labourer is worthy
of his hire. Verse. 16.
He that hears you, hears me; and he that despises you, despises me: and
he that despises me, despises him that sent me.

By these places of Divine Authority, we learn, how careful the Lord is of his
instituted Ministrey under the Gospel, and what weighty and strong commands do
lie upon the consciences of those who participate of their spiritual labors.
Besides, as the Priests had their Cities and habitations assigned them; Mat.
21.33.
so the vine-dressers are said to have a Tower built in the vineyard for them
to dwell in.

Now many will say, A maintenance for a Gospel-Ministrey we allow, and that
competent and fitting for their estate and condition, that so they may serve
the Lord without distraction. But the way of maintenance as it is in our
Nation, by Tithe, we allow not of: 1. Because Jewish, and annexed to the
Ceremonial Law. 2. Because brought in under Popery, and is therefore
Antichristian: And in the next place they like not a forced and compulsory
maintenance of that or any other manner, but that every one should give freely,
and this to be counted the Gospel way.

Here I shall premise, that it is not my purpose to handle this question, nor
to declare my own opinion upon it, only so far as to cut the nerves of those
objections in sunder, it is sufficiently done already by many learned and
judicious persons, Sir Henry Spelman, Sir James Sempill, Doctor Garleten,
Doctor Sclater, M. Nettle, and others: I shall only speak a little to the
branches of this objection.

To the first, That it was a part of the Jewish and Ceremonial law given by
Moses, and therefore to be abrogated by the death of Christ.

Genesis 14.20. Heb. 7.4 etc. v. 6.
I answer, That long before the Law was given, the Patriarch Abraham did pay
tithes to Melchisedec, who was a signal Type of Christ, and had not his descent
from the loins of Levi, being yet unborn; and yet received Tithes of Abraham,
and blessed him that had the Promises: which Argument the Apostle clearly
urges against Levitical Ceremonies in the seventh chapter to the Hebrews. v.
9, 10.
For Levi who received Tithes, paid Tithes in Abraham; for he was yet in the
loins of his Father when Melchisedec met him. Now whereas it is urged that the
Levitical Priesthood being changed, there is made of necessity a change also of
the Law. v. 12.
I grant it to be true, that this Law ought to cease, and did so, in respect of
the Levitical Priesthood, which was finished at the death of Christ. But the
Lord Jesus, who was so eminently typified by Melchisedec, the receiver of
Tithes before the exhibition of the Law, has an unchangeable Priesthood, and
therefore the Tithes which he received as due annexed to it, Heb. 7.24. Mar.
9.41. Mat. 10.40, 41, 42,
do still continue to be his due by Divine sanction. But now Christ our High
Priest being in heaven, counts that done and given to him, which is given to a
Prophet in his Name: he having no where repealed or disanulled his right.

Genesis 28.22.
Besides this, holy Jacob also when he was at Bethel in his journey toward Padan
Aram, made this vow, Of all that thou shall give me, I will surely give the
Tenth unto thee; after this being about to depart from his cruel and hard
Uncle, and being enriched through the good hand of God, he was by the God of
Bethel put in mind of his vow which he made at the anointing of the pillar,
Genesis 31.13. Genesis 33.18. Genesis 14.5, 17, 18
which no doubt he fully performed (but whether at Shalem, a City of Shechem,
whereof Melchisedeck was King (a place not far from Shaveh Kiriathaim, where he
met Abraham) for Shalem was in the Tribe of Ephraim, not far from Jordan, and
Kiriathaim in the Tribe of Reuben, not far off on the other side the River) or
whether at Bethel it self, for at both places he offered on an Altar: but at
the last, Genesis 33.20.35.7.
especially where he was blessed of God, probably upon the performance of his
Vows: At which of the two places he consecrated his tenths to God, is not much
material, seeing that it was done doubtless, and that a great while before the
Ceremonial Law was delivered by Moses at Mount Sinai.

Exodus 22.29. Exodus 38, 21. Lev. 27.30. Numb. 18.21.
Again, God commanded the rendering to him the first fruits, and other offerings,
an appendix of Tithes, before ever the Levites were assigned to their service
about the Tabernacle: The Tithe, whether of the seed of the Land, or of the
fruit of the Tree, is the Lords; it is holy unto the Lord, and was given by God
unto the children of Levi for an inheritance. Wherefore we make it not to have
been Typical, but as a Moral Duty, grounded upon equity, and the Law of Nature
in the main: that is, as maintenance: and the quota pars, or the tenth of men's
substance upon a positive Law observed by the Patriarchs before the Law. Now
such things as were before the Ceremonial Law, and continued under the Law,
though sometimes fortified by the Moral and Judicial Laws, were also to remain
after the abrogation of the ceremonies, and not to determine at that time: As
for example, the seventh part of our time stands dedicated to God by a moral
Institution, being appointed before the Law was given in the Wilderness, even
in the state of Innocence, and therefore continues after the Law, even in the
times of the Gospel, although the seventh part part of the week be changed to
another day, yet a seventh part still continues; so likewise some
acknowledgement of our substance and goods, the increase of our grounds, and
the fruit of our labors, is to be rendered up to God as a moral duty, as
thereby owning him to be our God, and the giver of all our blessings. But now
the quota pars, or how much of this is to be dedicated, stands in force by the
positive Law of his Declarative Will; which I have shown to be the tenth: God
declaring that the tenth is his, it is his portion in the world, which he gives
to his servants whom he appoints for the celebration of his worship. Wherefore
even Heathens by the light of nature knowing that there is a God, and
consequently that this God is to be worshipped, and then, that there must be
administrators, or managers of this Worship, who because of their constant
attendance thereon, could not, nay might not employ themselves in any worldly
affairs, therefore ought to have some set maintenance, whereby their lives
might be preserved, according to the dignity of their place: wherefore they
generally assigned them the tenths; either deducing it by tradition from the
ancient Patriarchs after the flood, to whom they were allied in collateral
lines, or else by imitation of the Worship of God in Canaan. This I could
abundantly testify out of Plutarch, Plut. in Luc. and alibi.
and other grave Authors in this case. But I cannot say that the tantum, or
such a quantity dedicated to God, could be discerned by the light of Nature.

A second branch of the objection is, That this way of maintenance is Popish
and Antichristian, being brought into the Church after the defection from the
Truth, and the rise of the man of sin.

As to this, the want of skill and knowledge in the history of the Church, may
be indulged and pardoned: for no man is bound to speak more then he knows; yet
to assert it so vehemently, as some have done, that is unhandsom, and not
befitting any sober spirit.

Let them then know, that after the ten persecutions of the Primitive times
were ended, and peace and rest given to the churches of Christ by the great
blessing of God under the glorious Reign of Constantine the great, that godly
Emperor, that he made a Decree and Law, Sozom Hist. Eccl. l. 1. c. 8.
That the Christian people should give a certain fixed rate of their estates to
the maintenance of the Gospel-Ministery about the year 325. after the overthrow
of Licinius: which certain rate that it was a Tenth, is attested by some, vid.
Zipp. 363. ex Hermanno.
and was fully enjoined by after Empe^ours. Whence we infer, First, That this
work was not done by the Pope; for then there was but a Bishop at Rome, without
a super-eminent title or power over others, which is the character the Apostle
gives, whereby we should know the rise of Antichrist. 2 These. 2.4.


That it was many years before the clear manifestation of the Man of sin, which
was in the year 602, when the cruel Phocas constituted the Bishop of Rome head
over all Bishops, and then was he revealed with power: It is true, Whitak. Open.
Theol Tom. 2. cont. de Romans Pont. praef p 517. 2 These 2.7. An 325. Petav. Doct.
Tempor. part. 2. p. 720.
an Antichristian spirit catching after superiority, and usurping of the place
of Christ, to be Head of the Church, did work even in the Apostles days; and
yet no sober person will say (I hope) that those times were Popish. But to
clear up all, The Nicene Council manifests the days of Constantine to have
shined with great luster of truth, as appears by the Nicene Creed or Confession
of Faith* composed by three hundred and thirteen Fathers then met together in
Council, which is commonly to be seen: for five of the three hundred and
eighteen did disagree from it, ( Hotting. Eccles. Hist part. 1. p. 174.) They
determined also clearly against Arius the Heretic, who opposed the Divinity of
Christ.

In these times of the Sunshine of the Gospel was it that the godly Emperor
Constantine stated a set rate for the Ministry. Afterward here in Britain,
the Saxon Kings having expelled the British out of their ancient Seats, being
themselves then Pagans, at last were converted to the Faith, and holding
possession of the Land by the Title of Conquest, of what Lands they kept to the
Crown, and of what they enfeoffed their great Lords in, to hold under them,
they retained nine parts, and made a donation, or deed of gift of the tenth
part to the Clergy: so that there is no one person in the land that has at
present any injury, or is oppressed thereby. For if Landlords, they never
purchased the tenth: If they be tenants, they never paid for any Hold or Tenure
of the Tenths, either by Fine or Rent: The tenth part being always reserved
upon the account of the ancient Donation, as the Ministers particular stated
portion; unless what is alienate by Impropriation in the days of Henry the
eighth: so that all the great men of the Nation holding their lands either by
Grant from the Crown, or Patrimonial descent, or purchase, do thereupon still
retain the right of Patronage, or presentment to such places, whereof their
Ancestors were possessed at the time of the Donation. So that this Tenure and
possession proceeds from the free gift of Christian Magistrates, who seeing a
necessity of maintaining a godly, learned, and painful Ministry, thought it the
highest prudence to fix upon some settled rate and portion annually to be
assigned over to that use and behoof; who because of the example of the ancient
Patriarchs before the Law, and the command and institution of God under the
Law, thought no course could be better taken, then to follow those leading
examples, and not to give either an eighth, or ninth, or a twelfth, or
twentieth part of their estates, but a tenth, which has since been confirmed
by manifold Acts and Decrees of successive Parliaments of this Nation, both
before and since the Reformation. But as to the manner and way, I think no
sober and serious person will much hesitate, in case there be a fixed rate set
and appointed; that so their condition may not fluctuate, and be subject to
inconstancy; their hopes of supply being else frustrate under some necessities
of Providence.

Hence then, as to the third branch of the objection which lies against forced
maintenance. There is no person in this point unjustly and unrighteously forced
and compelled, nor in the least measure oppressed; When the godly Magistrates
of the Nation do cause the Laws touching that ancient Free gift and Donation,
granted by their Ancestors, to be put in execution: for the Supreme Magistrate
is Custos utriusque Tabulae, and doubtless may, as godly Hezekiah did, 2 Chro.
31.4.
command the people that dwelt in Jerusalem, to give the portion [of the Lord's
Ministers] that they might be encouraged in the Law of the Lord. So that there
was not of late, even in the times of the Bishops one penny but that which was
called the Easter-offering that was paid of 2d a piece out of the peoples
purses, which is now generally fallen with the late Hierarchy: Insomuch that
what people will give freely to such with whom they are in Communion and
Church Fellowship, is wholly left to their Christian love, and zeal to the
Ministry and Ordinances. So that if men throughout the Nation generally were
left to their own Free-wills, unless it be for such whose hearts the Lord has
touched with ardent affections, and tender love to his Sanctuary; if the godly
Civil Magistrate did not interpose for the conservation of the Rights of
Ministers, the generality of the carnal, formal, and ungodly people, (who hate
a sound soul-searching, and convincing Ministry, and are by the conscientious
and faithful dispensers of the Word, by reason of their scandalous sins, justly
kept off from ruining their own souls in eating and drinking their own
damnation, by receiving unworthily at the Lord's Table) they would be so far
from contributing freely and liberally to the maintenance of such a Sound,
Holy, and Godly Ministry, as that they would generally deny to render those
very Dues, to which the people can never in any Justice lay the least Claim to,
as being by a Deed of Gift past over to the Ministry by our Zealous
Forefathers, in the first Plantation of the Gospel, and since established by
so many strong and binding Laws.

But there are still some persons (who I charitably hope) would not foster and
cherish in their breasts any obstinacy and opposition against a faithful, holy,
able and sincere Ministrey) that yet do fly to the examples of the Apostle
Paul, who that he might not be chargeable to the Churches, 1 These. 2.9.
would rather work with his hands, and think it a fit president for Ministers
to use some calling whereby to get their livelihoods. To whom I would reply in
the spirit of meekness and soberness: First, That the Apostles needed not to
study, they had the gift of Tongues and utterance, they had an extraordinary
measure of the Spirit of God poured out upon them in the day of Pentecost; Acts
2.4.
they had the gifts of miracles to conciliate and gain Authority to their
Doctrine where ever they came, and the revelation of the mystery of grace
clearly manifested to them; whereas now such extraordinary gifts being ceased,
Ministers must give attendance to reading, to exhortation, to doctrine; they
must meditate on these things, 1 Timothy 4.13, 15.
and give themselves wholly to them, that their profiting may appear to all,
which work if they conscionably perform, looking at the injunction of God, and
the profit of souls, they will find little time to spend in outward vocations
and businesses of the world, which take off the edge of the affections from
spiritual things, and put them out of a prepared frame for Gospel services,
unless they were sure to enjoy infallibly the presence and anointing of the
Holy Spirit in an extraordinary manner, unto the several emergencies of their
duties. I doubt not, but godly Ministers, if they had such eminent and
miraculous assistance (which the primitive times enjoyed) for the performance
of their incumbent services in the Gospel, they would be content to betake
themselves to such moderate employments in Trade and Merchandise, as whereby
possibly they might attain to some good estates, by the blessing of God, as
well as others, they being generally no more destitute of parts then other men,
if this were the mind of God, and the rule of the Gospel.

But secondly, The state of the Churches in the Apostles times was generally
poor and mean, and not able to contribute to their necessities. The Apostle
does frequently complain of the poverty of the Saints, and acquaints us, that
not many mighty, not many noble were called: Romans 15, 26. 1 Cor. 19, 1, 3 2
Cor. 9.12. Philem. v. 7. Hebr. 6.10. 1 Cor. 1.26.
If any Gospel-Minister should in this case deny to set himself to some labor
or work, and still press upon the peoples pure necessities, he would then not
walk as he had Paul for an ensample: But blessed be God, there are thousands
that have given their names to Christ in England, who enjoy such splendid and
ample patrimonies, that they might easily take off from the poorer sort any
burden, and yet sufficiently maintain their Teachers, if there were no stated
and legal maintenance, and not necessitate them to work in callings, to the
great dishonor both of themselves and the Gospel in these times: Such are to
be charged from God, that they be not high-minded, nor trust in uncertain
riches, but in the living God, 1 Timothy 6.17, 18, 19.
who gives us richly all things to enjoy, that they do good, that they be rich
in good works, ready to distribute, willing to communicate, laying up in store
for themselves a good foundation against the time to come, that they may lay
hold on eternal life. But alas, it is to be feared, that there are many great
ones, (whose case is sadly to be bemoaned and lamented over) that spend far
more annually in the maintaining of Faulconers and Huntsmen (to say no worse)
then they expend upon pious uses: The Lord lay not their sin unto their charge.
How far are such persons from the temper of the primitive Saints in the
Apostles days, who mutter and grumble at the present condition of the
Ministrey, which at this day is generally so low and mean, that their very
Ministrey is almost brought into contempt and reproach among the wicked and
profane spirits of the vulgar. The state of the Church of Christ before
Constantines days, was generally under persecution, and afflicted in most
places with deep poverty, then indeed there was a necessitous duty lying upon
the Ministers to take some care for their Families, or else they would prove
worse then Infidels.

Such persons who insist so warmly upon this point of Ministers working
according to the example of some of the Apostles (for it seems all did not;
excepting Barnabas and Paul, 1 Cor. 9.6.
others did forbear working) I would wish them to look to their duty likewise,
to follow the example of the Primitive Saints: (for the same rule in all equity
binds them on the other side) For, Acts 4.34.
there was none among them that lacked: For as many as were possessours of
lands or houses, sold them, and brought the prices of the things that were
sold, and laid them down at the Apostles feet. I fear me, those that are rich
persons, who press this laboring of Ministers in worldly vocations so much,
will come off very dolly and slowly to this work of selling all and laying it
down at the Ministers feet. I am sure the poor would not complain so generally
as they do, nor the Ministrey be driven from their duties to worldly labors
(if this their absurd inference should take place) if such would do their duty
in this case, which is inferred upon their own supposition.

But thirdly, As to the times of the Apostles, we are to consider likewise,
that Christian Religion had not then so f^r prevailed, as to get any strong
footing in Princes Courts: So that there were no Christian Magistrates to be a
hedge about the Church, and to take care in this particular for the comfortable
support of the Ministrey. The Apostles declared the will of God sufficiently,
but they had no coercive power in this point, and though doubtless, many might
make conscience, who were able to do it, yet there wanted not a Demas to
forsake even them, and to embrace this present world: No doubt, there were
several persons, that being not soundly wrought upon, did pull back, and
withdraw; Acts 4. ult. and 5.1, etc.
as we read in the case of Ananias and Saphira, else what needed the frequent
and fervent exhortations to this duty of communicating. But when once Christian
Magistrates arose, they took care for a certain rate or tribute to be imposed
on the people for this purpose, as it was in the days of Constantine and
Licinius: And why that which is incumbent as a duty upon Christians, may not be
made one of the Topicall or Municipal Laws in any Christian Kingdom, State, or
Commonwealth, I see no reason, since it tends to the preservation of Gods
public Worship under the Gospel.

But however, in this case it is very dangerous for any persons who have this
worlds goods, to plead poverty, and going behind hand, to palliate their want
of love to the Ministrey, to excuse them from this important work. Possibly the
Lord may providentially blast such men's estates ere they are aware: Certainly
whatever is detracted secretly from that use, will make bad portions for their
posterity. Pro. 3.9, 10. Hag 2.18, 19. Mal 3 9, 12 D^. Edw. Reyn. ib. sup.
I am sure God did of old promise particular blessings to such as brought in of
their substance, what was enjoined for the honorable and splendid maintenance
of the Temple; and do we think that God has less care of, and love to his
Gospel Ambassadors, who are the Ministers of the New Testament? No certainly!
But let such consider, that the very Heathens dealt more nobly and heartily
with their Idolatrous Priests, who helped on the poor creatures toward hell,
Yet because under the sense of some Religions, though false worship, they were
most of them very liberal. It is not my design to quote any Humane testimonies
at present, I shall content my self with the citation of one example out of
Scripture, which the Spirit of God takes notice of, and that is, of the people
of Egypt in the days of Joseph, although they were then exercised under a sore
judgment of Famine, when all the other people of the Land had sold their goods
and possessions to Joseph for the Kings use, Gen, 49.26.
yet the lands of the Priests were even then excepted.

I heartily wish, that such poor souls as are tainted with disaffection to the
maintenance of the Gospel Ministrey (that otherwise possibly some of them may
be honest good meaning people) were a little sensible that the hand of Joab is
in all this: I mean, the Jesuits and persons of other Orders, among the
Papists, many whereof have been in these late years discovered to have been
among those people in their meetings that withdraw from the public
Assemblies, and have been known by some of our Nation, that have seen them
beyond Sea in the proper habits of their Orders, whose great design is to
subvert the Universities and the Ministrey, and then they know well enough we
must bid farewell to the Protestant Religion, and the game will be theirs: How
many Popish opinions have been vented by them, and here cried up for New
Lights, is too sadly known [as, the Doctrine of Perfection, Voluntary Humility,
and neglect of the body, attainable in this life, and that the Ministers of the
Reformed Church are no true Ministers, and a number of the like, arising out of
the Bottomless Pit] our sad discords, make sweet harmony in Popish ears: So
that what on the one side, betwixt poor seduced spirits, and carnal and
profane, who love none but daubers with untempered mortar, the faithful
Ministers of Christ are objected to great reproach and rebuke this day; so that
the spirits of the godly, and such as are steadfast in Gospel Truths are grieved
and wounded, the wicked Popish seducers warmed by success, the Devils
expectations raised, and the Papists hopes of a great harvest greatly
enlivened, to whom in the Northern parts many have declined already, and more
will daily: Nay, in conclusion, they will strike at the Protestant Magistracy
as well as Ministrey, it is their great aim to bring it about: And I doubt not
but godly Magistrates do consider, that there is no one sort of people under
their Government, that can so effectually promote their interest, as a godly
faithful Ministrey can, when encouraged by them; since they have so much
influence upon the consciences of men: I hope God of his infinite mercy will
stir up the wisdom and courage of our godly Magistrates that sit at the Helm,
to reform what is amiss, to be a terror to evil works, and an encouragement to
the upright in the Land; that so a godly Ministrey may be protected, maintained
and cherished, to the glory of the Gospel, that the Ark of Gods presence may
ever continue among us, in despite of all the gates of Hell, so long as the
Ordinances of Heaven shall endure. To which end, it is well worth the
consideration of the faithful, to take special care for their preservation, and
all due encouragement, since there is a necessity for their costly and
chargeable education in the famous Seminaries of Learning; seeing now abilities
for Ministerial service, are not given in miraculously: The Scriptures being
written in the Learned Languages, there is great necessity for them to be well
skilled in them.

Their preparatory studies, and their actual services, do greatly waste the
vital spirits more then those of the Law did.

They are commanded to be wholly in these things (...), says Paul to Timothy,
Be in them, converse in them, make them thy business; 1 Timothy 4.15.
whence may be inferred, that the Ministrey should not immerse themselves in
secular affairs, left thereby their progress and proficiency in the study of
the Scriptures, and their own hearts, should be obstructed and hindered, So that
unless strongly necessitated by want and poverty, and the wickedness of those
that are able, and deny subministration and supply to their wants, they ought
not to disturb their spirits with the overwhelming and soul-dividinging cares
of this life.

Besides, it is necessary for them, as the case now stands, that they should
have a well-furnish'd Library, and be well acquainted with the History of the
Church all along since the world began, especially since the time of Christ to
our days. Nay, there is not one Art or Science in the whole Circle or Compass
of Learning, but some way or other may contribute to the capacitating of a
Minister for his work in the explication and applying of Scripture: They ought
also to be well versed in controversy; that they may be able to oppose
gainsayers, and maintain the Truth. To this purpose speaks a learned and
faithful Dispenser of the Gospel in his days, That they ought to have [ The
skill of Arts, D. Stoughton Preachers Dignity and Duty, p. 87. etc.
of Tongues, the ancient Hebrew, the copious Greek, the elegant Latin:
(Tongues are necessary for Ambassadors, and these Tongues are very necessary
for God's Ambassadors.) All which must be assisted (as the Orb in his motion,
with his Intelligence) or rather informed, as the Body with the Soul in all his
operations) with pithy Logic, persuasive Rhetoric, profound Philosophy, that
I may not name others; every one of which apart, would make a noble Profession
in another; and yet all together make but a small part of the Noble Profession
of Theology; and rather, not a part, but a Porch of this Royal Building: For I
have not yet told you of the Scripture, in which not a word not a jot, not a
tittle, but has its weight, and must not be suffered to perish, the depth of
the Scripture, left it be said by some scoffing Samaritan, The Well is deep,
and thou have never a Bucket. Lastly, The infiniteness of Divinity (there is no
infinity in Philosophy, but here there is) positive, controversal,
Ecclesiastical, experimental, for the chair, for the Schools, for the pulpit,
for the conscience, etc. All which are necessary for him that would be a worthy
Divine.]

5. He must provide for his own Family, or else he will lie under that heavy
doom of the Apostle, To be worse then an Infidel, and deny the Faith: which to
do as a Man, as a Christian, as a Scholar, as a Minister; that is, not in a
sordid, mean, base, and precarious way, lest the Dignity of his Office be
objected to contempt in the eyes of carnal vulgar people, who generally receive
the Truth with the more respect and obedience, from such as having some
moderate and comfortable estates, and are not obliged to unworthy and pedantick
shifts and cringings to every insulting Balak; nor the ensnaring of their
Consciences to satisfy corrupt lusts and humors, by intrenching upon their
glorious Commissions received from Christ: This being certain, that converting
work is the main and principal work of the Ministry, which will be greatly
advanced, when their persons are not obnoxious to scorn by their meanness:
which was found fully true in the person of our blessed Lord, and his holy
Apostles and Disciples.

1 Timothy 3.2.
Lastly, Every Gospel Minister is commanded to maintain Hospitality themselves,
as well as to preach it; Alas! they may indeed teach it to others while their
Lungs and Heart strings crack for want of supply, but are not able (generally)
themselves to go to the cost to practice it in our Nation, through inability.
They are so far from being capable to perform this Duty, that many have not for
their present necessities, much less for their convenience and refreshment.

These things being premised and duly considered, viz. The noble Provision
which God made for his servants under the Law, the Dispensation whereof was far
inferior to this under the Gospel: Though some will say, that the pomp of
those Ordinances consisted much in external splendor; and they say true: but
yet, thence can by no means be inferred, that God requires not the service of
our Bodies and Estates under the Gospel: for its evident, the whole New
Testament teaches the quite contrary.

Besides, the necessary and costly provision of all acquired knowledge, the
enjoined seclusion of themselves from worldly occupations, their required
sustentation of their Families, and provision of a subsistence for them after
their departure. The honor and reputation of the Gospel. The occurring and
obviating the secret designs and machinations of our Popish adversaries (who
like the Spartans of old to the Athenians, did but desire their Orator, and
then) study by all means to ruin Protestant Religion among us, and not finding
any directer course to steer then this, the pulling down of Universities, in
the which provision is made for able Workmen in the Lord's Vineyard, and for
such as manage the controversy against them (as blessed be God hitherto
successfully by Raynolds, Whitaker, Willet, Abbot, Davenant, and many others)
and further, to subvert the stated and fixed maintenance of the Ministers, when
come abroad* whereby the Divel's ayms will be gratified, the enemy overjoyed,
the Gospel ruined, and Ark depart from our Israel. But blessed be the Lord who
has fixed his memorial stone in Eben Ezer; 1 Samuel 7.12.
hitherto has the Lord helped them, and we hope the same mercy will yet
continue to make them against those subtle insinuating enemies a fenced brazen
Wall: Jer. 15.20, 21
They shall fight against them, but they shall not prevail against them; for I
am with you to save you, and to deliver you, says the Lord. And I will del^ver
you out of the hand of the wicked, and I will redeem you out of the hand of the
Terrible. Ps. 85.9. etc.
Surely his salvation shall be nig^ them that fear him, that glory may dwell in
our La^d; That mercy and truth may me together, righteousness and peace may
kiss each other. Truth shall spring out o^ the earth, and righteousness shall
look down from heaven yea the Lord shall give that which is good, and our Land
shall yield her increase: Righteousness shall go before him, and shall set us
in the way of his steps. Though the Kings of the earth set themselves, and the
Rulers take counsel together against the Lord, and against his anointed, yet
has he set his King upon his holy hill of Z^on, and will g^ve him the heathen
for his Inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for his possession.
As for those that break his bands in sunder, and cast away his cords from them:
He that sits in the heavens shall laugh, the Lord shall have them in
derision; He shall speak unto them in his wrath, and vex them in his sore
displeasure: He shall break them with a rod of iron, he shall dash them in
pieces like a Potters vessel. O then, kiss the Sun lest he be angry, and ye
perish from the way, when his wrath is kindled but a little. Blessed are all
they that put their trust in him.

CHAP. X. OF THE Temples Destruction.
2 Chro. 36.12 Ver. 14. Jer. 5.31.
WE are now arrived at the fatal and final period of that first and most
Magnificent Temple; which by reason of the manifold and heinous sins of the
Kings and Nobles, the Priests and Levites, the lying false Prophets, and the
willingly seduced people of the Land of Judah, was consumed with fire, and
utterly laid waste by Nebuzaradan, the Captain of the King of Babylons Guard, 2
King. 25.8 Jer. 52.13. Joseph. contr. Apion l. 1. p. 144.

Strabo Geog. l. 15 p. 687. Calvis. Isag. Chronol. f. p. 79.

Petao-Ration. Tem. p. 2 l. 4. p. 234. edit. Par. 1656.


in the 19th year of the Reign of Nebuchadnezzar his Imperial Master. This
great and potent Emperor, who employed his Captain in that dismal design, is
called Nabuchodonnosor by Josephus out of Berosus, a Chaldean Writer; by Strabo
in the 15th Book of his Geography, Navocodrosor: by Ptolomy in that his most
Golden Canon of the Assyrian Monarchs, Nabocolassar, according to a very
correct Copy of it communicated by Dr. Overal (sometime Dean of Paul's in
London) to Scultetus living at Heydelberg, and since printed by Calvisius,
agreeing with another of the same kind published by Petavius out of the Kings
Library at Paris: The same Canon for substance, though different in some
letters of the names, and the years of their Reigns, is presented to us by
Eusebius in his Chronicle, where this King is called Nabupolasar, or
Nabuchodonosor. But to leave the variation of Authors in the several letters of
his name, I shall proceed to accommodate the time of the ruin of this once
glorious Pile, to the year of the worlds Creation wherein it happened, according
to the best account yet extant. Here, because I am not willing at present to
trouble any with that controversy, I shall follow the calculation of the
elaborate pen of the late famous Primate of Ireland, Vsserii An. Lat. p 1. p.
131
in his Scripture-Annals, accordingly as I have hitherto generally done all
along this work.

First of all, it is to be noted, that the 19th year of Nebuchadnizzar, was
coincident with the 160th year current of the Nabonassaraean Era: for although
his Father Napopollasar, died in the 143 year of that Era, as appears evident
by Ptolomies forecited Canon, and therefore the Sons 19th year must fall in
with the 162 year of Nabonassar; Dan. 1.1. Jer. 25.1.46.2.
yet the Scripture does expressly affirm in one place, that the first year of
Nebuchadnezzar was the third; and in another, that it was the fourth of
Jehoiakims Reign, that is the third ending, or ended completely, and in the
beginning of the fourth. At what time he went upon an expedition against
Pharaoh Necoh at Carchemish, by the River Euphrates, which Josephus affirms out
of Berosus, Joseph. p. 144 Peta. dedoctr. Temp. l. 9. c. 61. p. 143.
to have been done by his Fathers direction being then alive; Although I know
the learned Petavius differs in his judgment: Yet there seems to be truth in
the Primates assertion, if we compare the current and complete years of the
Kings of Judah diligently together with this present Assyrian Canon, and the
Eclypses which confirm it, recited by Ptolomy in his Almagest, which would take
up much room, and not tend much to my purpose at present to ampliate in it.
There are four Eclypses noted by Ptolomy to have been seen at Babylon before
the date of the 160 year of this Era; yea, before Nebuchadnezzar entered upon
Dominion: For the last of the four (which was of the Moon) fell out in the
fifth year of Nabopollasar his Father, and the 127 of the Era, Bulliald.
Astron. Phil. l. 3. c. 7. p. 151.
and all of them are found by calculation from our present Tables, to
correspond very near with the quantities of the eclypsed digits mentioned by
Ptolomy. Hence it is, that Astronomers have esteemed this Epoch to be one of
the firmest Basis of all Chronology.

Now then to apply the time of this sad Catastrophe and dissolution of the
Temple, to the Julian period: For which purpose, we must at present assume some
things (but yet such are now generally agreed on, and demonstrated by able
Authors) 1. That the first year of the true time of our Lords Incarnation, was
co-incident with 4710 year of that happily-invented Julian Period, and also
with the 4000 year of the world. 2. That the first of Nabonassars Era did
correspond with the 3967 year of the forementioned Period. To which if we add
159 complete years of Nabonassar's (for it was in the 160 current) the Sum
brings us to the 4126 year of the Julian Period; in which the 19 year of
Nebuchadnezzar (deduced from his first beginning to reign, while his Father was
yet alive) does completely fall, If further, we shall substract 4126 from 4710.
the year of the Julian Period at our Lords birth; the residue will be 584 years
before Christ's true birth-time, or 588 before the vulgar computation, which is
four years behind the truth, when the Temple was destroyed. Lastly, If we
deduce those 584 years before Christ, from 4000 the year of the world wherein
Christ was born, according to the best computations, the residue points out
3416. for the year of the world wherein the Temple was burnt, according to this
calculation of the times.

In this deplorable year, 2 King. 25.8
on the seventh day of the fifth Month (answering to August the 24 of the
Julian year, being Wednesday) the Great Commander of the King of Babylons Army,
sets fire to the house of the Lord, and the Kings Palace, and to all the houses
of Jerusalem, so that every great man's house was burnt with fire; which dismal
and flaming consumption continued, till it had fully devoured all those
forementioned stately Palaces on the 10 day of the same fifth month, answering
to the 27 of August, being Saturday, Jer. 52.12.
and the Jewish Sabbath, when the City rested in its cinders for the sins of
the Inhabitants, who had so greatly polluted the Sabboths of the most High God.
After this, they brake down all the walls of Jerusalem round about; then they
battered in pieces the two famous pillars of Brass, the ten Bases with their
lavers, together with that admirable Brazen Sea, all to shivers, and carried
away all the brass to Babylon, with the Cauldrons, Candlesticks, Cups,
Snuffers, Spoons, Shovels, Fire-pans, Bowls, and Basins, and all the Vessels of
Gold, Silver and Brass, great and small wherewith they ministered in the house
of the Lord; yea, the treasures of the Temple, and of the King and his Princes
were conveyed to the Triumphal City: So that now the Lamentations of Jeremy the
weeping Prophet, may well suit the subject of this Chapter, seeing the once
delicate Daughter of Zion now sits desolate upon the ground, while her dear
children, Jer 6.2.
hanging up their harps upon the willows by the rivers of Babylon, convert the
songs of the Temple into bitter howlings, Amos 8.3.
and their Sacrifices into the bread of mourners, Hos. 94. Psalm. 137.1. 2 Kin.
21.13 Hos. 2.11. Mal. 2.3.
and swell the rivers they sit by, with floods of tears, and weep unspeakably
while they remember Zion: Alas for Jerusalem, the line of Samaria, and the
plummet of the house of Ahab is now stretched over that beautiful City: God had
now caused all her mirth to cease, her Feast-days, her New Mons, her Sabbaths,
and all her Solemn Feasts: The dung of her Solemnities was now spread upon her
face; nay, the very place where the Temple once stood in full beauty and glory,
was in the days of Jerome, an eye witness, after its last ruin, Hieronym. t. 5.
in Isa. 64. p 293. c. Job 30.31. Isa. 27.9. Lam. 4.1. Mic. 3.12. Lam. 5.18.
turned [ in sterquilininum urbis novae] into the dunghill of the new city,
called Ae^ia. Well may the harps of the Temple be now changed into mourning,
and the organ into the voice of them that weep, when the stones of the Altar
become as vile as chalk stones, that are beaten in sunder; and the stones of
the Sanctuary are poured out in the top of every street, and the fine gold
thereof become dim, and the precious Sons of Zion esteemed as earthen pitchers:
Zion it self is plowed like a field, Jerusalem laid on heaps, and the Mountain
of the House, as the high places of the Forest, and the Foxes walk upon that
mountain without control.

Jer. 7.12.
Whence we learn, That as God did to Shiloh, so he dealt with his House at
Jerusalem, turning an Eden into a Desert; a pleasant Land into an howling
Wilderness, causing stately Palaces to become a throne for briars and nettles
to triumph in, Isa. 13.21.34.14, 15.
and their sad ruinous heaps, to be dens of Dragons; for Iim and Ohim, and the
wild Satyrs to dance their measures, for the wickedness of them that dwelt
therein: Whereby let us be warned (if we act over their sins) lest God act over
us their judgments. If we shall abuse such places (which our devout
forefathers have erected) by idolatry and Superstition, to the high
provocation of the pure eyes of Gods glory to jealousy against us; certainly
he will proceed yet further, as he has in some measure begun in his wrath,
Isa. 64.11.
to make even our Jerusalem become a desolation, and our beautiful houses,
wherein we and our Fathers have praised him, to be burnt with fire, and all our
pleasant things to be laid waste. It Is not outward glittering pomp that God
looks at: The hour is now come, that neither in the Mountain of Samaria, John 4.
nor at Jerusalem, will the Father be worshipped; but those that now present
their homage to him, must perform it in Spirit and in truth: For the Salvation
of Israel has long since appeared from Zion, Psalm. 14.7.
and has abrogated all the ancient Ceremonies, and God has revealed himself
in a spiritual way to such as have waited for the Consolation of Israel: Luke
2.25.
They must now expect a Temple (not made with hands) coming down from God out
of Heaven, which shall need no Golden Candlestick to enlighten it, Rev. 21.23.
no Sun or Moon to shine into it: But the Glory of God and of the Lamb shall be
the light thereof, most radiantly beautiful is the place where his Honor
dwells: From out of whose Throne rivers of Water of Life, Rev. 22.1.
clear as Crystal shall, shall proceed, for the true Worshippers that shall
reign with him for ever to bathe themselves in, being streams of inexpressible
pleasure, that flow at his right hand for evermore.

The Epilogue.
HAving now finished the main Design through the merciful conduct of
Providence; I might here add a discourse about the Visionary Temple, described
by the Prophet Ezekiel exhibited to him in a Divine ecstasy of spirit, during
the Babylonian captivity, and take notice out of the most approved Writers, how
far the building of Zorobabel did square with it, Sherringham Jom p. 102.
and wherein it dissented; and therein speak of the five memorable things
wherein it fell short of the glory of Solomon's Temple, viz. The Ark of the
Propitiatory, the Cherubims, and the fire descending from heaven, as at the
Dedication in Solomon's days, The Oil of Unction, in the room thereof others
place the presence of the holy Spirit, speaking to the Prophets; and the answer
by Urim and Thummim. I know that the Pseudo-Hegesippus relates concerning
Pompey, Hegesip. l: 1. c. 17. p. 42. etc. Edit. Colon. 1575.
that when entering this second Temple, he saw therein among other things, the
Tables of the Testament, and the Cherubims standing upon the Mercy-seat. But
alas, this story is built upon a very sandy foundation; viz. that passage in
the Author of the Macchabees, that the Prophet Jeremiah should take with him
the Tabernacle, the Ark, and the Altar of Incense, and hide them in a Cave in
Mount Horeb, (...). 2 Macchab. 2.7.
Until the time that God shall gather together the congregation of his people,
and be merciful to them. Against which Jewish fiction, Pet. Galat. de Arcan.
Cathol. Relig. l. 4. c 9. p. 211 Edit. Franc. 1612.
some of their own Rabbis have plainly declared, in that they held the five
aforementioned things to be utterly wanting in the second Temple, as is
attested out of their writings by Galatinus. Nay Josephus, an Author to be
brought against the Jews without exception, speaks plainly of it in his time,
(...), treating of that part of the Temple called the Oracle, and by him in
that place (...), the innermost part of the house says it had nothing at all
within it. Yet there were many excellent and costly ornaments wherewith it was
beautified in a mavelous manner: As particularly it is related, Jos. de Bell.
Judaic sec. Gr. l. 5. c. 14. secund. Lat. Ruffin. l. 6. c. 6. p. 918. A. 3 Esd.
8.14.
That Artaxerxes the Persian King gave all the gold and sllver which was found
in Babylon to it: A strange story, if creditable, but it is found in an
Apocryphal Writer; (...), etc. I might mention what gifts Alexander the great,
Ptolomy Philadelphus, his son Evergetes did bestow upon that Temple, or what
was done by Antiochus the great, or his son Seleucus Philopater, by Simon the
son of Ouias. I might treat of the restoration of that Temple by Judas
Macchabeus, the valiant Captain of the Jews, after the profanation of it by
Antiochus Epiphanes, or of what Helena the Queen of Adiabene did contribute:
Concerning all which things, the Authors of the Apocrypha, and Josephus in many
places speak amply, with high commendations: I might lastly, if I would follow
Josephus, tell great stories of the building of a Temple from the very
foundations by K. Herod in the space of eight years, But yet says one, he gives
in some couchant expressions, whence we may gather, that he did not build all
the body of the covered Temple anew, but perhaps raised it higher, adorned and
beautified it with many rare Porches, and other external buildings. As to this
point, at present I shall enter no contest, though to me it seems very evident
from cap. ult. Of his 15. book, that Josephus does directly assert it from
these words, (...). That taking away the foundations, he did substitute others
in their room, upon which he raised the Temple] and then in the following
words, plainly declares both the length and height of it, (...) for its length
100 cubits, and in height 20 more, that is above 100, being 120. in all. But
how this will stand with the assertion of the Prophet Haggai, Hag. 2.9.
that the glory of this latter house (speaking of Zorobabel's Temple) shall be
greater then the former: Why? Because in that house the Lord promised to g^ve
peace, which is plainly spoken of Christ, Luke 2.14. Hieron. in Hagg. 2. Vol.
6. p. 279.
who brought peace upon earth, especially seeing the word in the Hebrew Text is
(...) is by the 70. translated (...), by Paguine, and the Vulgar Latin as we
have it, and the ancienter of Jerome himself in his own works set forth more
purely; it is turned by Novissima, the last House; Hag. 2.7. Mal. 3.1.
and so the word will bear it. But not to lean upon any versions; the seventh
verse speaks plainly, that therein the glory of that House should consist and
excel that other of Solomon's; because the desire of all Nations should come
and fill that very House with glory; which by the Jews themselves is
interpreted of the Messiah: This as it is a most strong Argument against the
Jews, to prove that the true Messiah is long since come because that Temple is
long since ruined; so it seems also to evince, that Zorobabels Temple should
not be pulled down before the coming of Christ: for how could he come into that
very Temple, if it were plucked up by the very foundations, as to its self, and
all its Buildings, and another more pompous built by Herod, before Christ
appeared in the flesh? Besides, the Jews (who had little reason to malign the
glory of Herod, Joh. 2.20.
as a great Benefactor to, and adorner of their land with sumptuous Buildings)
do plainly reply to our Lord concerning the Temple then extant in his days,
that it was 46. years in Building, whereas Herod's by the testimony of Josephus
was but 8. Casaubon in Baron. execr. 13. number. 38. p. 203.
This I leave to be solved by others, as Tarnovius and Chemnitius cited by him,
who think that the same Temple stood in its entire body, but sumptuously
repaired and adorned by Herod with great magnificence. Insomuch that Josephus,
and the Jewish Author of the Cod^^ Middoth, do seem to ascribe it wholly to K.
Herod. So likewise Tacitus in the fifth book of his Histories, Tarnov. in Joh.
p. 223.
cited by L. Empereur, seems to manifest, That the Temple which Pompey invaded,
and Titus destroyed were the same: Although that learned Author in his Comment
on Middoth thinks that Herod did build one anew from the very foundations:
Tacit. l. 5. Hist p. 626. Edit. Lugd. Bat. 1640.
but because it was done with the free consent of the Jews (to whom he makes an
Oration extant in Josephus) and for as much as the old materials were used in
the frame of the work, they still counted it one and the same Temple with the
former of Zorobabels; and with him the learned Primate agrees. Usser. Anna.
part. 2. Lat. p. 516.
Though the former speaks in conclusion somewhat dubiously in these words [ Non
dest tuuntur argumentis, qui asserunt Templum ab Herod non de integro
ex^ructum, sed immutatum and auctum, veteri conserva^o, fuisse] They want not
arguments, who do assert the Temple not to have been wholly built anew by
Herod, L'Empereur praefat. in Middoth, p. 20.
but changed and augmented, the old being conserved. But leaving this to the
fuller disquisition of others, we are sure that the last Temple (by who ever it
was built) was destroyed by the Roman Army of Titus, who was that Prince
prophesied of by Daniel, that should come and destroy the City, and the
Sanctuary, the end whereof should be with a flood, and unto the end of the War
desolations were determined; Dan. 9.26.
Sacrifice and Oblation was then utterly to cease, when the over-spreading of
abominations should make all desolate, v. 27.
even till the consummation, and that which was determined should be poured
upon the desolate: when the ships of Chittim should afflict Eber, Number. 24.24.
and he should perish for ever; when God brought a Nation from far, Deuteronomy.
28.49. v. 53. Greg. Thol. Hist. Mir b. Vol. 2. p. 167 ex Babylon Talmud. Ezekiel.
11.23.
from the end of the Earth, as the Eagle flies, (even under the Banners of the
Roman Eagle) a Nation whose Tongue they knew not, and of a fierce countenance,
so that they should eat the fruit of their own bodies, by reason of that strait
siege wherewith they should be girt in all their gates. A Prophecy most fully
accomplished in the days of Jerusalems final ruin, as is woefully and sadly
related by Hegesippus and Josephus, then the ten miracles finally ceased, such
as the Jews usually relate concerning their Temple. Then the glory of the Lord
indeed departed fully from the Temple, and stood upon Mount Olivet on the East
side of the City, the place from whence Christ our Lord ascended up into
heaven: to show to us, that upon Christ's Ascension, that all the glory of an
external Temple was then consummated and fully ended.

Of these and the like matters I might have enlarged copiously; But when I
reflect upon the Title of this Treatise, which leads me to speak only of the
Temple of Solomon, that being finished [ manum de Tabula] my poor labors must
also receive their period, which I humbly commit to the blessing of God, whose
gracious hand has enlarged my life through his abundant mercy to arrive at
length to the conclusion of this present work, for which, with all adoration of
the Divine Majesty, I give most humble and hearty thanks to his holy name, and
freely submit my self, and all my endeavors, to the judgment of pious,
learned, candid, and ingenious breasts.

Only for a peroration of the whole work, give me leave to observe the
admirable fulfilling of the Prophecy of our blessed Lord concerning the
irreparable ruin of the last Temple: which although Julian the Apostate
Emperor endeavored with all his might to enervate and invalidate; yet his
design by the most just judgment of God, could never take effect. Two
witnesses whereof I shall allege, the one of a heathen, the other of an
Ecclesiastical Writer.

The former, because precedent in time, I shall name first, and it is of
Ammianus Marcellinus, Ammian. Marcel. l. 23 ad initium, p. 429. Edit. Lug. Bat.
1632,
who relates this story of Julian in these words [ Ambitiosum quondam apud
Hierosolymam Templum quod post multa and interneciva certamina, obsidente
Vespasiano, posteaque Tito aegre est expugnatum, instaurare sumtibus cogitabat
immodicis, negotiumque maturamdam Alypio dederat Antiochensi, qui olim
Britannias curaverat pro praefectis. Cum itaque rei idem fortiter instaret
Alypius, juvaretque Provincia Rector, metuendi globi flammarum prope fundamenta
crebris assultibus erumpentes, ficere locum exustis aliquoties operantibus
inaccessum: hocque modo elemento destinatius repellente cessarit incoeptum.] He
designed with excessive costs and charges to restore the sometime most
magnificent Temple at Jerusalem. which after many fatal skirmishes in the siege
of Vespasian, and afterward of Titus, was with great difficulty won by
assault. This business he had committed to be hastened by Alypius of Antioch,
who had formerly ruled Britain in the room of the Praefects. When as then
Alypius did strenuously set himself to the work, being assisted by the Ruler of
the Province, fearful balls of fire breaking out near the foundations with
frequent assaults rendered the place unapproachable, the workmen being several
of them consumed; and in this manner the enterprise ceased through the resolute
opposition of that element.] So much from him. Niceph. Call. list. Eccles. Hist.
l. 10. c. 32. p. 74. vol. 2. Paris. 1630.


The other testimony of Nicephorus Callistus, is extant in chap. 32. and 33. of
his Ecclesiastical History, which for the Press sake I shall not transcribe in
Greek, but relate the principal things in English. These are his words.

The Jews having got together as many as were skilful in the art of Building,
and prepared materials for the structure, and fully cleansed the place, they
provided spades made of silver, their charges being allowed out of the public
stock. With such earnestness and alacrity did they labor in the work, that the
very women did carry away the rubbish in their laps, and whatsoever Jewels or
other precious ornaments they had; they expended upon that business, etc. and
when as they had dug up the remainders of the old building from the lowest
foundations and had cleared the ground, Luke 21.
so that now there was not a stone remaining upon a stone, according to the
prophecy. The next day coming to the place to lay the first foundation, they
say there was a great earthquake, insomuch that the stones were cast out of the
foundation, so that many of the Jews were slain, who either came to see the
work, or had the oversight of the Structure. The public buildings also which
were nearest the Temple were loosned, and falling down with great force, proved
the Sepulchers of those that were in them: Some that attempted to fly away,
were found half dead; some lost their legs, hands, and other members, according
as the violence of that sudden accident seized upon them, The Earthquake was
scarce over, but those that remained fell upon the work again, Cap, 33.
etc. But when the second time they attempted it, some fire violently issued
out of the foundations, and [other] fire fell down impetuously from Heaven, and
consumed more then before. There is (he says) some variations among Authors of
the punctual time and manner of this accident of fire, but the main of the
truth is without doubt. Moreover, the fire which came down from Heaven consumed
to ashes the hammers, graving tools, saws, hatchets, axes, and all the other
instruments which the Workmen had brought for their service, continuing a whole
day together, etc, when Cyril, who was at that time Bishop of Jerusalem, saw
these things: He considered in his mind the word of the Prophet Daniel, to
which Christ also had set his seal in the holy Gospel: He told them all, that
now was the time that the Oracle of our Savior had its accomplishment; which
said, That a stone should not remain upon a stone in the Temple. And when he
had spoken this, a sore earthquake assailed the foundations, and cast out all
the remaining stones, and dispersed them. Upon this, there arose a fearful
storm, and whirled into the air many thousand bushels of lime and plaster, and
sudden flames of fire flashing from beneath, burnt up in a moment an
innumerable company of people, that were as yet either laboring in the work,
or that came to behold it. Thus did Julian fulfill Christ's predictions
concerning Jerusalem, which he designed to have made void, etc. These prodigies
are sufficient to prove the truth of the Oracle: But what shall be now
declared, being very wonderful, will further confirm it, which I shall report,
as I have found in the Archives, and it is thus: When the foundations were a
laying, as I have said, there was a stone among the rest, to which the bottom
of the foundation was fastened, that slipped from its place, and discovered the
mouth of a cave which had been cut in the rock. Now when they could not see to
the bottom by reason of its depth; the Overseers of the building being desirous
to have certain knowledge of the place, tied a long rope to one of the
Laborers, and let him down: He being come to the bottom, found water in it,
that took him up to the mid-ancles, and searching every part of that hollow
place, he found it to be four square, as far as he could conjecture by feeling.
Then returning toward the mouth of it, he hit upon a certain little pillar, not
much higher then the water, and lighting with his hand upon it, found a book
lying there wrapped up in a piece of thin and clean linen. Having taken it
into his hands, he signified by the rope that they should draw him up. When he
was pulled up, he shows the book, which struck them with admiration, especially
seeming so fresh and untoucht as it did, being found in so dark and obscure a
hole. The Book being unfolded, John 1.1.
did amaze not only the Jews, but the Grecians also, holding forth even at the
beginning of it in great Letters [ In the beginning was the Word, and the Word
was with God, and the Word was God.] To speak plainly, that Scripture did
manifestly contain the whole Gospel, which the Divine tongue of the
Virgin-Disciple had declared. This, together with the other miracles, which at
that time were proclaimed from Heaven, did demonstrate, that not any word of
our Lord should fall to the ground, Socr. Eccles. hist l. 3. c. 17. Theod. l.
4. c. 20. Sozomen. l. 5 c. 21.
which had foretold the utter desolation both of City and Temple.

For the truth of this story, I am not bound to undertake: yet this I may
safely say. that the main substance thereof concerning the miraculous fire,
causing the work to cease is true, being attested by grave and sober Authors
that lived not far from the times wherein it was acted.

One having declared briefly the sum of the story, Chrysostom. ser 2. contr. Jud p.
334. vol. 6. edit. Savil.
goes on thus, (...) And now, says he, if you come to Jerusalem, you will see
the foundations naked and bare; and if you ask the reason, you shall hear none
but this story, and of this matter we are all witnesses, A.C. vulg. 363.
for these things happened in our own age, not very long since.

But Julian that great and subtle enemy of the Christians, presently upon this
went on his expedition against the Persians, and there felt the direful weight
of Gods judgments upon him for those and other his enormous crimes acted
against the Truth. Happy were it for the Jews, could they but discern the
strong and mavelous actings of Providence against them, when designing the re
edification of the Temple, (...), P. 337. ibid.
says the former Author in his third Oration against them: For once, twice,
and thrice, under Hadrian, Constantine, and Julian they attempted it, but were
beaten off the two former times by the Roman Soldiers, the last time, by fire
flashing from the foundations. They have formerly talked of a third Temple
under the Messiah. Their discourses are accomplished at this day, but in a
spiritual way, which they poor souls cannot yet discern, while the vail of
Moses is upon their hearts. It Is the Temple of the Church wherein Christ
delights to walk: Let us who upon their casting away, were reconciled to God,
Pray for their resurrection from the dead, that so the blindeness which is
happened unto Israel, Romans 11.15. Verse. 25:
until the fullness of the Gentiles be come in, may be visited with the
Dayspring from on high, that even to them the Deliverer may come out of Zion,
Verse. 26. Hos. 3.4, 5.
to turn away ungodliness from Jacob; that they who have continued many days
without a King, and without a Prince, and without Sacrifice, etc. may seek the
Lord their God, and David their King, and fear the Lord and his goodness in the
latter days: Rev. 21.1.
That so both Jew and Gentile having one Shepherd, and one fold, may worship
him in the New Jerusalem, that comes down from above, 3 Pet. 3.13.
wherein dwells righteousness, when the New Heavens and the New Earth shall
be manifest, where there is no Temple to be seen: Rev. 21, 22.
For the Lord Almighty and the Lamb are the Temple of it.

Aristot. Rhet. l. 1. c. 9. (...).


FINIS.
The Index. An Alphabetical Index of the chief Matters handled in the foregoing
Treatise.
A.
AAron's Rod. 61 What it noted. 264 etc.
Accursed, are dedicated things. 108 Adamant, a precious Stone in the
Breast Plate. 302 Adarconim, what Coin. 2 and 4 Aethiophians of Africa
mistaken for those of Arabia. 154 241 Agate a precious Stone in the
Breast Plate. 303 Alkerm^s of what made. 294 Almond Rod, what. 265 Almug-Trees.
52 Altar, its name whence. 282 Altar of Brass. 70 What it noted. 281
Altar of incense. 62. 64 What it noted. 273 Altar to the unknown God. 247
America, discovered of old. 224 Amethyst, a precious Stone in the Breast Plate.
304 Ammoniack-Gumme. 270 Angels noted by Cherubins. 259 Their Communion with
Saints. 230
Annual Festivals. 112 Apollo whence derived by Plutarch. 251 Arabia, famous
for frankincense. 271 Araunah's threshing flower, The place of the Temple. 2.
15. 184 What it cost. 3
Arc of the Covenant. 59 Mysteries thereof. 254 Removals from place to place.
252 What wood it was made of. 253
(...), in Josephus, whence derived, and what measure. 109 Asuppim. Gates,
where. 52. 102
B.
BAlsame. 317 Bases of the 10 Lavers. 79 Bath, what quantity. 109 etc.
Bdellium, what. 261 Beasts 4 (in the Revelations. 5.) are Angels. 258 and 259
Bells on the Robe of the Ephod, 88 What they signified. 293
Beryll, a precious Stone in the Breast Plate. 305 Birth of Christ in
September. 323 Bishops and Elders the same. 289 Blew in the Ephod, what 294
Blindness, what Spiritually. 286 Blood, of the eating thereof. 236 Bonnets of
the Priests. 88. 313 Book of the Law. 259 Bowls of the Candlestick. 277 Branch
in Scripture for Christ. 264 Branches of the Golden Candlestick. 277 Brazen
Pillars. 68 Scaffold. 71 Sea. 73. 74 What it denoted. 283
Bread on the Golden Tables. 275 Breast Plate of Judgment. 89 Imitated by
Heathens. 310 What it denoted. 299 The Stones in it. 307
Breeches of the Priests. 88 What they noted. 289. 294
Bullocks offered. 114 Burial in Churches, when came up. 246 Burying places of
old, without the Walls of Cities. 245 Burning of Sacrifices, what it noted. 114
Burnt-offerings. 114 -- Spiritualized. 336 338 (...), whence. 295 (...),
whence. 284
C.
CAkes 1^ on the Golden-Table. 276 Cakes Oyled for the meat offerings. 123
Calamus Aromaticus, an ingredient of the Ointment. 317 Candlesticks of Gold. 66
Their fashion. 278
-- What they noted. 277. 279 Carbuncle a precious Stone in the Breast-late.
301 Cassia-lignea, in the Ointment. 317 Causey to the King's House. 52 Cedar,
its excellency. 218 Of what Use. 173 Lepers purified with it. 121
Censer of Gold. 61. 63. 269 Ceremonies of Old, were Types of Gospel-things.
176 Chambers annexed to the Temple. 30 In the Courts. 57 what they note. 242
Chemosh the God of Ammon, whence. 152 Cherubins two upon, and two near, the
mercy-seat. 60 What they noted. 257 Of what shape. 256 On the inside walls of
the Temple. 58 What they signified. 229
Chief-Priests. 91 Christ mediates like a Prince. 314 1 Chronicles. 6.10. opened.
146 Cinnamon, an ingredient of the Ointment. 317 Cities of the Priests and
Levites. 128 Their Fashion. 130
Cloven tongues sitting on the Apostles. 187 Coats for the Priests. 88 What
they signified. 290
Color varied by light. 310 Compass of the outward Court. 45 Cornerstone,
Christ. 195. 201 Covers of Gold, for the Incense-Cup. 274 For the Shewbread.
274
Courses 24 of Priests. 92 Of Singers, etc. 98
Courts of the Temple. 35 etc. What they signified. 238
Crassus his going into the Temple, boded his ruin. 248 Crook-backt, perverse.
287 Crown of Gold on the Highpriests head. 90. 313 What it signified. 314 Of
the King of Amalek, what it weighed. 5
Cubical form of the Oracle, what, 232 Cubit, of what Length. 16 Cymbals,
Instruments of music in the Temple. 96
D.
David's gifts and preparations for the Temple. 3 Daily service. 111
Spiritua^ized. 320
Dedicated gifts to the Temple. 3 Dedication-Solemnity. 136 Destruction of the
Temple. 364 Diamond a precious Stone in the Breast Plate. 302 Dishes of Gold
for the Shewbread. 274 Doors of the Oracle what it noted. 233 Of the
Sanctuary. 22 What it signified. 315
Dove, what it noted. 325 Drams, Hebrew Coins, how much. 2 Drink Offerings.
126 What they noted. 341
Dwarf, what spiritually. 287 Dyal of Ahaz. 160
E.
EArth's roundnesse hinted in Scripture. 225 And known to the Ancients 225
Easter, its true time mistaken. 333. 334 Elders and Bishops, the same in
Scripture. 289 Elders 24 in the Revelations, reflect upon the 24 courses of
Levites. 258 Eleuthero-polis a City where placed. 13 Emerald, a precious Stone
in the Breast Plate. 301 Entelechia, what? 170 Ephah, what quantity. 109 Ephod,
and what it noted. 89. 294 Exodus 34.30. vindicated from the Vulgar translation.
313 Expiation-day, the 10th of the 7th month, and is Sacrifices spiritualized.
112. 332. 339. Eye blemishes, what spiritually. 287 Ez^k. 20.25. opened. 177 --
28. 13. opened. 309 Ezekiels Visionary Temple. 49. 241
F.
FAces of the Cherubims, what they noted. 258 Fat is the Lords. 121. 336 Feasts
of the first fruits. 112. 332 Seventh month. 112 Temple in general. 111. etc.
Fire always burning on the Altar. 116 It must be from Heaven. 282 Strange,
what? 337 Noted the Spirit. 338 In the bowels of the Earth. 204
Firr-Tree. 218 First fruits. 112. 332 Fishes, why not offered. 114 Floor of
the Oracle. 27 Sanctuary. 23 And what it noted. 231
Flowers of the golden Candlestick. 278 Foot-broken, what spiritually. 286 Foot
English of what quantities 45 Greek of what quantities 45 Roman of what
quantities 45
Foundation of the Temple. 19 is Christ spiritually. 194
Foundations, how applied to Apostles. 202. 214 Frankincense. 270 in
Meat Offerings. 123. 125 its difference from Incense. 349 where it grew. 271
Free-will-offerings. 114. 121
G.
GAlbanum, a precious Gum. 270 Gate principal of the Temple, why on the
East Side. 242 Gates of the Inward Court. 53. 243 Outward Court. 51. 101 what
they noted. 244
Genealogists were Levites. 106 Genealogy of the Highpriests 100 Levites 100
Porters 102
Gerah a Coin, how much. 2 Gibeon, its situation. 252 Girdle of the Ephod. 89.
298 Priests. 88 what it signified, 291 with its uses. 292
Girdles used for purses of old. Ibid. Glass, how ancient. 23 has direct
pores. 230
Goats offered. 116 what they noted. 325
God to have no Image, say some Heathens. 249 God's part in the
Peace Offerings. 122 Gold, its proportion to Silver. 3. 228 of Ophir, whence,
224 what it signifies. 226
Golden Censer. 61. 63 Gospel-Substances typed by the ancient Ceremonies. 176
Graces of the Church set out by the inside Ornaments of the Sanctuary. 221,
etc. Gratulatory Sacrifices. 334 Gums precious for the Incense. 269
H.
HAnd-broken, what spiritually. 286 Harps. 96 Heave-Offerings. 122. 123 Heifer,
what it noted. 325 Heifer burnt. 117, 118 High Priest. 91 Did not go into the
Holy of Holies. with his rich attire. 314 His Election. 285 Their several
names under the first Temple. 144 Their Vestments. 88 Under the Gospel, Christ.
289
Hin, of what quantity. 109 Homer, of what quantity. Ibid. Honey forbid in
Sacrifice. 349 Horns of the Altar, what noted. 282. 344 Hyssop, how used in the
Lepers purgation. 121. 173
I.
JAsper, a precious stone on the Breast Plate. 306 Idolatry to kneel before a
memorative Image. 251 Jealousy-Offering. 123 (...) in Plutarch, from Ehejeh.
209 Jericho. its situation. 252 Jerusalem's position. 9 Images, none in the
Temple by the attestation of Heathens. 247 Incense Altar of Gold. 62. 64 at
Sacrifices. 114 for the Sanctuary, made of four Ing^edients. 269 Its difference
from Frankincense. 349 It noted prayer. 273 Not to be now used in worship. 350
Inner Court. 48 Inscriptions on Temples. 209 Jesephus reconciled to the
Rabbis. 47 Isaiah 36.22. explained. 150 Itch, what spiritually. 288 Judges,
were Levites. 105
K.
Kings 1.7, 39. explained. 76 Kings house nigh the Temple, what it noted. 243
Kings of Judah, during the Temple, a short Chronicle. 152. etc. Kings pillar in
the Temple. 72 Kiriath-Jearim where situated. 252 Knops of the Golden
Candlestick. 278 Korban, what. 334
L.
LAmb, signified Christ. 320. 325 Lambs, two sacrificed daily. 111 Lamps
burning continually. 277 dressed every day. 111. 278 for the Golden Candlestick.
278
Lamenesse, what spiritually. 286 Lavers ten. 79. 284 Lawyers, were Levites.
106 Leaven forbidden. 349 Leper cleansed. 117. 121 Levites. 94 their Revenues.
133 whom they noted. 319
(...). Frankincense 270 Light, for Doctrine. 279 Ligure, a precious stone in
the Breast Plate. 303 Lillies or Tulips. 223 Linen, why used by Priests. 289.
291. 295 Living stone, Christ. 203 Log, what quantity. 109
M.
MAintenance of a Gospel Ministry, 277. lin. 3. 354. etc. Male for a
Burnt-Offering. 114 Maneh, of what quantity and value. 2 Manna, The derivation
of its name. What it signified. Why termed Hidden.
260 Manna-Pot of Gold. 61. 259, 260 Mark 9.49. opened. 348 Math. 23.35.
opened. 156 Measures of the Hebrews. 109 Meat Offerings. 122 what they noted.
347
Men sacrificed by the Heathens. 323 Mercy-Seat of beaten Gold, 60 what it
signified. 255
Mincha, what. 334 Ministers not to exercise other Callings. 359 Ministry a
distinct function, and to endure to the end of the World. 190. 216. 266, 267,
268. 318 Mitre of the High Priest. 90. 313 Mitres of Bishops, why horned. Ibid.
Monthly Services. 111 Moriah mountain. 15 what it signified. 182 whence
derived. Ibid.
Moses mentioned in Lucian. 250 Posterity, the Treasurers of the Temple. 103.
164
Mountain of the Lord's House. 182 Musicians of the Temple. 98 Music at
Sacrifice. 111. 351, etc. Instrumental, not to continue in worship. 351
Myrrh. 269 an Ingredient of Holy Ointment. 317
Mysteries of the Temple. 106
N.
NAbonassar's Era useful in Scripture Chronology. 364, etc. Nazarites
Offerings. 115 Nethinims. 107. 319 New Mood Festivals 111 Nose flat, what
spiritually. 286 Numb. 17.8. opened. 265 Numb. 35.5. explained. 131
O.
OBed Edom and his Sons, Porters. 101, 102. 104 Odours noted prayers. 261
Offices of Christ set out of old. 264 Ointment of the Temple how compounded 268
Olibanum in shops is the Ancients Frankincense. 272 Olive Tree, its
Excellencies. 219. 223 Significations. 217. 233
Omer, what quantity. 109 Onycha, what. 269 Onyx-stones on the Ephod. 297
Onyx-stone on the Breast Plate. 306 Open-flowers, Lillies. 223 Ophir in East
India. 226 is Tapr^bane. 236 Gold 224. 229
Oracle. 25 what it noted. 232 why at the West End of the Temple. 174. 208
Oracles of the Heathens silenced. 198 Oxen under the Brazen Sea, what they
noted. 284 Oil for the Lamps. 277 Vessels. 278 What it noted. 284

P.
PAll of Metropolitan's, whence. 294 Palm Tree, what it might denote. 219.
229. 234 Palme-Trees carved on the Walls. 59 Parbar-Gate. 53. 102
Partition Wall. 25 What it noted. 241
Passover. 112. 321 Pattern of the Temple given to Solomon. 3 Pavements of the
Courts. 54 Paul the Apostle described in Lucian. 249 Peace Offerings, and what
they noted. 121. 346 Pentecost. 332 People's part in the peace offering. 122
Piety the best policy. 243 Pigeons offered. 114 Pillar of the King. 72 Pillars
of brass;. 68 For what Use. 280
Place where the Temple built, what it denoted. 182 Pomegranates on the Robe of
the Ephod. 88 What they noted. 293
Pomegranates, their nature. 203 Porch of Solomon. 244 The Temple. 21 Why open.
200 What it denoted. 208
Porches round about the Courts. 55 What they signified. 244
Porters of the Temple in 24 courses. 101 111, 320 Pot of Manna. 61. 259. 260
Precious Stones what they noted. 229 Priest, as to its Original, signifies an
Elder. 289 Used as a Taunt to Godly Ministers. 289
Priests of the Temple. 92 Court. 48. 50 Portion in offerings. 116. 118. 120
122 What it noted. 346 Vestments. 88
Propitiatory, or Golden mercy-seat, what. 255 Propitiatory Sacrifices. 334
Psalms or Songs of degrees where Sung. 53. 97 Psalteries, what Instruments. 96
Ptolomie's Canon of the Assyrian Kings very useful. 364 Purple of the Ephod.
295
Q.
QUantity of the Courts. 44 Oracle. 27

R.
RAinbow, its nature. 172 Recorders were Levites. 106 Red Cow or Heifer. 116.
117. 118 Revel. 5.11. explained. 258 Revenues of the Temple. 133 Right hand,
the South. 75 Rivers, how generated according to some. 204 Robe of the Ephod.
88 What it signified. 292. 296
Rock-water following the Israelites in the wilderness. 204 Rod of Aaron. 61
What it noted. 264
Roof of the Oracle. 28 Sanctuary. 24 What it noted. 231

S.
SAbbath-Services. 111 Sacrifices continue till Christ, and no longer. 333
Sacrificing at the consecration of Priests. 318 Spiritualized. 282. 325. 332.
335. 352
Saints are spiritual Priests. 216 Salt in meat offerings. 123. 126 Sacrifices.
114 And what it noted. 347
Samuel a Benefactor to the Temple. 1 Sanctuary, and what it noted. 22. 212
Sapphire, a precious Stone in the Breast Plate. 301 Sardius, a precious Stone
in the Breast Plate. 299 Saxon Kings gave Ministers maintenance. 357 (...) not
always signifies circular. 40. 131 Scab, what spiritually. 283 Scaffold of
Brass. 71 Scapegoat, what it noted. 344 Scarlet-colour. 295 Scarlet thread,
how used in the Leper's case. 121 Scribes were Levites. 106 Scurvy, what
spiritually. 283 Sea of Brass. 73. 74 Glass. 284
Services of the Temple in general. 320 Annual 111, 112. 321. Daily 111, 112.
321. Monthly 111, 112. 321. Weekly 111, 112. 321.
Seven, a number much used. 234. 279 Shadows, their nature. 174, 175. 177
Shaft of the Golden Candlestick. 277 Shallecheth-Gate. 102 Sheep offered. 116
Shekel, of what value. 2 Shewbread. 124 Table. 65 Vessels. 274, etc. What it
noted. 275
Shiloah fountain. 333 Shiloh, where situated. 252 Shishak King of Egypt, who
153 Shittim-wood. 253, etc. Side-chambers described. 29 What they noted. 237
Singers of the Temple. 95. 152 Sin Offerings. 116 spiritualized. 339
Smaragd, a precious Stone in the Breast Plate. 301 Solomon his praeparations.
6 Type of Christ. 185
Solomon's Porch. 244 Soul, what it is. 170 Sparrows offered. 116. 121 Spoons
for Incense. 274 Stacte, what. 269 Stadium of the Greeks and Romans equal. 42.
44 Statues, none ought to be made of God, confessed by some Heathens. 250
Stature of man probably not decreased. 17 Statutes, what they note. 177 Steps
to the Porch and Temple, what they noted. 210 Stones in the Breast Plate. 311
Revelations, what tribes they noted. 308
Stones in the Temple, noted Saints. 214 How generated and increased. 203
Strange fire, what. 282 Subterraneous fire. 204 Sum of money prepared for the
Temple. 6
T.
Tabernacle-Feast. 112. 332 Tables of Show bread. 65 Stone. 50
Talent Hebr. its value. 2 Temple, dedicated, 136 Destroyed. 364 Its duration,
140 Holiness, what: 207 Length and Measures, 31, etc. Mysteries. 166 Noted
Christ's body. 188 Noted Church of Christ. 192 Noted Each Saint. 192 Of
Ezekiel, only visionary. 49. 241 Its State under Kings. 152 Why on a Mountain.
183
Tenth-deal of flower, what quantity. 109 Thank-Offerings. 121, etc. Throne of
God visionary, in the first of Ezekiel. 257 Time of the Temple's erection, what
it noted. 181 Tithes, neither Jewish nor Popish in their original constitution.
356, 357 Tools noise not heard in the Temple's building. 187 Topaz, a precious
stone in the Breast Plate. 300 Treasurers of the Temple. 103 Treasures of the
dedicate things, and their difference from those of the House of the Lord, so
called. 103 Trees high and unfruitful, wicked men. 186 fruitful noted Saints.
221
Trespasse-Offering, wherein it differed from the Sin-Offering. 119 What it
denoted spiritually. 346
Tribes of Israel, the order of their names much varied in Scripture. 307, etc.
Trinity mentioned in Lucian. 250 Tropical year its quantity. 334 Turtles
offered. 114. 325 Type its derivation, 168 Definition 168 Explication in
general. 170
Types, many may be of the same thing. 175. 188 What rules to be explained by.
178

V.
VAil of the Temple. 28 What it noted. 234 What made of. 235
Vestments of Highpriests. 88 Priests. 88
Vision of a glorious appearance. 257 Unction. 284 Spiritualized. 318. 319
Unguis odoratus, an ingredient of Temple-Incense. 270 Vowed offerings. 115.
121 Urim and Thummim. 89 What they signified. 311
Uzzah's error about the Ark explained. 94
W.
WAfers, in meat offerings. 123 Walls of the Courts. 51 What noted thereby. 241
Of the Oracle. 27 Sanctuary. 22 What it noted. 241 Temple. 19
Washings several. 347 Wave-loaves. 124 Wave-offerings. 122 Waters from under
the threshold of the visionary Temple. 205 Weekly services. 111. 321 Whiteness
noted innocence, etc. 189. 224. etc. 261 Windows of the Sanctuary. 23 What they
noted. 230
Women's purification, noted Original sin, say some. 115 Workmen, a vast number
employed in the Temple-buildings. 7 World to continue 6000 years according to
some. 181
Z.
ZAdocks line. 146 Zeal what it is. 296 Zion Mount. 183
Errata.
Courteous Reader,
be pleased to correct some places in the foregoing Work, according to these
Directions; a. After, d. Dele, l. Line, m Margin, p. Page. r. Read.

EPistle, line 18. is, read has, l. 32. this r. the: Preface, p. 2. l. 21.
there being, r. and yet there was, l. 31. a. himself r. is.

[Page 3. line 16. as in, read, as much in, [p. 15. l. 6. after hundred r. and,
[p. 17. l. 39. a. Remember, r. William of Malmsbury. lib. 5. fol. 91. b. l. 19.
Edit. Land. [p. 19. l. 47. are r. is, [21. l. 48. that r. but l. 49. d. built
on, [22. l. 27. a. because r. neither, l. 34. a. said, r. in one place that,
[25. l. 13. r. Dagobert. l. 4. our, r. that, [27. l. 16. The windows of, r. Q.
whether w^ndows in, [29. l. 5. a. necessarily r. be therein also, l. 12. I fall
r. if all, [36. l. 22. Ghosts r. Ghost, [37. l. 35. their work were, r. there
were, l. 36. a. which, r. proof. [38. l. 13. r. denomination, [49. l. 7. a.
Aristaeas, r, page 31. l. 9. d. page 31. against, r. for, [50 l. 43. a. him r.
treating of the 2d. l. 46. Cubits r. Courts, [52. l. 40. d. also, d. so, [53.
l, 5. a. watching r. in several stations, [58. Title Chap. 3. r. 4. [59. Title
Chap. 3. r. 4. l. 2. a. Arc r. ^ve, [65. l. 9. and 10. d. from though, to
Capacity, [V. 1. page 83. r. 73. 84. r. 74. 85. r. 75. 86. r. 76. [p. 74. l.
24. d. it [75. l. 11. 7/1 r. 1/7. [76. l. 45 we. r. I. [87. Title Chap. 5. r.
4. [89 Title Chap. 5. r. 4. [91. l. 35. bekn. r. been, [C c 1. page 197. r. 97.
p. 198. r. 98. p. 199. r. 99. [97. l. 25. a. Sacrifice r. Numb. 10. 10. [p.
100. l. ult. a. Heman the Singer, r. the Ezrahite Psalm. 88. or Izrahite from
Izhar the son of Korah, [D d. page 111. 112. 113. 114. r. 101. 102. 103. 104.
[p: 106. l. 45. a. Chronicles r. and Azariah the Son of Zadok the Priest was
the first of Solomon's Princes, 1 King. 4.2. l. 52. they. r. the, [108. l. 19.
Incense r. increase, [p. 109. l. 8. a. (...) r. the word being derived from
(...), dec^mare to Tithe, because it was the tenth part of an Ephah, [p. 112.
l. 24. first r. fifteenth, l. 26. 15th r. first, l. ult. add, To these in the
following Table, must be added 4 Sacrifices more, offered on the expiation-day
with their flower and wine, p. 340, [p. 122. l. 5. a. Egypt r. so Mede Vol. 1.
p. 585. etc. [p. 141. 142. 143. 144. Chap. 7. r, 8. in the Title, [P p. page
143. 144. 145. 146. r. 145. 146. 147. 148. [R r. page 156. 155. 154. 153. r.
153. 154. 155. 156. [153. l. 26. Sesostu^ r. Sefostris, [156. l. 6. before
Joash r. A. M. 3126. [163. l. 23. which r. and, [164. l. 42. Empire r. Kingdom,
[197. l. 51. grew r. grow, l. 52. filled r. fill, [198. l. 19. now r. near
[200. m. l. 29. r. Zech. 3.9. [208. l. 19. Sacred r. faced, [209. l. 28. a.
Temple r. of, l. 45. a. whether r. or, [211. l, 26. who though r. yet when, a.
communion d. yet, l. 46. might r. may, [212. l. 43. cwell r. dwell, [222. l.
53. riverts r. rivets, [230. l. 27. we that r. that we, [231. l. 26. more r. a.
nearer, 241. l. 1. Senes r. Jews, [245. l. 45. r. among the Laws of the ancient
December virate in the 12 Tables, [S s s. page 243. 242. r. 249. 252, [257. l. 47.
tion r. foundation, [261. m. l. 26. 27. wicked Antedotarm. r. Wecker Antidotar,
m. l. 36. Polon r. Solin, m. l. 42. Marcellus r. Marcellin, 262. l. 6. white r.
fiery, l. 9. a. and r. on, l. 17, (...). [264. m. l. Triphare r. Tryohon, l.
ult. its r. his, [269. m. l. 6. 24. r. 34. [A a a a. page 267. 266. r. 273.
276. [273. l. 46. inclusion r. incision, [274. l. 46. d. 1. l. 47. a. laid. r.
on, [275. l. 26. Commission r. Communion, [276. l. 8. only one r. being
spoken, l. 30. eta r. eat. l. 31. Levites r. Kenites, l. 35. Gentil. r. Genial,
l. 48. inventing r. invention of, [277. m. l. 32, d. or 104. [278, l. 8. Verus
r. Venus, [279. l. ult. in r. of, [281. l. 42. to feed on, which r. to feed, on
which, [287. l. 6. d. and, l. 15. d. of his [290. l. 48. straight r. wrought,
[292. l. 14. Mat. 3. 1, 9. r. Mat. 10. 9. l. 28. often r. off. l. 43. Majty r.
Majesty, l. 47. enriching r. encircling, [293. l. 8, Sublimius r. Sublimium, l.
18. or, r. in, l. 24. likeness r. likewise, [294. l. 53. were r. wire, [295.
l. 3. upon it r. it upon, l. 39. Kermes says, r. Kermes, says it was, etc. l.
40. ( c) r. ( b) [299. l. 40. Cnaines r. Chains, [300. l. 32. 15th r. 5th, l.
36. a. stone. d. is, [301. l. 4. he. r. they, l. 6. (...), l. 8. set Josephus
before Jerome, 303 l. 2. his r. its, l. 26. a. Martinius r. do consent in the
Ligure, l. 29. not r. very, l. 52. Sabai r. Sabaei, [304 l. 7. r. Hebr. (...)
[305. l. 19. calls r. called, [309. l. 35. are r. were, [312. l. 1. him r.
them, [316 l 42. this. r. the, [323. l. 53. 2. r. 4. [N n n n. page 332. 333.
r. 322. 323. [332. l. 3. Aci^ous r. Alcinous. [333. l. 46. d. to, [335. l. 49.
this. r. the, [336. l. 15. unreasonable r. unseasonable, l. 42. as possible r.
as far as possible, [337. l. 23. shab r. shall, [244. l. 29. this. r. the [345.
l. 49. a. hands r. had, [347. l. 8. Sun r. Son, l. 15. yield r. procure, [349.
l. 17. a. Doctrine r. or unholiness, l. 34. in us, are r. in us, which are. l.
45. (...) r. (...) for (...) [357. l. 37. r. 2dly, before, THAT IT WAS, etc.
358. l. 36. a. piece r. that was paid, [361 l. 10. a. perfection r. attaineable
in this life, l. 20. a. more r. probably, [366. l. 40. d. shall [368. l. 3. d.
is [369. l. 13. r. ingenuous l. 28. r. Cessavit.

FINIS.

