PARRHASIANA: OR, THOUGHTS UPON Several Subjects; AS, CRITICISM, HISTORY,
MORALITY, AND POLITICS.

By Monsieur Le Clerk, under the feigned Name of Theodorus Parrhasi.

Done into English by ****

London: Printed for A. and J. Churchil, at the Black Swan, in
Paternoster Row. MDCC.

THE PREFACE OF THE AUTHOR.
IT IS an Observation made long ago, That the World is pleased with Miscellany
Thoughts upon several Subjects, as appears not only by the kind reception the
Thoughts of Monsieur Paschal and Monsieur de la Bruyere's Characters have
found, but likewise by the Scaligerana, Perroniana, Sorberiana, Valesiana,
Menagiana, etc. some of which have seen several Editions. This gave me
Encouragement to set down in Paper several Reflections which I had made upon
very different Subjects, and now to venture them abroad.

I have not divided the Thoughts into several This was our Author's Modesty:
However* for the ease of the English Reader, we have divided it into Chap.
Chapters, but only by some Marginal Notes, because I never pretended to give
any thing finished upon any of the Matters I treat of. However I may affirm
that, generally speaking, they are better connected than any of those I have
mentioned above. If I had so thought fit, I could have swelled each of them
into several little Tracts, by making a few Additions to them, and some of them
I might have distinguished by Chapters: But before I could bring them to this
Regularity, I must of necessity say many Things, which have been delivered by
others in so exact and perspicuous a manner, that there was no occasion to
repeat them after them. My Design was only to touch upon those Things, which to
the best of my Knowledge were never said before, or if they have been, were not
so fully handled and supported, as now you find them. For Instance, there are
several complete Treatises of Rhetoric, and the Art of writing History, to
which a Man may have recourse in order to form in his Mind an exact Idea of
these Sciences; but I never read or saw any of those Matters so fully handled
as they deserve. And therefore the Reader may if he pleases join what I have
said concerning them as a Supplement to those Treatises of Rhetoric and
History that are extant, or else furnish himself out of others what is
deficient in mine.

The principal Thing I aimed at in this Collection of different Thoughts, was
to say something that might be serviceable to the present Age: I leave it to
the Reader to judge whether the Advertisements I give him are well grounded,
For my part, I am persuaded that there was a necessity of saying something like
it, that Men of Parts may improve these Hints, and enlarge upon at their
leisure.

Perhaps it may be objected that there is too great a Freedom in my Thoughts
and Expressions; but unless I am mistaken, they can find nothing which in the
least offends against Religion and Good Manners. No Man living is more
persuaded of the Truth and Importance of both these things than my self, and I
should never engage so heartily as to defend them against those that attack
them. The Obedience that is due to Sovereigns and Magistrates is not at all
violated by this Liberty, and it is no hard matter to be persuaded of this
Truth, in the Country where I live: Since there is not a Man here that has not
reason to bless the Gentleness of the Government, and of its excellent Maxims,
one of the chief of which is To suffer all that are Subjects to it to speak
freely, so long as they obey the Civil Laws. In effect let Men carry Liberty as
high as they please, provided this Liberty be accompanied by a Love of Justice
and of Order, it will only better discover the excellence of this Government,
and oblige those that live under it to obey it with more cheefulness.

As for the rest, the Liberty I have taken in this Collection was never
intended to create any Quarrels. I have only made use of it to speak general
Truths, which I never apply but to Authors dead long ago. If any Persons of the
same Character are now alive, it is no fault of mine. It would be impossible
ever to Censure any Irregularities, if a Man were to stay till there were none
to be found to whom his Censure might be applied. It Is sufficient that he has
no particular Views, and designs no such matter.

At the end of this Collection I have only endeavored to defend the Writings
of a certain Author in whom I am interessed, and if I have answered the
Calumnies of his Adversaries somewhat sharply, I may safely say that it was not
till after several of them had for a long time abused his Silence, and vented
their Malice in the most injurious manner that could be. We use to suffer him
who defends himself to speak in a higher Tone than those that attack his
Innocence, and the World passes by several Things in him which are not pardoned
in the Aggressors. But I here declare that I have expressed my self with much
more Tenderness than those who have fallen foul upon the Party whom I defend,
and those that have read their Libels will make no question of it. I have not
entered here into any Matter, but only contented my self to touch some Matters
of Fact, till I have a proper opportunity to explain these Matters, as far as I
see convenient. In the mean time the Public ought not to be surprised that the
Person whom I here defend, has returned no other Answer to those who had a Mind
to quarrel with him. He has been, and still is taken up in some Occupations
that appear more useful to him, and consequently such as he ought more to mind.
There are several honest and discerning Judges that will not be wanting to
espouse his Party, till such time as he defends himself, if ever he thinks it
necessary. If he is capable of doing the Public any Service either in
discovering or supporting any one Truth which is of general Importance, they
are more obliged to him in my Opinion, than if he had formally convicted his
Adversaries, of a thousand false Reasonings, and a thousand Calumnies. As he is
ready to sacrifice his private Resentments to the public Advantage, it is but
reasonable the Public should do him Justice without his importuning them upon
that score.

Lately Published,
THE Historical Library of Diodorus the Sicilian. In fifteen Books. The first
Five, contain the Antiquities of Egypt, Asia, Africa, Greece, the Islands, and
Europe. The last Ten, an historical Account of the Affairs of the Persians,
Grecians, Macedonians, and other Parts of the World. To which are added, The
fragments of Diodorus that are found in the Bibliotheca of Photius: Together
with those Published by H. Valesius, L. Rhodomannus, and F. Vrsinus. Made
English by G. Booth, of the City of Chester, Esquire in Folio.

Three Discourses of Happiness, Virtue, and Liberty. Collected from the Works
of the Learned Gassendi, by Monsieur Bernier.

Letters written by Sir W. Temple, Baronet, and other Ministers of State, both
at Home and Abroad. Containing an Account of the most Important Transactions
that passed in Christendom from 1665 to 1672. In Two Volumes. Reviewed by Sir
W. Temple sometime before his Death: And Published by Jonathan Swift Domestic
Chaplain to His Excellency the Earl of Berkeley, one of the Lords Justices of
Ireland.

The Adventures of Telemachus the Son of Ulysses, Part 1.

All the other Parts will soon be published, and sold by A. and J. Churchil.

PARRHASIANA: OR, THOUGHTS ON Several Subjects.
CHAP. I. Of Poets and Poetry.
What V se is to be made of the Poets.
ABundance of Men read the Poets, who don't know what a Poet is, or at least
cannot express what they mean by it. A Poet is one who invents, either in whole
or in part, the Subject he treats of; who disposes it in a certain Order proper
to surprise the Reader, and make him attentive: In short, he is one who
expresses himself in a different manner from the Vulgar, not only in respect of
the Cadence, but likewise of the Elocution. That is to say, when a Man sets
himself to read a Poem, he ought to consider, that he is going to read the Work
of a Liar, who intends to entertain him with Fictions, or at least with Truths
so corrupted, that it is no easy matter so distinguish one from the other. We
ought to remember, that by the glittering Pomp of his Expression, he chiefly
designs to surprise our Reason, and by the Harmony of his Cadence to please our
Ears; in order to make us admire his Subject, and give us a great Idea of
himself. Such Considerations as these would serve us instead of an Antidote
when we read their Compositions, which perhaps may be of some Profit to those
who think rightly and justly; but are only fit to seduce others whose Reason is
not strong enough to pass a true Judgment upon what pleases them too much.

If it be demanded, what use a Man may make of the Poets, we are in the first
place to distinguish between the Ancients and the Moderns, between those that
write in the living, and those that write in the dead Languages. We must
likewise take care to distinguish between the Advantage a Man may reap from the
Poets alone, and which is not to be had by reading any other Compositions, and
that which is common to the Writings of the Poets, and those of other Authors:
For upon all these Heads a Man may say different things.

Not to speak of the Advantage, which is to be acquired by reading Authors in
Prose as well as in Verse, it is certain that the ancient Poets may be
serviceable to us in two respects. The first is, That they fill the Mind with
admirable Lessons of Morality and Politics, with which they embellish their
Works, and that their Maxims being delivered in handsome Terms and in Verse, not
only affect us more, but make a more lasting Impression upon our Memory. The
second is, That their Style being noble and elevated, warms the Imagination of
those that read them, and may accustom them to express themselves in a lively
and animated manner. For this reason, the ancient Rhetoricians advised the
Reading of them to those that applied themselves to the Study of Eloquence.

These are in general the greatest Advantages that may be drawn from the
ancient Poets, for I don't call Diversion an Advantage, which is the only use
some Readers make of them, since a Man may do that by reading of History:
Besides, that to read merely to amuse one's self ought not to be looked upon as
a serious Occupation. But you will ask me perhaps, Whether the Moderns, who
write in Greek or Latin Verse, may not be of equal Advantage? To which I answer
in the Negative, That they are inferior in all respects to the Ancients. Those
fine Sentences we admire in their Writings, are scarce at all to be found in
those of the Moderns; and besides, there is a vast difference between the Style
of the former and that of the latter.

Several of the Moderns indeed have written Greek and Latin Verses, but
resemble the Ancients, just as Apes may be said to resemble Men. They copy
their Vices much more than their good Qualities, and indeed it is as dangerous
to imitate the Thoughts of the Moderns as their Style. Instead of grave and
noble Sentences, they give us nothing but gross and mean Thoughts: Instead of
Purity and Conciseness, we find in them very suspicious manners of Speaking,
and tiresome repetitions of synonymous Expressions, borrowed out of the
Ancients, and ill applied. There is scarce any modern Poet, either Greek or
Latin, who may not justly be censured with a good part of what I have said. For
this reason no body recommends the Reading of them to such as study the belles
Lettres. We send our Youth to the Ancients, and counsel them to read over their
Compositions, without so much as condescending to mention to them the modern
Poets. In truth, it would be full as ridiculous to read the Moderns, in order
to instruct ourselves in the ancient Poetry, as it would be to read the Italian
Verses* written by Foreigners, as for instance, those of Monsieur Menage, to
learn how to write in Italian. All the World knows, that the Italians laugh at
them, and find very notorious Solecisms in them. We need not doubt but that the
ancient Poets, were they to rise out of their Graves, would laugh in like
manner at our Greek and Latin Verses, and be amazed to find so many People in
the World, take such mighty pains, and lose so much time to succeed so
wretchedly.

If the ancient Philosophers were to come upon Earth again, and should without
prepossession Study the modern Philosophers, they would honestly confess, that
they are not to be compared to them in any respect, neither for the Art of
Reasoning justly, nor that of ordering and expressing their Thoughts with
perspicuity, nor for the importance of their Discoveries. We may pass the same
Judgment upon the ancient Critics, and the ancient Interpreters of the Holy
Bible, compared with the Moderns. But as for the Poets, those of latter Times
(I desire to be understood only of those that write in the dead Languages) are
only Scholars in comparison of those of Antiquity. And what may the reason of
this be? It Is because the Moderns are sordid Imitators of the Ancients, and can
pretend to nothing that is truly original, because they are only Poets by rote
and by imitation, and have not penetrated into the Principles of their Art, as
the modern Philosophers, and the others, whom I just now mentioned, have done.

To disengage himself from this servile. Spirit of Imitation, a Man ought to
write in his own Mother Tongue. By this means he will think less of the
Expressions and Thoughts of the Ancients; and as he is full of modern Words and
Ideas, with which he is perfectly well acquainted, he will become an Original.
The Poets of this Character do the same service to their Language and Nation,
as the Greek and Latin Poets formerly did to theirs. If no one has as yet
appeared upon the Stage, who has equaled Homer and Virgil, in the modern
Languages, the Reason of it in my opinion is, because they are too much
possessed by this Spirit of Imitation, and have not as yet dared to take those
Flights, which a noble Imagination, enlightened and regulated by good Sense,
might aspire to. Besides, they chequer their Writings too much with the poetic
Ornaments of ancient Greece and Italy, which a Man ought wholly to throw aside,
who designs to pass for an Original. To effect this, some happy Genius ought to
start up, of a Spirit superior to the Pedantry of the Schools, who should give
an Example to others, and perform all that Homer would be capable of
performing, were he now alive; nay, to model Poetry anew by the Ideas of good
Sense, which are infinitely better understood at present than they were
formerly. Then we should see Poems free from that absurd Trash of the Pagan
Divinities, which the Ancients might well enough introduce into their Works,
because the People believed what was told concerning them. As now adays we
believe nothing of this, it is impossible for us to relish these antiquated
Decorations, without forgetting the Age wherein we live, and the Truths we are
most assured of. We must, if I dare so express myself, transplant our Minds to
the past Ages, in order to get their Taste and Manners, without which we can
never reconcile ourselves to these strange Ornaments. However, those Poets that
have written in the modern Languages, may be of some use both for their
Thoughts and Style, as I have remarqu'd of the Ancients. I take it for granted
that the French, and those of other Nations who understand that Language, are
no less obliged to Corneille, Despreaux, Racine, de la Fontaine, de Fontenelle,
and others that have excelled in some sorts of Poetry, as the Ancients could
possibly be to their best Poets. We find in their Writings a Vein of strong
manly Sense, which is not common, an elevation and delicacy of Thoughts set off
in such beautiful Expressions, that we cannot read them without admiration.
Other Nations, even those of the North, pretend to have produced some Poets,
that equal these, or at least are not inferior to them, but I am not able to
judge of this matter.

Having mentioned the principal Advantages that may be drawn from reading the
Poets both ancient and modern, it is requisite I should say something likewise
of the Mischief they may do those People who converse too much with them, and
have not sufficiently cultivated their Reason. In the first place, The Poets
are full of false Thoughts, by which if we are not deceived, yet we insensibly
lose a good Taste and right Judgment, which are the finest Ornaments of Human
Nature. By reading these sorts of Books too often, not only with Indulgence,
but even with Admiration for the beauty of the Style, we insensibly accustom
ourselves to think after the same manner, and to approve for just that which is
entirely false. We may observe the same effects of Humane Weakness in the
reading of Authors of a quite different Character, which for the very same
Reason, never fail to produce the same Effects. In some parts of the World,
they read the Fathers of the Church, but especially the Latins, being resolved
beforehand to find them polite and solid, and humbly to sacrifice their Reason
to them: After which they don't only give quarter to false Thoughts and ill
Reasonings, of which their Writings are full, but by little and little they
begin to admire and imitate them. They observe no other order in their Thoughts
than what an Imagination, heated by the Enthusiasms of a false Rhetoric,
suggests; and every Argument, that makes but a tolerable appearance, passes for
a good one. The same thing happens to those who heat their Brain too much by
reading the Poets: They arrive at that pitch at last as to have no manner of
relish for exactness of Reasoning. A Figure of Rhetoric goes with them for a
good Argument, provided it be expressed in fine Terms, and the Cadence of it be
harmonious. As we pardon a thousand silly things at an Opera in favor of the
Music, so the agreeable sound of Words, and the elegance of the Expression
makes us at first forgive such things in the Poets, and afterward in ourselves.

If we imitate the false Thoughts of the Poets, only by being conversant in
their Writings, we must certainly much more spoil ourselves by their Style, but
especially when we are young. That which is not too swelling for Verse, is
insupportable in Prose: and after we have been accustomed to the Bumbast of the
Poets, we are apt to think we crawl on the Ground, when we deliver ourselves in
a plain natural manner, and the most elevated Language of Prose seems dull and
insipid. Thus while we endeavor to write sublimely in Prose, we fall into a
poetical Affectation, which is condemned by all the Masters of Eloquence. In
Proaem. Lib. VIII.
A Corruptissimo quoque Poetarum, says Quintilian, figuras, seu translationes
mutuamur, tum demum ingeniosi scilicet, si ad intelligendos nos opus fit sit
ingenio. We borrow Figures and Metaphors from the worst of Poets, and think we
are very ingenious, when a Man must have some Wit to understand us.

In the mean time, while we affect a Style too figurative, we really fall into
a cold insipid one, which we pretended to avoid by taking the other Course. For
can any thing in Nature be more insipid than to think to sham mean vulgar
Things upon the World for great ones, merely because they are expressed in an
elevated manner? This is the Reason why, while an Orator of this complexion
puts himself almost into convulsive Fits that he may move his Auditory, they
are either fast asleep, or in so perfect a state of Insensibility, that it is
near akin to sleeping. And if he is ever so ill advised as to publish a Work
of this nature, it is ten times worse for him; for a Reader is infinitely more
rigorous than an Auditor.

This is the Mischief which the reading of the Poets may do such as don't read
them with Judgment enough. I don't here speak of that it may have in common
with the reading of other Works, which may corrupt the Mind and Heart, but of
that Mischief which is peculiar to itself, if we don't take care to prevent it.

Why Poetry pleases so much.
THERE are only three things that can please us in any Discourse, the Matter of
which it is composed, the Order in which this Matter is distributed, and the
Style in which it is expressed. Poetry pleases in all these three Respects; but
then there are abundance of things to be censured in Poetry upon these very
Respects.

The matter of Heroic and Tragic Poems, (to confine ourselves at present only
to them) pleases us for the grandeur of the Actions and Events which it
comprehends, and for the Incidents which are rare and surprising, or proper to
raise the Passions. That Admiration and Terror, that Pity and Indignation,
which they stir up by turns in us, employ and engage our Minds in what they
represent, and give us a sensible pleasure when we read them. The Heart of Man
is made to be incited by Passions, it takes a delight in being moved; nothing
in short is so tiresome to it as a Calm, or so dull as Indolence, and it is upon
this account that the Poets gain it over to their Party. Who can read the
Adventures of Turnus in the Aeneis, without being Affected by them, and without
abandoning himself with pleasure to an agreeable Melancholy? Nay, we cannot
read, without some emotion, a description of the Passions that disordered the
unmerciful Mezentius, after the Death of his Son, which Virgil has expressed in
this manner: -- Lib. Aeneid. X. v. 871.
Aestuat ingens
Vno in cord pudor, mistoque insania luctu,
Et furiis agitatus amor, and conscia virtus.
Shame and Grief for the Death of his Son mingled with a furious Anger, Love
that provoked him to the last degree, and a sense of his Valor incited his
Soul all at once. We are no longer in a condition to judge rightly of Things,
when once our Passions have discomposed us. We pardon every thing, nay, we
imagine every thing to be good in a Poet, who knows how to unhinge us.

The Romans who were accustomed to use their Victories with Generosity, and who
would have thought it strange to see a parcel of poor Fellows murdered in cold
Blood about the Hearse of a General that was fairly killed in Battle, did not
however find fault with Virgil for introducing his Aeneas, the most pious of
all Men, and the most beloved by the Gods, killing eight Wretches upon the
funeral Pile of Pallas.

-- Lib. Aeneid. X. v. 518. Vide and Lib. XI. v. 18.
Sulmone creatos
Quatuor hic juvenes, totidem quos educat Vfens,
Viventes rapit, inferias quos immolet umbris,
Captivoque rogi perfundat sanguine flammas.
Nothing can excuse Virgil, but the Example of Homer, whom he has here
imitated. For Homer makes Achilles commit the same Cruelty, who sacrifices a
dozen Trojans about Patroclus's funeral Pile in the tweny third Book of the
Ilias. But what may be pardoned in an enraged brutal Hero; as Achilles really
was, ought never to be forgiven in the pious Aeneas. Besides, Virgil, who was a
Man of better Sense, and lived in an Age that was infinitely more polite than
Homer's, is less to be excused than he for making his Hero commit so barbarous
an Action. However, the World takes no notice of this Inhumanity, out of
respect to the great things that he makes Aeneas perform, and the great Idea he
gives of him in other places.

If Virgil has transgressed against the Rules of Decency in making his Aeneas
guilty of so inhumane a piece of Cruelty, he has offended against good Sense in
changing those Javelins, with which Polymnestor had transfixed Polydorus, into
the Branches of a Tree, the Root whereof was Polydorus himself, in his third
Book of his Aeneis: in making a golden Bough to sprout from another Tree, in
his sixth Book; and in turning the burnt Ships of Aeneas into so many
Sea-Nymphs, in the eleventh. Vossius instituti. Poet. Lib. 1. c. 2.
I know that the common way of excusing Virgil, is by pretending, that in this
he accommodated himself to the ancient Fables, and to the Ideas of the People,
who had a great esteem for these sorts of Fictions, and thought the Poets used
them sparingly when they did not ascribe things that were palpably
contradictory to their Gods. These Reasons may serve to excuse the ridiculous
Tales of old Women, with which they rock their Children asleep, but not a Poem
designed and carried on with a great deal of Art, where we ought to have
nothing, but what is probable. It cannot be pretended that the Wonderful shows
better in these sorts of things than in those that may really happen. If we
must plainly speak the truth, these Fictions are not wonderful, but altogether
ridiculous. It will be granted me, I suppose, that if Virgil had let them
alone, the Aeneis had lost none of its Beauties, and so he had saved us the
Pains to excuse them. To speak impartially, our modern Romances are nothing but
so many Poems in prose; but should the Authors of 'em stuff 'em with such
improbable Fictions, they would soon be hissed out of the World, although we find
they introduce Heroes who lived in the remotest Ages. Such, in short, is the
famous Romance of Cyrus. Scudery had never had the satisfaction to see the
Conclusion of that bulky Romance, had he filled it with such monstrous
Chimeras: And his Bookseller finding not vent for the first Parts, would sooner
have been sent to the Galleys, than he would have continued them to the twelfth
Volume. For my part all the Difference I can find between the modern Romances
and Poems, if we consider the Matter of them, is no more than there is between
the Pieces of two Painters, one of whom imitates Nature, and represents nothing
but what is to be seen, while the other designs Animals that were never in
Nature, as an Elephant with a Crocodile's Head, or some such Monster as that.
These last Paintings would rather offend than please the Sight, and the Beauty
of the Colors, would never be able to atone for the extravagance of the
Painter. I need not give myself the trouble to apply this Comparison to the
Subject in hand.

To come now to the Disposition of a Poem, it is certain there is something
surprising in it, and which at first sight commands the Reader's attention,
because instead of taking up the Action at the beginning, the Poet takes it up
at the middle, which keeps the Reader in suspense, and makes him eager to know,
how the Hero of the Piece came into those Circumstances wherein he at first
finds him. Virgil in his Aeneis has observed this Conduct much better, than
Homer has done in his Ilias. The latter begins with the Quarrel between
Achilles and Agamemnon, and goes on according to the series of Time without
recounting any thing that had past before, but only by scraps and pieces, to
which a Man must add a great deal to have a perfect Idea of the Trojan War,
till the Death and Funeral of Hector, with which he concludes his Poem. It Is
true indeed, that the Odyssee is much better managed, but the Aeneis is
exquisitely perfect. It begins at the seventh Year, and the Hero of the Poem
relates in the second and third Book all that happened to him before. Thus the
Reader, at his first dipping in it, finds himself engaged to read what follows,
so soon as he has read the beginning, and that pity which the Misfortunes of
the Trojans raise in him, and which Virgil at first sets forth with so much
Art, makes him extremely desirous to know how they shall be delivered out of
them. Although he knows well enough that it is a pure Fiction of the Poet, yet the
Matter is so touching and so well disposed, that he forgets that it is a
Romance, and is not only as much affected by it as if it were a real Truth, but
what is more, as if he were mightily interessed in it. From that very moment,
as I have already observed, every thing pleases, and of Critics or severe
Readers, we become zealous Admirers of him, after which we are concerned for
the Reputation of the Man whom we have admired. We cannot endure that any one,
whoever he be, should find any Defects in him, although they are never so
palpable. This is the Reason why Zoilus, surnamed the Scourge of Homer, made
himself a thousand times more detested for having had the presumption to
censure his Faults, than if he had blasphemed all the Gods. His very Memory was
held in Horror and Detestation among the Grammarians, the sworn Partisans of
Homer, who failed not to possess their Disciples with the same Hatred of him,
that is to say, The World; for all that learnt any thing passed at first under
their Hands. These Impressions that are made on us in our Childhood are not to
be effaced without some trouble, so that we are not to wonder if the World has
been so long prejudiced in favor of Homer, even so far as to copy his very
Faults.

Adrian de Valois, who was a very learned Man, has Valesiana, p. 63.
remarked, that Virgil has committed a great fault in the Description he makes
of Ascanius. He could not well be less than seven Years old when Troy was
taken, because he was able to march along with his Father, who held him by the
hand, when he fled out of that City. Scquiturque patrem non passibus aequis,
says Virgil in the second Book of his Aeneis. Consequently then, when Aeneas
was at Carthage seven Years after, he was at least fourteen Years old. Dido
speaks thus to Aeneas toward the end of the first Book:

-- Nam te jam septima portat
Omnibus errantem terris and fluxibus aestas.
In effect Ascanius was able at this time to sit his Horse, and ride out a
Hunting. Nay, this was not all, for no less Game would content our young Spark,
but a Boar or a Lion thundering down the Mountains. By which it appears that he
was not only a good Horseman, but that he was already Master of some Force and
Courage.

At puer Ascanius, Aeneid. Lib. IV. v. 156.
mediis in vallibus, acri
Gaudet equo, jamque hos cursu, jam praeterit illos:
Spumantemque dari pecora inter inertia votis
Optat aprum, aut fulvum descendere monte leonem.
Nevertheless in this very Aeneid. Lib. I. v. 722. IV. v. 84.
Book, as well as in the first, Dido dandles him upon her Knees like a Child of
some four or five Years old. It Is visible that when Virgil put that
Circumstance into his Poem he forgot himself how old Ascanius ought to have
been according to his first supposition. However his Narration so takes up the
Reader's Mind, that he is not sensible of this Contradiction, nay, and will not
see it, when he is told of it.

The third thing that makes us take so much pleasure in reading the Poets is
their Style, wherein two things are to be observed: The first is the Expression
considered in itself, and the other the cadence or the harmony of their Verse.
Their Expression pleases when it is according to the Rules of Art, because it
is pure, proper, and simple, when it ought to be so, and figurative when it
ought to be otherwise. The Figures above all are frequently employed in their
Compositions, drawn from the most elevated and beautiful things, so that they
fill the Mind with nothing but noble and sublime Ideas.

Although in general Poets are obliged to follow the same Rules of Rhetoric as
those that write in Prose, yet they are allowed to employ much more Decoration,
and to heighten all their Descriptions with the most lively Colors. There is
as much difference between the same Subject, as it is managed by a Poet, and by
an Orator, as there is between an Assembly of Men dressed in plain ordinary
Clothes, and the same Assembly in their richest Apparel upon some solemn
Festival. The Descriptions when finely touched, particularly charm the Reader,
who fancies he does not read the Descriptions of things recounted by the Poet,
but that he sees them with his Eyes, and is present at all the Actions. Homer
is excellent upon this score, which occasioned the saying, That he surpassed
the Painters, who only represent that which strikes the Eye, whereas he
frequently paints the Thoughts, without so much as speaking. Therefore we ought
not to be surprised if the Poets please us more than the Orators.

The liveliness of their Colors strikes our Eyes so strongly, that we forget
with them the Rules of good Sense, if we are not very much upon our Guard all
the while we read them. The irregular Imagination of the Poet expresses itself
in so noble and sublime a manner, that it easily overpowers ours, and gives it
the same Movements, by which itself is agitated, and this makes all its
Irregularities to disappear. For instance, Virgil it in the first Book of his
Verse. 25. and seqq.
Aeneis, thus describes the Habitation of the Winds.

-- Hic vasto Rex Aeolus antro
Luctantes ventos, tempestatesque sonoras
Imperio permit, ac vinclis and carcere fraenat.
Here in a vast Cavern King Aeolus commands the Winds that struggle to get out,
and the roaring Tempests which he imprisons. I would not have taken notice how
ridiculous it was to make the four Winds to come out of one hole of a Rock in a
little Island near Sicily, because it may be replied, That the Poets are full
of the like Blunders, and that we ought not to be so severe with them, if some
Interpreters would not bear us down, that all this was an effect of Virgil's
great Learning, who knew that the Winds arise from subterraneous Vapors. For,
suppose it was so, (although it is by no means probable) he ought to have assigned
to each Wind its particular Cave, and to have placed the East Wind at the most
easterly part of Asia, and so the rest; since it is impossible to establish the
Source of the Winds, if there were one, any-where but toward those places from
whence they seem to come. For this Reason it was that the ancient Greeks placed
the Residence of Boreas in Thrace, who came from thence to carry away the
Daughter of the King of Athens; although I cannot comprehend what shift he made
to get home back again, unless we answer like the Fellow, who having given the
Name of the South Wind to the North Wind, defended himself by saying, That in
truth it was the South Wind, brat that he was then endeavoring to get home
again. But let us see what follows:

Illi indignantes magno cum murmr, montis
Circum claustra fremunt. Celsa sedet Aeolus arce,
Sceptra tenens, mollitque animos and temperat iras.
Ni faciat, mania ac terras, coelumque profundum
Quippe ferant rapidi secum, verrantque per auras.
Angry with being locked up in this manner, they rage with a great noise about
the Mountain that confines them: But Aeolus who sits on a high Eminence, with a
Scepter in his Hand, softens and moderates their Indignation. If he did not do
so, they would carry away with them the Sea, the Earth and Heaven like so many
Balls through the Air. This is what we may properly call, To throw the House out
of the Windows. Can it be supposed, with any manner of probability, that the
Winds that arise from the Earth, and brush over its Surface, would blow it the
Lord knows whether, if some body did not look after them? Besides, whither
would they blow it? What! to the imaginary Spaces, or the Intermons of
Epicurus? What is this Heaven that the Winds would carry through the Air? Some
Interpreters say, That it is the Air itself: But what can be more ridiculous
than to say, That the Wind carries the Air through the Air; that is to say, that
the Air moving from a certain Quarter is carried cross itself? If we are to
understand the celestial Bodies, to wit, the fixed Stars and Planets, it is not
only a gross mistake in Phisics, worse than the idle Dreams of Epicurus, but a
monstrous Hyperbole. I know it may be replied, That Virgil considers the Winds
as Persons, nay, what is more, as Gods; but whatever is feigned of those sorts
of Gods, whom the Mythologists call Physical Gods, ought to be founded upon the
Nature of the things that are deify'd. Thus take it in what sense you please,
it is evident that we cannot excuse this Passage. He still adds, Sed pater
omnipotens, speluncis abdidit atris,
Hoc metuens, molemque and montes insuper altos
Imposuit, regemque dedit, qui foedere certo
Et premere and laxas sciret dare justus habenas.


But the almighty Father ( Jupiter) fearing this, hid them in black Caverns,
and over them set massy high Mountains. Besides this, he gave them a King, who
by his Order knew how to hold in, and let loose the Reins, according to certain
Laws. As if two or three small Mountains were able to keep in those Deities,
that with the Breath of their Mouth could blow Heaven and Earth, whither they
pleased, and as if a thing so changeable as the Winds, so far as we know any
thing of this Nature, could be subjected to Laws. However these magnificent
Expressions that Virgil uses in this place, hood-wink the Reader to that
degree, that he does not perceive the absurdity of this Fiction. There are
several more in Homer, which I will not examine, having no intention to make a
complete Critic upon these two celebrated Poets, or indeed any other.

I know that what they call Probable and Wonderful in Poetry, signifies another
thing than what we commonly call by that Name. We look upon it in Homer and
Hesiod as Wonderful, but not exceeding the Bounds of poetical Probability, that
there are more Hom. Iliad. Lib. XVIII. Hesiod. in Clypeo Herculis.
Sculptures upon one Buckler, in basso relievo, than can be imagined to be
crowded in a Space a hundred times as big; that these Sculptures move and speak
as if they were so many living Persons; nay, that some of them hang in the Air
and fly about the Bucklers like Flies, yet don't stir from it. To excuse the
Ridiculousness of these Fictions, it is pretended, that these Bucklers were
wrought by a God; but, who ever saw the Gods work Miracles in this nature? All
this had passed for absurd idle stuff, had it been written in Prose, but we
admire it in Verse for the beauty of the Expression, just as we admire
Grotesque Figures upon Marble for the fineness of the Sculpture. This set
Virgil upon imitating these Poets in his description of Aeneas's Shield, which
is to be found in the eighth Book of the Aeneis, though it is not altogether so
extravagant. Theocritus has attempted the same thing upon a wretched wooden
Cup, in his first Idyllium, where he likewise represents things, which
Sculpture cannot express.

But that we may be the better able to conceive the Ridiculousness of this
poetical Probability, let us hear what Aristotle says of it in his Art of
Poetry, although he pretends to defend the Poets, and to give them Rules. Chap.
XXV. We follow the Version of M. Dacier.
We ought, says he, to use the Wonderful in Tragedy, but much more in an Epic
Poem, which, is this respect, goes as far as the Unreasonable: For as in an
Epic Poem we don't see the Persons that Act, all that exceeds the bounds of
Reason, is very proper to produce the Wonderful in it. For Example, what Homer
tells us of Hector 's being pursued by Achilles, would be ridiculous upon the
Theater, for no one could forbear laughing to behold the Greeks on one side,
without making any motion, and Achilles on the other, who pursues Hector, and
gives the Sign to his Troops: But this is not seen in an Epic Poem. Now the
Wonderful is always agreeable, and for a proof of this, we find that those that
relate a Story, commonly add to the Truth, that they may better please the
Hearers. This is well enough, when we don't carry Matters farther than they will
bear; but when we go to the Unreasonable, we make ourselves ridiculous to those
that love to use their Reason in every thing, that is, to all wise Persons. A
Poet, says he a little lower, ought rather to choose things Impossible,
provided they have the air of Probability, than the Possible, that are
incredible, with all their Possibility. I own that all that is Possible is not
credible; but whatever is Impossible, in my Opinion, is much less so. It Is to
no purpose to say, That what is impossible to Men, is not so to the Gods; and
so that when the Gods intervene, those things that are impossible to Men,
become probable. A Man that has not debauched his Taste by a blind admiration of
Antiquity, cannot digest this foolish profusion of Miracles for the sake of
Trifles, of which Homer is so full. None but the Inhabitants, of the Isle of
Scheria, in the Ionic Sea.
Phaeacians, whom Ulysses banter'd as he pleased, without fearing to of, he
ca^l'd a Liar for his pains, could divert themselves with reading these
ridiculous Miracles, were they not told with all the agreeableness imaginable,
I mean as to the Expression.

Another thing which contributes very much to surprise our Reason in reading
the Poets, is the pleasant Cadence of their Verse, which flatters our Ears
after the same manner as Music does. When an Air pleases us, we never consider
the Words, as we find it by experience at an Opera, which we are not able to
read with any tolerable patience; but when it is represented on the Theater, we
hear it with admiration. As Music charms our Ears, by striking them differently
at several certain measured times; by never passing all on the sudden from one
extreme Tone to another, which is quite opposite to it, by carrying no Tone too
high for fear of shocking our Ears, but by employing Tones that are
proportioned to our Organs; and lastly, by making us hear the same Cadences, in
the same Order, more than once: After the same manner the Poets, by using
Syllables of a certain quantity (I speak of the Latins and Greeks) in certain
places; by choosing Words of an agreeable Sound; by breaking their Course,
which would otherwise seem harsh, with Caesuras; and by making us feel this
Harmony some time after, fill our Ears so deliciously, that they obtain our
Favor for a world of false Thoughts.

To be convinced of the truth of this Assertion, a Man need only set the finest
Passages of the Poets in the natural order of Construction, and he will find
nothing in them to please him. Although we may there discover Disjecti membra
Poetae, to use Horace's Expression, it is all of it nothing but a cold heap of
great Words. Let us take, for Instance, the beginning of Simon's Speech in the
second Book of the Aeneis, which is assuredly the most artificial Speech that
can be made, and Charms every one that reads it. Equidem, Rex, f^^t ^bor tibi
cuncta, quaecunque sucrint vera, neque nega^^o n^e de gente Argolica. Hoc
primum; nec si improba fortuna finxit Sinonem miserum, finget etiam va^^^^,
mendacemque. Here indeed is a Latin Discourse, however it does not come up to
the Majesty of Verse. I will not give any more Instances of this Nature,
because every Man may try this Experiment, in any place he thinks fit to single
out. It Is likewise easy to transpose after the same manner the description of
Aeolus's Den, and the Reader will soon perceive that the Cadence of the Verse
serves very much to help it off.

The Inconveniences of Poetry.
HOWEVER there is one thing to be observed in relation to Verse, which is, That
if the Poets have some Advantage over those that write in Prose, by reason of
their Cadence, there are several Inconveniences which they cannot always avoid.
For Instance, They cannot say all they have a mind to say, neither do they say
it in that manner as they could wish; they are forced to convert the Order of
the Words, though never so much against their Inclination; they frequently say
that which they would not say, and clog their Discourse with superfluous
Epithets, and sometimes forced ones, to fill up the Measure of their Verse.
There are abundance of noble significant Words, that cannot stand in some sorts
of Poetry, especially the Heroic, so that they are often forced to lay aside
good Thoughts that come into their Head, because Words that are necessary to
express them fully, cannot come into the Verse. If the Poet is not resolved to
part with his Thought, he must employ other Words that are not proper, and
often invert them strangely to make up his Measure. It Is true indeed, that in
this respect we are apt to do the Poets Justice enough, in favor of their
Cadence, since we have been so complaisant as to bestow the Name of Figures
upon real Faults of Discourse, according to the Observation of Quintilian: Lib.
1. c. 8.
Poetis quia plerumque metro servire coguntur, adeo ignoscitur, ut vitia ipsa
aliis in carmine appellationibus nominantur. Metaplasmos enim and Schematismos,
and Schemata vocamus, and laudem virtutis necessitati damus. We are so
favorable to the Poets, because they are confined to measure, that even Vices
in Verse, go under other Names. We call them Metaplasms and Figures, and praise
that as a Beauty, which was the mere effect of Necessity.

But there is nothing so inconvenient, as when being at a loss how to fill up a
Verse which is well begun, they are obliged to end it ill. Nothing is more
common in Homer and Hesiod than these Botches of a word or more to stop up the
Gap. Nay, we find whole Verses and Expressions, that return every moment upon
us, rather to serve for Passevolans, if I may be allowed so to speak, and to
make up the number, than for any real Necessity. What they might very well
express in one word or two, they frequently employ a whole Verse to do it in,
and sometimes more; and all this to no other purpose than to make the Discourse
more insipid and tiresome. Had I written this Book in Latin, I would have cited
Examples enough to justify this Assertion, in the mean time I appeal for the
truth of it to all those that have read these Poets, with a mind disengaged
from the Prejudices of the Grammarians.

It Is very probable that the Reason why Virgil, who has avoided these Faults
more carefully than the abovementioned Greek Poets, left some imperfect Verses
in his Aeneis, was only because he could not at first fill them up without
making some Botches, or at least some useless Repetitions. There are some
Passages in his life relating to this Affair, which deserve our Observation.
However he could not avoid, and that very often, to use several Words and
Expressions, that only serve to fill up the Measure. Thus in the first Book of
his Aeneis, having assigned a little before the Reasons why Juno was so
implacable an Adversary to Aeneas, he repeats it again about the fortieth
Verse, Aeternum servans sub pectore vulnus. "Carrying an eternal Wound in "her
Soul. Take away these words, and you maim the Verse indeed, but not the Sense.
A little lower Juno promises Deiopeia for a Wife to Aeolus in these Words:
Connubio jungam stabili, propriamque dicabo,
Omnes let tecum, meritis pro talibus, annos
Exigat and pulchra faciat to prole parentem.


I will give her you in Marriage for ever, that she may pass her Days with you,
and make you the Father of fine Children. There Is nothing more belongs to the
Sense than these Words, Connubio jungam, quae pulcra faciat to prole parentem.
I will give her you in Marriage, that she may bring you fine Children, whatever
the Interpreters have said upon this place. Jupiter as he is telling Venus what
the Fortune would be of Aeneas's Posterity, to let her know that Ascanius would
Reign thirty Years, thus expresses himself, v. 271. At puer Ascanius, cui nunc
cognomen Iulo
Additur, (Ilus erat dum res stetit Ilia Regno)
Trignta magnos volvendis mensibus orbs
Imperio explebit.
But young Ascanius, who is at present Sirnam'd Iulus (he was called Ilus while
the Kingdom of Ilion lasted) will Reign thirty long Years. Now nothing is
essential in this Passage, but the three first Words of the first Verse, and
the third Verse, At puer triginta, etc. Whether we put the other words in
Jupiter's Mouth, or the Poets, who speaks by the Parenthesis, it is a Botch
which the necessity of the Meter extorted from Virgil. What is the worst on it
is this, That injudicious Poets who have taken these Faults for Beauties, have
often drained themselves to repeat the same thing in different Words, as if the
Readers were to esteem their Verses not by their intrinsic Worth, but by their
Number. Ovid and Lucan have been very justly charged with this Fault, although
the latter wanted not the poetical Enthusiasm, and the former had the most
easy Versification in the World.

Personal Defects of Poets.
IN the p. 318. Edit. Col.
Scaligerana we meet with this Judgment of Scaliger, No Man ever was a Poet, or
loved to read the Poets, but his Heart was seated in the right place. He
expresses it much more warmly in Though our Author has not cited it, yet I
thought it would not be a miss to set it down, Nunquam Poesis, aut poetarum
amor in abjectum and humilem animam cadit, and omnium maxim divina sequitur
ingenia, eorumque perpetuus fere comes, Ibid.
Latin. I suppose that by having his Heart seated in the right place, he means,
having a good Opinion of himself, for indeed there are few Poets who have not a
leaning that way. Poetical Enthusiasm makes these Gentlemen believe that they
are above the ordinary Race of Mankind, because they speak a Language peculiar
to themselves, and when this Fury seizes them, there are certain Traces in
their Countenance, which sufficiently declare that, Hor. L. II. Sat. vii. v.
117.
Aut insanit homo, aut versus facit -- "This Man is either a Fool or a Poet.
Their slow walking, their discomposed Air seems to come from this; for being
accustomed to make Verses, and bite their Nails as they walk, they would
persuade us that they are thinking on something when they thinking on just
nothing. To return to Scaliger, if he believed that Poets or Lovers of Poetry
were incapable of stooping to mean things, it is certain he could never reckon
those for Poets or Lovers of Poetry, who have written so many Verses in Praise
of the Roman Emperors and their Favorites, whose Vices they have commended as
well as their Virtues: that is to say, Virgil, Horace, Ovid, Statius, Martial,
and the rest whom I need not mention, after I have mentioned these five; the
three first of which excessively flattered Augustus, and those that were near
his Person, and the other two the infamous Domitian. What meannesses in
particular did not Ovid stoop to, to get himself recalled from Banishment? Did
not Virgil and Horace place Augustus, when living, among the number of the
Gods? Thus we cannot excuse this Judgment of Scaliger, who was no Poet, though he
writ Verses sometimes, but by Virtue of the poetical Privilege of Lying, when
there was an occasion for it.

An Examination of what Horace says in, Favor of Poets.
HORACE in the first Epistle of his second Book, which is addressed to Augustus
makes a sort of an Apology for the Poets, upon which it is no hard matter to
confute him: Hic error tamen, and levis haec insania quantas
Virtutes habeat sic collige; vatis avarus
Non temere est animus; versus amat, hoc studet unum,
Learn, says he, the Virtues that accompany this Fault and this slight Folly.
It Is rare that a Poet has a covetous Soul, he loves nothing but Verses: this is
his only Passion. But this Passion for making Verses sometimes agrees well
enough with that of getting Money, and there are few People that think they
ought to be better considered for the Pains they take than the Poets. Horace,
to do him Justice, was not Covetous, as far as we can jugde of him by his
Writings; but one of the Grecian Poets, whom he esteemed above the rest, I mean
the inimitable Pindar, was as greedy a Wretch as a Man well could be. His Odes
were purely written to get the Pence, and we find him all along making a
Panegyric upon Riches, which showed plainly enough that he expected a Present
for his Pains. What can be more scandalous than the Compliment he makes to
Xenocrates of Agrigentum, in the second of his Isthmians. The Muse, says he,
was not then a Friend to Gain, nor Mercenary, and it was not the fashion to
sell the sweet and agreeable Songs of Terpsichore, that have their Forehead
silvered; but at present she gives leave to follow the Advice of an Argian,
which is not repugnant to the Truth. Riches, Riches make a Man, cried he, being
himself destitute of Money and Friends: You are Wise, and I don't sing to an
Ignorant. This was enough to make a Man that knew his Right Hard from his Left
to comprehend, that the Poet wanted to be greased in the Hand. If This is he
who writ La Pucelle, a French Heroic Poem, in the composing of which he took up
near twenty Years, which occasioned the following Epigram upon him: Illa
Capellani dudum expectata Puella,
Post longa, in lucem tempora, venit anus.
The Reason why he was so long about it, was because he had a Pension of Two
Thosand Franks a Year from the Duke of Longueville, which he thought would be
stopped after the publishing of his Poem. See the Menag. Vol. 1. p. 38.
Chapelain had been comparable in any respect to Pindar, there had been another
Poet too, who must have been turned out of Horace's number. But Pindar alone is
sufficient to prove him mistaken, and I leave to such as have more leisure than
myself to compile a Catalogue of covetous Poets. I will only observe that
Horace contradicts himself afterward, where he thus rallies a Comic Latin
Poet. v. 173, Quantus sit Dossennus edacibus in Parasitis,
Qua non astricto percurrat pulpita socco,
Gestit enim in loculos nummum demittere, post hac
Securus cadat, an recto stet fabula talo.
How many Verses does Dossennus employ to describe gluttonous Parasites? How
much liberty does he allow himself in regard of the Measure? His whole Ambition
is to get Money in his Pocket for his Plays, and he does not trouble himself at
all whether they succeed afterward, or not. We might join Simonides to Pindar
and Dossennus; and those who have a mind to be more particularly informed of
his Begging and his Avarice, need only to consult Phaedrus, Lib. IV. Fab. xxiv.
What follows afterward in Horace is full as true as what went before:
Detrimenta, fugas servorum, incendia ridet,
Non fraudem socio, puerove incogitat ullam
Pupillo; vivit siliquis, and pane secundo.
He laughs at Losses, the running away of his Slaves, and the burning of his
Houses. He neither deceives his Friend, nor his Pupil; he lives upon Pulse and
Brown-bread. If this were true, the Poets would he more disengaged from the
Vanities of this wicked World, than even the Monks themselves, and such of our
Friends as we desired to free from the Temptations of this Life, we should not
advise to retire into a Religious House, but possess them with the Love of
Poetry: By that means they would be healed of all those Desires with which the
rest of Mankind are so violently agitated. But a Poet as Covetous as Pindar, or
several others, would be the last Man that I should repose any Confidence in. I
own that a frugal sober Poet may be able to live upon Pulse and Brown-bread,
although he has wherewith to live better if he pleases; but then he does not do
this by Virtue of his Poetry. Horace himself never observed Sobrietry, but
according to the Maxims of Epicurus, that is to say, When he found good Cheer
was incompatible with his Health, and so forth. If he delivers any Precepts for
Temperance in his Works, there are other places where he piously exhorts us to
drink and make much of ourselves. There is no necessity to point at these
places in order to refute him, for our Youth knows them but too well. In a
word, It Is downright Raillery to pretend to exempt the Poets from Vices, to
which they are subject as well as other Men. On the other hand, I think we
ought not to accuse them in particular, as if Poetry inspired them with ill
Inclinations. They are in this respect neither better nor worse than the rest
of the World: But to return to Horace, who continues to speak of them in this
manner: Militiae quamquam piger and malus, utilis urbi. Although a bad Soldier
and lazy, yet he forbears not to be Serviceable to the State. Horace designed
without question to be understood here the Poets of his own time; for he knew
well enough that Tyrtaeus, Alcaeus, and other Poets of Antiquity had performed
Miracles in the Field. For his own part, he fairly betook himself to his Heels
at the Battle of Philippi, Ovid. VII. L. 2.
Relicta non been parmula, leaving his Shield behind him. But let us now see
wherein a Poet may be useful to the State in time of Peace: Si das hoc, parvis
quoque rebus magna juvari,
Os tenerum pueri balbumque Poeta figurat.
Torquet ab obscoenis jam nunc sermonibus aurem,
Mox etiam pectus praeceptis format amicis,
Aspertiatis, and invidiae corrector, and irae.
Recte facta refert, orientia tempora notis
Instruit exemplis, inopem solatur and aegrum.
If you will grant me that small things may be serviceable to great Ones; it is
the Poet that forms words for Children who know not yet how to speak. He turns
aside their Ears even from obscene Discourses, and afterward instructs them in
wholesome Precepts. He corrects rough Behavior, Envy and Anger: He relates
noble Actions, and furnishes Youth with famous Examples: He comforts the Poor
and Sorrowful. In the second Verse Horace alludes to the Custom they had of
making Children learn the Poets, almost as soon as they were able to talk; this
helped to give them so great a Veneration for them, that they never left it
afterward, so that the most absurd things did not shock them in a more
advanced Age. For Instance, They made their Childen learn Homer, he that speaks
of the Gods not only as bare Men, but even as vicious Men; after which they
were disposed to receive all sorts of Absurdities in matters of Religion, and
accordingly they did so. What care the Ancients took to teach their Children
Homer may be seen in the beginning of the Allegories of Heraclides Ponticus.
The Philosophers complained, both before and after the time of Horace of this
ill effect of Fables; witness Plato in his Books of the Commonwealth, and
Plutarch in his Treatise, After what manner young Men ought to read the Poets.

It Is to no purpose to say, That we find good Examples in him; for to humble
that Excuse, we likewise find some of the worst that can be. Homer frequently
extols Virtue, but then he represents very wicked Men as Favorites of Heaven.
Achilles, for Instance, is protected by the Gods in a most extraordinary
manner, because he is the Son of Thetis, although he was hot and ungovernable,
and more like to a wild Beast, than a Man. He never describes the Gods as
lovers of Virtue or haters of Vice, as he ought to have done, but on the
contrary divided among themselves upon the different Interests of Men below,
and that by Passion merely, without any regard to good Manners, or the Justice
of the Cause. As many of them espoused the Trojan, as the Grecian Party, although
the Quarrel of the first is really not to be defended. The succeeding Poets,
who were blind Admirers of Homer, took no more care than he did to give us good
Examples, as it might easily be made appear if it were necessary. We are only
obliged to them for a Moral Sentence now and then interspersed in their
Writings, for which they are beholding to the Philosophers.

As for what Horace lays down, That the Poets turn aside Youth from obscene
Discourses, it would be no hard matter to produce abundance of places in Homer
and Hesiod, that are good for nothing but to give us very villainous Ideas, and
to Debauch the Minds of young People, if in producing them, I should not commit
the same Fault as they did. Let a Man not only take Ovid and Catullus into his
Hands, and an infinite number of other good Poets, but even Horace himself,
without castrating them, and then see what a heap of filthy Stuff he may find
in them. But the Morals of the virtuous Horace, were not over-rigid, no more
than those of his Master Epicurus, and he succeeded infinitely better with him
to preach upon the Juice of the Grape, than to meddle with a continued Body of
Ethics.

His Satyrs are none of the fittest things in the World to reform Rudeness,
Envy and Anger, no more than those Satyrs of the other Poets that are still
remaining. They are all stuffed with Passages that proceed from these; although
there are here some Moral Precepts interwoven, but without connection, and
without Principles. Their Discourses resemble that of a certain Parson who
wished himself at the Devil, yet swore very heartily, that if he heard any of
his Parishioners Swear, or talk of the Devil, he would excommunicate them.
Horace himself shows us the intolerable Abuse of the ancient Poetry in these
remarkable words, where he speaks of the ancient Greek Comedy: -- Saevus apertam
In rabiem verti coepit jocus, and per honestas
Ire minax impune domos. Doluere cruento
Dente lacessiti; suit intactis quoque cura
Condition super communi. Quin etiam lex
Poenaque lata, malo quae nollet carmine quemquam
Describi; vertere modum, formidine fustis
Ad benedicendum, delectandumque coacti,
This cruel Raillery in time turned to downright Rage, and sawcily exposed the
most virtuous Families. Those that suffered by their stabbing Satyrs, were not
a little concerned, nay, even such as were not touched, took the Alarm by
reason of the common danger. At last certain Laws were enacted, with Penalties
affixed to them, to hinder them from writing scurrilous Lampoons against any
Man whatever. The Poets, for fear of a Cudgel, left off this way of Writing,
and were forced to divert and speak well of their Auditors. Aristophanes is
still extant, who was one of the principal Ornaments of this old Comedy, full
of Gall and Calumny, and in Horace's time abundance more were remaining upon
whom he set a great Value, as appears by diverse places in his Works. Now what
could a Man learn from Poets full of Scandal and Ribbaldry, such as
Aristophanes was, if he Read them with admiration, unless it were to Bite
without pity and discretion, and talk after the most insufferable rate that can
be imagined? Thus the reading of these Poets could not but be highly
prejudicial, notwithstanding Horace had so good an Opinion of them. Although we
don't introduce People by their Names in Comedies, as the ancient Greeks did,
yet for all that we have not left off writing scandalous Satyrs, where we
frequently name them, or else describe them so plainly, that all the World
knows who it is we mean. Epigrams likewise, that were always in vogue, are for
the generality pieces that Bite to some purpose. Those that have read Catullus,
Horace, Persius, Juvenal and Martial, know very well that what I here advance
is laterally true. After this we must needs own that Horace makes merry with
us, when he pretends to affirm that the Poets are very serviceable to reform
the Manners of young Men, and cure them of Anger, Envy, and a rude Behavior.

But it will be objected, that these very Poets, whom I have mentioned, have a
thousand moral Sayings in their Writings, and are useful, for instance, to
comfort Men in adversity or any ill Circumstances, as Horace says: I own all
this, but then you must grant me at the same time, that there are a thousand
other Passages in their Writings, that in all probability will produce the
quite contrary Effect. They frequently describe Riches, Honors, and Pleasure
in so lively and charming a manner; and on the contrary, they paint Poverty and
the sad Consequences of it, as something so dismal and insupportable, that
after a Man has read them, it is a hard matter for him not to be strangely cast
down. Let a Man read what Theognis has said of Poverty, and the care we ought
to take to avoid it, and he will own with me that the greatest Miser in the
World cannot say more. Yet he is a sententious Poet, and we put him into the
Hands of Boys for the sake of his moral Sayings. Let a Man read in Horace and
several other Poets, what they say of the pleasure a Man finds to be considered
in the World, to arrive at Honor and acquire Glory, and he will be satisfied
that the Descriptions they make of Virtue, which is to be esteemed, although it
is despised, are extremely forced in Comparison of the Praises they bestow upon
Honor and Reputation. The reason of this difference is, that the latter
Commendations pour down in a stream, whereas the former only come by fits and
starts, when they designed to imitate the Philosophers. I need not say any
thing of Pleasures to those that have read Horace, who know well enough that he
speaks of them in so insinuating a strain, that his Eloquence upon this Head is
wholly contagious. If we therefore find in the Poets some Passages that are
Good, which I don't deny, we likewise find in them abundance that are vicious,
so that we often find them arguing pro and con, without giving us any certain
steady Rules to discern Bad from Good. This is visible from Stobaeus's
Collection, wherein we may find upon several moral Subjects, Arguments on both
sides, drawn out of the Poets.

But to return to Horace, he goes on with this Panegyric upon those of his own
Profession in these Terms: Castis cum pueris ignara puella mariti
Disceret unde preces, vatem nisi Musa dedisset?
Poscit opem Chorus, and praesentia numina sentit.
Coelestes implorat aquas, docta prece, blandus,
Avertit morbos, metuenda pericula pellit,
Impetrat and pacem, and locupletem frugibus annum.
Carmine Dii superi placantur, Carmine Manes.
Young Boys and Maids that never knew what Marriage was, how should they learn
their Prayers, if the Muse had not given them Poets. The Chorus implores the
assistance of the Gods and finds their favor. They supplicate for Rain, they
avert Sicknesses and Dangers that are to be feared, they obtain Peace and
fertile Years. Verse equally appeases the heavenly and infernal Deities.

I will not say that all this is pure Banter out of Horace's Mouth, who did not
believe that the Gods concerned themselves in the governing of the World, no
more than Epicurus; since to demand the assistance of the Gods, and to address
one's self to a fortuitous concourse of Atoms, according to, him is one and the
same thing. I will only observe that in this place he alludes to the Prayer
which the young Boys and Girls sung for three Days and Nights at the Secular
Games. But what can be more ridiculous than to affirm, that we should not have
known how to Pray, if there had been no Poets in the World? Were they then
afraid to Pray in Prose, or did they believe that the Divinity would be sooner
affected by a pompous Discourse in Meter than by a simple Prayer in Prose? Did
they think that the Gods were better pleased to hear their Praises in Music,
than an Elogium recited without singing? Though this be absurd in the highest
Degree, it is nevertheless very certain, that the Poets endeavored to make the
World believe it, in order to make their Art more valued. They have feigned
Miracles, and made Souls come back from Purgatory (for by the by the Pagans had
their Purgatory as well as the Christians,) to propagate this Belief, that the
Deity took greater Pleasure to be praised in Verse than Prose. See Phaedrus IV.
Fab. 24.
They have told us that Simonides having agreed for a certain Price with a
Champion to compose an Ode upon his Victory, finding this Champion was too
obscure a Fellow to furnish a Poet with Materials enough to make an Ode, he
took up two thirds of it with the Praises of Castor and Pollux; upon which the
Champion would give him no more than a third part of what he had bargained with
him for; but had the civility however to invite him to Dinner. Simonides, who
no doubt on it loved good Cheer, when it cost him nothing, did not fail to come
to the Entertainment, although the Champion had broke his word with him. As they
were merry at the Table, and Simonides laid heartily about him, to revenge
himself for the scurvy Trick the other had played him, two young Men covered
with Dust, and all over in a Sweat, as if they had rode Post, sent to speak
with Simonides immediately, who was no sooner informed of it, and had scarce
got out of the Room, when all on the sudden (Oh prodigious Miracle) the Roof of
the House fell upon the rest of the Guests, and buried them in the Ruins: and
the two Men who had sent to speak with Simonides were no where to be seen. All
the World, says the History, when they came to hear of this Accident, were
firmly persuaded that Castor and Pollux came on purpose to save our Poet's
Life, for having praised them in his Ode. Those that believed this Legend, to
be sure paid Simonides well, when they employed him. By this means he filled
his strong Chest, which he carried about him to put his Money in; for he had, as
he himself said, two Chests, where he deposited the Rewards that were given
him, one of which was always very light, and the other pretty heavy. In the
former he put the Compliments that were made him, and in the other his Money.

What is reported of Pindar was no less ingeniously contrived to show what
esteem the Gods had for the Incense of the Poets. Pausan, Boeoticor. p. 515.
A little before his Death he dreamt, that the Goddess Proserpina reproached
him with having composed Hymns upon all the Deities except herself, but that
she expectd that he would write one in her Praise, so soon as he came to her
Dominions. Soon after he was dead, he appeared in a Dream, as the Tradition
goes, to an old Kinswoman of his at Thebes, and sung to her a Song in honor of
this Goddess, which our ancient Gentlewoman remembered so well, that she wrote
it down, as soon as she awaked, in the very words she heard it, The Priestess
of Delphos, as the same Author informs us, did a considerable Service by
Apollo's Order to a Poet of so covetous a Soul as Pindar was, for she commanded
those of Delphos to give him a share of all the first Fruits, which they
offered to Apollo. After this manner did the Poets and their Friends endeavor
to persuade the World, that the Gods esteemed their Language much more than
that of other Men, and consequently that they obtained of them whatever they
had occasion for, more easily than any other People.

This is the Doctrine that Horace in the abovementioned Verses preaches to
Augustus and his Readers, as earnestly as he was able. The credulous People
actually believed it, but what would not those People swallow down, who
imagined that they appeased the Indignation of the Gods by dancing about their
Altars? A great part of the Pagan World, as a witty Man has remarked, were
strongly persuaded that they paid their Gods in good Money, when they paid them
in Dances and Songs. As these two things are nearly related one to another,
there is no question but the Poets did all that in them lay to entertain the
People in these Imaginations. Thus we find in the Grecian and Roman History,
that whenever they thought their Gods were angry with them, they consecrated
certain Sports and Games to them, in which Dramatical Representations, Dances
and Songs made a great part.

Why the Roman Law grants no Immunity to Poets.
HOWEVER it seems the Poets were never able to gain the Roman Lawyers over to
their side. At least the Emperor Justinian has inserted into the Code a Law of
Philip, which is not much for their Reputation or Favor. In the fifty second
Title Lib. 10. where we find a Collection of Laws made by diverse Emperors in
favor of Grammarians, Rhetors, Lawyers and Physicians, in which Immunities,
Privileges, and public Stipends are granted to those that taught these Sciences
or exercised them by public Authority; we see this Law of the Emperor Philip.
Poetae nulla Immunitatis Prarogativa juvantur: The Poets enjoy not the
Privilege of any Immunity. We cannot accuse Philip, as if he were the only
Person that had not been favorable to the Poets, for if any Ordinance had ever
passed in their Favor, Trebonian had not failed to insert it into the Code.
It Is probable that after Philip's time, some Poets who had a good Opinion of
themselves, would have had their share in the Immunities, which the Professors
of other Sciences enjoyed, and that Complaint of this being made to the
Emperor, he explained in this manner the Laws in favor of those that taught
the Sciences publicly. The Interpreters of the Code have taken a world of
pains to find out the Reason of this Law, as I have observed in those whom I
have consulted, but have missed it in my Opinion. However several good Reasons
may be assigned: The first is, That the public Masters of other Sciences are
serviceable to the State, by instructing the Youth in useful Knowledge; but a
Poet whose chief Business it is to spend his time in composing Romances in
Verse, (for Epic Poems are the sublimest Productions of Poetry) what such
mighty Service does he do the State, as to deserve a public Recompense? No
Roman Emperor ever believed it, and for that Reason they would not grant the
Poets any Immunities In the second place, If there was any Advantage in having
a set number of Poets in the Republic, the Grammarians ought to be thanked for
it, who without being Poets themselves, taught all that was to be taught of the
art of Poetry; witness those who have written the best about it, yet were no
Poets. In short, had any Immunities been granted to the Poets, all the Subjects
of the Roman Empire had busied themselves in making of Verses, and had
pretended to pass for Poets, only to be excused from other Duties of the State.
Then you would have seen, Corvos Poetas, and Poetridas picas. "Crows turn
Poets, and Pies Poetesses. Don't tell me that they might have erected Tribunals
to distinguish between good and bad Poets. What a prodigious number of such
Courts must have been erected to read and examine all the Pieces that would
have been brought before them, which could not have been done without a vast
Expense to the Public. Besides that several notorious Abuses would have of
necessity crept in, which I need not recount at large. I will only say, That
every Fellow who thought he was able to equal Chaerilus (a dull heavy Rascal in
Alexander's time, who made him an odd sort of a Present for some Verses he had
written in his Praise) would have put in his Claim to these Privileges, it
being highly reasonable, that a Man who would have been judged to be a good
Poet by Alexander, the Disciple of Aristotle, and Admirer of Homer, should be
recknon'd in this number. The Emperors would have been persecuted every hour
of the Day by Poets of all sorts and sizes, bringing their Verses to them, and
complaining of the great Injury that had been done them, to deny them this
honorable Name. It cannot be replied to this, that every one is not capable of
making Verses, for when such Feats are to be done, but especially in one's
Mother Tongue, a Million of Blocheads think themselves able to do it, and this
ridiculous Imagination would soon overspread all the World out of hopes of
Gain, Persius in Prologo.
Quis expedivit Psittaco suum (...),
Picasque docuit verba nostra conari?
Magister artis, ingenique largitor
Venture, negatas artifex sequi voces.
Quod si dolosi spes refulserit nummi,
Corvos Poetas and Poetridas Picas,
Cantare credas Pegaseium melos.
Who was it, says a Poet, that taught Parrots to cry, Good morrow in Greek, and
Pies to endeavor to talk as we do? The Belly, which is the Master of Arts,
which gives Wit, and makes them imitate Words that Nature never taught them. If
there were a deceitful Appearance of the least Gain you should have Crows
become Poets, and those Poetesses the Pies to sing most admirable Verses. I
would never advise any Prince to make this Experiment, but for fear of
extinguishing the poetic Fire he may bestow Rewards upon those that are capable
of teaching other Sciences, and give them leave to make Verses now and then, if
they have a Talent that way.

Whether Epic Poets have written with a design to instruct or to divert.
I HAVE said in the beginning of this Work that the Poets are not altogether
unuseful. I don't pretend here to unsay it; but I dare affirm that the Epic
Poets never proposed to themselves Instruction as the principal part of their
Design, but only to give Diversion to the Reader, and instruct him no farther
than it contributed to the Ornament of his Poem. I know indeed that those that
have written about the Art of Poetry are of a different Opinion, but I am
satisfied they have rather said that which the Poets ought to have done, than
what they have actually done. To convince the Reader likewise of this, we need
only examine some few of their principal Reasons.

A Man Le Bossu, L. I. c. 3.
of Wit who has written about Epic Poetry in French with a great deal of Art
and Perspicuity, thus defines an Heroic Poem. It Is, says he, a Discourse
invented with Art to form the Manners by Instructions disguised under
Allegories of an important Action, which is told in Verse in a manner probable,
diverting and wonderful. But if we look more nearly upon it, we shall find that
this Definition is only the Definition of an Idea. For in fine if I should
deny, that it appears by any place of Homer and Virgil, that they had any other
design than that of pleasing their Readers, no body can tell how to prove the
contrary. It will be urged perhaps that we may draw certain Instructions from
those Events that are related in their Poems. But I maintain that there never
was any Narration in the World from which some sort of a Moral might not be
deduced, although the Author of it never dreamt of any such thing. Take any
Romance or Novel you please, and I will engage to draw some moral Instructions
out of it, which the Writer of that Romance or Novel had not any intention to
give us. As Man is a rational Creature, subject to Laws which regulate his
Conduct, he can scarce say any thing, upon which one may not be able to
moralize as much as he pleases. Therefore to be assured that any Poet had a
design to give us certain Lessons, it is necessary that he should tell us so
himself, or at least set it down in his Writings after such a manner that no
body could doubt it. Now it is certain that there is nothing in Homer or in
Virgil that can convince us that they designed to instruct us in certain moral
Doctrines.

I take it for granted, that if by the help of our reasoning we deduce moral
Instructions out of these Poets, conformable to the Ideas of Virtue and Vice
which they might have (for we must judge of them by their Ideas, and not by our
own) we may likewise by the like Reasonings draw quite contrary Conclusions.
Now if this be true, it is visible that what they say in favor of Virtue, and
against Vice, is of very little Advantage to the World.

Let us see what they say of the Fable of the Iliads, or of that which the Poet
has invented, with a design to insinuate something to the Greeks. Ibid. c. 8.
We are told, That Homer seeing Greece divided into so many States as it had
Cities, yet upon emergent Affairs frequently obliged to unite in one body
against the common Enemy, designed to let his Countrymen see in his Iliads
that nothing but a good Understanding between them could make any of their
Designs that were formed and carried on by so many Generals, to succeed; and on
the contrary, that Divisions and Quarrels proved always fatal to these
Confederacies. Therefore Homer, as they pretend built his Fable upon this great
Truth, that a Misunderstanding of Princes certainly Ruins their Dominions. I
sing, says he, the Anger of Achilles, so pernicious to the Greeks, and which
has destroyed so many Heroes, while King Agamemnon and this Prince quarell'd
one with another.

I confess indeed that such an Instruction as this may be drawn from the
Iliads, and that Homer faithfully relates all the Calamities that the Grecians
suffered, during the contest between Agamemnon and Achilles. But let him have
told this in what manner he pleased, yet it is certain we might have inferred a
moral Doctrine from it, as I have already said; and we don't find in any one
place of his Poem, that he proposed this as his end. All that is said upon this
Head is nothing but mere Conjecture, and we have as much reason to reject as to
propose it. If we may conclude from Homer's Narration concerning the Greeks,
that in such a Confederacy as theirs was, it was necessary to pitch upon one
General, and obey his Orders, may we not infer the quite contrary Doctrine from
what he tells us of the Trojans; that because they obeyed Priam, who suffered
himself to be governed by his Sons; and their Captains and those of their
Allies blindly followed the Advice of Hector, they entirely ruined themselves?
Therefore Homer teaches us by all this, that the too great Authority of any
Prince, as was that of King Priam, supported by his Sons, is the ruin of a
State, which much necessarily be undone, let it be never so unanimous, when it
is ill governed. It had been much better for this Prince and his Family that
they had not had Authority enough to keep Helen, in spite of the Trojans, for
then by delivering her to her Husband, they had avoided a War, which brought
the most dismal Calamities upon them, that were ever mentioned by the Poets.
What may not a Man be able to say on this Occasion, upon that admirable Maxim
of good Policy, That in a well-regulated State there ought not to be any
Authority superior to the Laws, or any single Person who may do whatever he
pleases, without fearing to be called to an Account for it? One might likewise
make most excellent Observations upon the Counsel of See the eighteenth Book of
the Ilias.
Polydamas to go back into Troy to avoid the Indignation of Achilles, and upon
Hector's Answer, where one might show that a General ought to listen to the
Advice of his principal Officers, and that it is much better to let slip an
Opportunity of gaining some Advantage over the Enemy, than to Ruin one's self
to all intents and purposes, by obeying a General who abuses his Authority, and
hazards all. Besides one may say, That Homer had it never in his Thoughts to
show that Divisions were of fatal consequence, since in his Poem he introduces
the Gods strangely See particularly the 20th. Book.
divided between themselves about the Quarrel of the Trojans and Greeks, yet did
not believe they were to be blamed for it.

To come now to the Bossu, Lib. I. c. 10.
Odysses: It Is pretended that the principal Design of the Poet is to make it
appear, that the Absence of a Person from his own House, or his not having a
vigilant Eye upon all that is done there, occasions great Disorders in his
Affairs, so that the principal and most essential part of the Action is the
Absence of the Hero. It cannot be denied but that Homer designed to describe
the Absence of Ulysses, and the Irregularities it caused in his Family; but who
can assure us that this was his chief Design, and that it was not rather to
affect and divert the Reader, by raising his Compassion for Ulysses and his
Fireside, and by exciting his Admiration and Curiosity by those extraordinary
Accidents that befell him? He was obliged to make Ulysses very prudent, and much
favored by the Gods to get himself out of those Dangers in which he was
involved, which makes him to be the more admired and esteemed by the Reader. I
confess, that among all this there is a great deal of good Instruction, but
it is only an embroidery of the Fable, and not the principal Design of the Poet.
We find the like Reflections in all our Romances, although the Authors of them had
no other end but to amuse the Reader, by recounting to him in an agreeable
manner, a Fiction for a true History. We cannot therefore draw from thence any
Consequence in favor of Homer, unless we likewise ascribe to Scudery and
Calprenede a philosophical Design to instruct the Public by their Romances,
whose only end was to amuse and divert those People, that are at a loss how to
employ their leisure Hours.

Besides, had he designed to insinuate that a Prince ought not to absent
himself from Home, he had much better have taken any other Person than Ulysses,
who left his House and Native-Country with great Unwillingness, and if he was
absent, it was only because he could not help it. He ought to have chosen one
that went a rambling out of Indiscretion, and loyter'd abroad merely for want
of a good Conduct, which had much more clearly discovered what it was the Poet
intended to teach. By seeing Imprudence punished, we should much sooner have
comprehended that a Prince is obliged in Interest to stay at Home, than in
seeing some Disorders happen in a Man's House who is kept abroad in spite of
his own Inclination, and is absent only because it is impossible for him to
return home.

But suppose these Reasons were not so strong as they are, we might at one blow
destroy the abovementioned Hypothesis, by offering others that carry as much
probability in them. Nothing could hinder a Man from asserting upon the same
Principles, that the Poet's Design was to show that no hindrance of what Nature
soever can hinder the execution of the Decrees of Fate. This Doctrine frequently
occurs in Homer, and indeed the Odysses is nothing but a Comment upon it. We
find Ulysses there surrounded with Pleasures and strong Temptations, to make
him forget his Native-Country. We find him encompast with terrible Dangers, out
of which he happily frees himself, because Heaven had decreed that he should
return home in safety. Homer tells us Odyss. Lib. 1. verse. 16.
not far from the beginning of the Odysses, that when the Years of Vlysses's
Absence were over, the time was come wherein the Gods had destined his return
to Ithaca, and that he did not without some difficulty find himself even among
his Friends.

One might likewise pretend that Homer designed to describe conjugal Love to
us, by representing on one side Penelope not to be moved with Caresses and
Menaces of her Suitors, during so long an Absence, and suffering herself rather
to be ruined by these Fellows, who all the while they were Courting her, lived
at her Expense, than to comply with any one of them; and on the other side,
Ulysses who could not be overcome by the Charms of Circe, nor of Calypso, nor
of the Daughter of Alcinous, but always passionately desired to see his dear
Penelope again, to whom nevertheless he was not so faithful as she was to him.
But even this contributes to show his Constancy, since Goddesses themselves
such as Circe and Calypso were, who refused him no Favors, were not able to
detain him in their agreeable Islands, although they tempted him with so great a
Bribe as Immortality. It is true that Homer mixes the Love of his
Native-Country with his Desire to return, but it is not incompatible with that
of his Wife. Patriae, De Ora. L. 1. c. 44.
says Cicero, tanta est vis, ac tanta natura, ut Ithacam illam in asperrimis
saxulis, tanquam nidulum affixam sapientissimus vir immortalitati anteponeret.
The Love of one's Country is so forcible and natural, that the wisest Man of
antiquity preferred Ithaca, which is situated like a Bird's Nest among sharp
Rocks, to Immortality itself.

It will be granted me, that since we can give so many different
interpretations to this pretended Allegory, which composes the Odysses, it is
not very probable that Homer proposed any of them in particular, as the end and
mark of his Work, or that if he had such a Design in his Head, he has executed
it very ill. An Allegory which is so obscure, that it is equally capable of
different Meanings, is no longer an Allegory, but a Riddle.

What is likewise said of the Le Bossu Live. 1. c. 11.
moral Design, which Virgil proposed to himself in his Aeneis, is no better
founded. Some People would needs persuade us, that this Poet designed to
instruct Augustus, as the Founder of a mighty Empire, and to inspire him, as
well as his Successors with the same Spirit and Conduct, which had made this
Empire so great. A wise Roman, say they, who was an able Politician in his time
('it is Cicero they mean) informs us that Clemency was so peculiar to this
Government, that it reigned there even in the midst of War, and that nothing
but downright absolute Necessity could make them suspend the Observing of it.
They maintain that this is the Instruction, which Virgil designed to give the
Roman Emperors in his Aeneis.

But to this it may be replied in the first place, that Virgil indeed
represents Aeneas all along as one that was very devout, and ready on all
occasions to follow the Orders of Heaven; but he does not make him exercise any
extraordinary Compassion toward the Vanquished. We don't find that he any
where signalizes his Clemency. On the contrary he makes him in all his Battles
kill those that cried to him for Quarter, without the least remorse.

In the second place, If we had a mind to reason upon the Supposition that
Virgil designed to give us moral Instructions, it is more natural to imagine
that his Intention was to demonstrate, that we ought to submit to the Orders of
Providence, although they appear hard and difficult to execute. This is a Thought
which runs through the whole Aeneis, as it would be easy to demonstrate. We
might likewise say, That he designed to inform the Romans, that the
Establishment of a great Empire is not made without a particular Providence of
Heaven, and to possess them consequently with devout Thoughts. But these
Projects are by no means fit for an Epicurean, and all the World knows that
Virgil embraced the Opinions of Epicurus as well as his Friend Horace.

If we must plainly deliver the Truth, it is highly probable that Virgil meant
nothing else than to flatter Augustus and the Romans in particular, by making a
Romance about the Origin of their Empire, and of the Julian Family, which he
deduces from Iulus, the Son of Aeneas, according to the Tradition of that
Family. This was certainly the Poet's Aim, who seldom loses any occasion to
flatter Augustus and the Romans in general, and not to exhort the Emperors to
Clemency.

Thus you have beheld the moral Projects of the three finest Epic Poems that
were ever composed, entirely overthrown; after which, it will not be hard to
believe that Tragic Poems are not written for nobler Ends. Aristotle defines
Tragedy thus: It Is, Chapter IV. Of his Poetry.
says he, the Imitation of a grave entire Action, which has a just Greatness,
etc. which by the means of Compassion and Terror fully purges in us these and
the like Passions. Thus the Tragic Poets would pretend to heal the Passions of
their Auditors, or at least to lessen them, by exciting Terror and Compassion
in their Souls. I will not say, that no Tragic Poet in the World ever proposed a
moral Design to himself; but I believe that for the generality they have not
troubled themselves about that matter, and that the moral Passages scattered up
and down in their Compositions, are rather to embellish the Subject, and please
the Audience, than with a Design to calm their Passions. It may indeed
sometimes so fall out, that the Spectator by seeing the Calamities of Humane
Life represented on the Stage, and the incertainty of Honor and Greatness
described in a lively manner, on purpose to affect him, may moderate himself a
little better in his Desires and Transports; but Terror and Pity are not
healed, by being often raised in the Heart: On the contrary, in process of time
Men accustom themselves to them so well, that the least thing at long run is
capable to disturb them. After this manner all Habitudes are formed. By having
the same Movements often within us they become so natural, that it is very
difficult to disengage ourselves from them. But it will be objected perhaps,
that by virtue of seeing these sad and terrible Objects, which are represented
in Tragedies, we may come in time to be less sensible of the impressions of
Pity and Fear; as Soldiers use to despise Dangers, wherein they frequently find
themselves engaged. But this Comparison signifies just nothing, for Soldiers as
often as they find themselves in Danger, do all they can to dissipate their
Fears, and encourage one another: whereas a Tragic Poet sets all his Engines on
work to raise the Passions of the Auditors; and as the latter takes no manner
of care to oppose his Design, it is no wonder that at last they contract a habit
of those very Passions which the Poet excites in them.

It will still be urged that Examples of the Misfortunes of Human Life, which
we see in Tragedies, dispose those that behold them often represented on the
Theater, to be less surprised at them, whenever they fall upon themselves.
Vide Marc. Antoninum. L. XI. n. 6. and ad eum locum Tho. Gatakerum.
It is true that the Philosophers endeavor to make this use of Tragedy, and
that they frequently cite Instances out of them, to persuade Men to Constancy.
But it is one thing to endeavor to draw some Profit from a thing which is
established, and another to do the same thing with a certain Design. The
Philosophers are to be commended for their Endeavors to lead Men to Virtue, by
the very Objects of their Passions and their Pleasures; but the Tragic Poets
rather busied their Brains to procure the Applause of the People and their
Diversion, than their Reformation or Amendment. Thus they oftener arrive at the
first of these Ends, than at the second.

The Comic Poets pretended also to have a share in this Honor, and it was
commonly said, To Teach Comedy as well as Tragedy, to mean the publishing of
any Dramatic Compositions. In effect, by representing common Life, and rallying
the Follies of the World, they might perhaps make a better Impression upon
their Auditors, than by pompously setting forth the extraordinary Calamities of
Heroes and Princes, after the manner of the Tragic Poets. There are but few
Kings, and Great Men in the World, to whom alone the Examples of Tragedy can be
well suited: But on the contrary, we have infinite numbers of private Men, who
may, to their great Advantage, behold their Passions and Humors lashed and
ridiculed in Comedy. But before the Comic Poets can pretend to pass for public
Teachers of Virtue, it is necessary that they should be first Philosophers, or
else that none but Philosophers should deal in Comedy: As we find it to be
quite othewise, it is no wonder that our Comedies, being composed by those that
are not the most regular Men in the World, have no less contributed to
propagate Vice, than to show the Folly of it. They don't represent
Intemperance, and diverse other Vices as blamable, but when they are carried to
great Excess, that is to say, never but when they may hurt the Estabishment or
Fortune of those People who abandon themselves to them. Now, sound Philosophy
demands a great deal more Virtue from us than will just keep us from being
Scandalous, or ruining ourselves in the World. Thus, whatever they allege for
themselves, the Comic Poets seem to have nothing else in view but to divert the
Public, and to get Reputation and Money by diverting them. To compass this, they
were obliged to mix abundance of moral Sentences in the Conversation of their
Persons, because they frequently hold such sorts of Discourses; and because
that after they have laughed heartily, the Public is diverted with these
Sallies of Morality, rather for the variety of the Entertainment, than for any
Instruction. A sufficient Proof of this is that they are not a jot the better
for it, as a Plautus in Rud. Act. IV. Sec. 7.
Comic Poet has very well observed in these Verses.

Spectavi ego pridem Comicos ad istum modum
Sapienter dicta dicere atque iis plaudier,
Cum illos sapientes mores monstrabant populo;
Sed cum inde suam quisque ibant divorsi domum,
Nullus erat illo pacto, ut illi jusserunt.
I have often seen that after the Comic Poets have said good things, and that
they have been applauded for them, while they taught good Manners to the
People, as soon as they were got home, no body was the better for their Advice.

I don't pretend to prove by this Discourse that we cannot give very useful
Precepts in Verse, and that they have not been actually given in them. All that
I would show by it is, that whatever has been said of the moral Designs of the
finest Compositions of ancient Poetry, has much more appearance than Solidity
in it, when we come to examine it nearly. This does not in the least hinder,
but that a Poet, who has tasted the good Maxims of a Philosophy which is
somewhat severer, than that of the greatest Poets of Antiquity was, and who
possesses them as they did the Opinions of their own time, may not undertake a
Poem with the same Views, that have been vainly ascribed to them, and by this
means re-establish the Honor of Poetry, which has been defamed by the Faults
we have already taken notice of. It Is of such a Poet, that we may truly say
what Horace says of him, whom he endeavored to instruct in his Art of Poetry:
Omne tulit punctum, qui miscuit utile dulci,
Lectorem delectando, pariterque monendo.
that Writer gains the good Opinion of the whole World, who mixes the useful
with the agreeable, by diverting his Reader, and giving him good Advice at the
same time. But I am mightily afraid that such a Poet has for a long while been
nothing else but a pure Idea without reality.

CHAP. II. Of True and False Eloquence.
NOTHING is more esteemed than Eloquence, not only among Men of Learning, but
even the Vulgar: However, there is scarce any thing of which for the
generality, we have a wronger Idea. It Is certain that it is the most useful
thing in the World, when we really possess it; but it is as certain that when we
only believe we possess it, and have persuaded the Multitude of it, there is
scarce any thing so pernicious. We not only take a Phantom for something Real,
but we frequently put off a Falsehood for a Truth, or at least instead of
illustrating the Truth we lose it in the thickest Darkness. I call true
Eloquence, that the Reader may not be deceived, The Art of speaking Truth, as
we ought to speak it, to convince reasonable Men, to render them attentive, and
to affect them, if it is necessary, while we speak it. On the contrary, false
Eloquence is an Art, if it deserves such a Name, of recommending Falsehood
instead of Truth, and of making the same Respect be paid to the former, which
is only due to the latter: To which we ought to add the want of Address in
those that propose Truth itself, but do it in so awkward and silly a manner,
that they make their Hearers doubt of it, and that no one listens to them, nor
is affected by their Discourse, although in the bottom it is true.

To show the Excellence of true Eloquence, and the Disadvantages of the false,
would take up a complete Treatise of Rhetoric, which is far from my Thoughts at
present. I will only make some general Reflections upon the four parts of this
Science, Invention, Disposition, Expression and Pronunciation.

I. INVENTION consists, Of Invention.
as every one knows, in discovering all that can be said upon a Subject we have
chose to treat of; but as we ought not to say every thing that comes into our
Heads, although it belongs to the Subject in hand, because then we should never
make an end, we ought necessarily to make choice of those Thoughts that are
proper to the end we propose to ourselves: and herein the Art and Address of an
Orator consists. Unless a Man is perfectly Stupid, and has never read in his
Life, it is impossible for him to be wholly unprovided of Matter, when he has
any Truth or historical Fact to discourse upon; but then, unless he understands
the Art of Thinking justly, and has often made long and profound Reflections
upon it, unless he has a true Relish and Discernment, we find that he generally
makes an ill Choice of the things that present themselves to his Mind: he will
enlarge too much upon things of little Importance, or dwell upon such as have
no connection with the Subject in hand, while he omits those that are more
important and Effential, or touches them but slightly. This is what happens
daily, but especially to Preachers, who without Understanding the Rules of Art,
learn to preach by Rote and Custom.

But to talk more particularly upon this Occasion, we are apt to commit three
Faults principally, which don't appear so to the Eyes of those who are not able
to distinguish true Eloquence from the false, but which are not the less for
all that, and which for that very Reason, produce very ill Effects.

The first is, that abundance of People are of the Opinion, That provided they
talk a great deal, so that their Matter never fails them, it is enough to give
them the Character of eloquent Men, unless it happens that they are altogether
destitute of exterior Talents that relate to the Style and Pronunciation. To be
able to talk an Hour or too about a Trifle of no Consequence, although without
Choice and Judgment, seems to be the finest thing in the World, provided a Man
does not hesitate but runs glibly on, and moves his Auditors. We foolishly
persuade ourselves that we acquire the Reputation of Men of Wit, in spite of
good Sense, as if it were possible to be one without the other. It Is the same
with Authors as with Orators, although they ought to be much more severe in the
Choice of their Thoughts, as a Reader is infinitely harder to please, than one
that hears. However, if they can so order Matters, as to make a large Book, and
they don't want Words when they are attacked, they think that they perfectly
satisfy all Difficulties, and answer all Objections. Thus this sort of People
fall foul upon every thing without Distinction, which does not suit with their
Passions, in a vain Presumption, that a Torrent of Words will effectually do
their Business for them, and that they shall never want a Supply. I knew a Man
of this Character, who thought that Talking and Proving were the same thing; so
that after he had talked a great deal, he fancied he brought abundance of
Proofs; and on the contrary, that those that talk little prove nothing. He
persuaded himself that the World counts the Sentences in a Book just as they do
Soldiers in an Army, and that the more Ink a Man uses, the more Reason he has
on his side. One may apply to this Man a Saying of See Aulus Gell. L. 1. c. xv.
Salust, Satis loquentiae, sapientiae parum, Words enough, but little good
Sense. On the other hand, those that are really Eloquent, after they have
formed a clear Idea of the Propositions they intend to prove, (for this in
short is the end of all Discourses whatever they are, if they are reasonable)
make use only of those Proofs that appear the most simple, the most direct, and
the most sensible, and reject all the rest. After this they adorn the Proofs
they have chosen with all the Decorations that solid Eloquence uses to employ,
and of which I shall take occasion to discourse at the Conclusion of these
Reflections. When they have a fertile Subject, which deserves to be enlarged
upon, they talk the longer of it: But if it is Barren, and the thing in hand is
not of that importance, as to require a long Examination, they soon dispatch
it. In a word, they lengthen their Discourse according to the Nature of their
Subject; whereas others amplify theirs, according to the extravagant Desire
they have to talk much, or to make a show of their pretended Eloquence. The
former talk when they have something to communicate, which deserves to be
heard, and the latter never hold their Tongue, but when no Body will do the
Penance to listen to them.

The second Fault we may observe in those that are only Masters of a false
Eloquence, and which concerns the Choice of what is proper to be said, is that
they believe that if they are not allowed to say every thing that comes into
their head, they are not however obliged to use no Arguments, but such as are
concluding. They flatter themselves that the World ought to consider them as
Persons of a nice Discernment, if they employ no Reasonings that are palpably
absurd, that shock the Imagination. The slightest Appearances and the most
uncertain Probabilities serve their turn. They perpetually confound the
Possible with the Probable, and the Probable with the True. Their Discourses
and Works are full of Reasonings of this Nature, which would no more endure the
Test of Logic, than a gilded Shilling would endure the Touchstone. If we
confine them to Syllogism, and carefully consider their equivocal Expressions,
and their precarious Principles, we shall find at first sight, that they are
nothing but pure Sophisms which are founded upon Ambiguities or Suppositions
that cannot be defended: We shall find that by Reasoning after this manner,
there is nothing which we cannot attack and nothing which we cannot prove. We
may meet abundance of Examples of this Nature in the Writings of the ancient
Philosophers, and Fathers of the Church, especially when they Dispute or Reason
upon the Old Testament. In every Page we find Suppositions altogether
uncertain, and which it is impossible to prove, if once we deny them, and
Arguments that are wholly built upon the Ambiguity of some Words, which they
would not give themselves the trouble to explain, to have an occasion to Reason
out of our sight. It will be told me perhaps, that I ought to talk more
respectfully of the Fathers, and that the consent of Antiquity, for Reasoning
in this manner, is a sufficient Proof that it is warrantable and good. But I
have nothing to do here with Theological Doctrins, wherein their Authority uses
to be of weight: Logic, at present, is the Business in debate, which will not
allow the Authority of Citations, but only the strict Rules of Art. Whoever
violates them, is to be tried before the Tribunal of Logicians, though it were an
Ecumenical Council, confirmed by several others. There is no Authority in the
World that can make Arbitrary Laws for good Reasoning, or change a Sophism into
a true Syllogism, or make a just Argument become a Sophism, without altering
something in it. No Person has power to grant Immunities to the Prejudice of
the Rights of Reason, or to make any Exception in favor of any thing of this
Nature. We must either obey the Rules, or undergo the Sentence. The true
Rhetoricians follow upon this occasion the Authority of the Philosophers, or
rather the inviolable Light of good Sense. They maintain, that when a Man is to
prove any thing solidly, he ought to employ no Reasonings, but those that are
solid: If he will needs make use of probable Reasonings, whatever he concludes
from them, cannot be more certain than the Proofs he brings. All that he can
make of them will only amount to a Probability. Now as there are several
Degrees of Probability, a Man likewise ought to have a regard to that, and to
make slight Appearances go for no more than they are really worth.

In the Civil Law, for Example, there is no Authority which can make a bad
Consequence go for a good one. When any thing is to be proved by a Law or an
Act, we must plainly show that the Terms of that Law or Act cannot be possibly
understood in another sense. Probability, especially when it is slight, serves
only to spoil our Cause: For the Advocate of the other side, let him underhand
his Profession never so little, will not fail to observe that nothing
concluding has been urged in the Case; and the Judges demand solid Proofs, and
not simple Conjectures. If any Man should be so ill-advised as to Reason at the
Bar upon the Laws, as Origene does upon the Bible, he would be hissed out of
the Court, and in a short time no Body would retain him, unless he entirely
changed his Method. Let People say what they please, since the Fathers never
had any such Privilege from Heaven, as to be exempted from following the Laws
of good Logic, we lie under no Obligation to believe that those Reasonings are
good in their Writings, which would be exploded any where else.

However, in several parts of the World, those that design for the Pulpit, read
them to model themselves upon their Eloquence, and to use, upon occasion, their
Words or their Arguments, and as if they durst not employ the Rules of Logic to
examine them by, they learn by little and little to Reason just as they did, and
at last to declaim against Reason, for fear, I suppose, lest the World should
find out their little Sophistry. This is one of the most crying Sins of
Ecclesiastical Eloquence, as it is managed in those Places where the Fathers are
the Copies they write after. A Man ought to leave his Reason and Logic behind
him in the Church Porch to be edified with such Preaching. Thus these arbitrary
Suppositipons, and irregular Reasonings have made the Italians say of these
sorts of Discourse, that, il creder e di cortesia, they believe them merely out
of good Manners and Civility: And for this cause when they have any false
Point, or any unjust Reasoning, their Answer is, guardate questo per la
predica, keep this Nonsense to yourself till you are a Preacher. They are
convinced by Experience, that abundance of things, which we patiently suffer
from the Pulpit, would be ridiculous in a serious Conversation of rational
Persons.

On the contrary, true substantial Eloquence suffers us to utter nothing for
Truth, but what we prove in so convincing a manner, that the strictest
Logicians can have nothing to object against it. If we have nothing, as I have
already said, but probable things to propose, she will oblige us to acquaint
our Auditors with it. As she has no other design but to instruct, and that in a
solid manner, so that the Reader shall not only be persuaded upon the spot, but
retain the Truth which has been demonstrated to him, in his Mind; she never
employs any of those tinsel Arguments that may glitter for a Moment, but soon
after disappear; the only uses the eternal and inviolable Lights of good Sense,
which appear to be so much the more true, the nearer we come to examine them.

However, now and then an occasion presents itself, where it is lawful for us
to make use of weak Reasonings for a little time. And this happens when our
Hearers or Readers are more affected by them than by the best Arguments. In
such a Case, we are obliged to accommodate ourselves to their Imbecility, in
order to gain them over to our side, and afterward to be in a condition to
instruct them better, when they can hearken to what we have to offer to them,
without prejudice. The Mind of Man is Haughty and Jealous, and sometimes he
cannot be undeceived but by himself, by our making a dexterous use of those
Principles which he admits for true ones so that he attributes the change, that
is made in him, to his own Knowledge, and not to that of another. We must
therefore make use of his Principles, which are frequently either false or
uncertain, as if they were built upon Truth, to make him draw a Consequence
from them, which be would not otherwise admit.

If we had only honest sincere Men to deal with, who search after nothing but
the Truth, then we need do no more than propose it clearly to them, in order to
bring them over to us: But we are obliged every moment of the day to undeceive
People that are governed by their Passions, and prepossessed by a thousand
Prejudices directly opposite to the Truth; and therefore we must, as far as
it is possible, Reason with such Men either upon common Principles, or their own
proper Ideas. If we let them see, that we are at too great a distance from
their Opinions, or that we look down upon their Errors with contempt, they
immediately take it for granted, that we despise their Persons, and this
Consideration alone makes them shut their Ears to the Truth. Upon this account
the Masters of this Art inform those that would persuade others, not to advance
any thing that may in the least wound the Imagination of their Auditors, and
make them suspect that we want Respect or Consideration for them. We may
observe this wise Precaution in the first Discourses which the Apostles
heretofore made to the Jews and Pagans, whom they managed with as much Address
as was possible. We may upon this Head, consider the Harangue which St. Paul
makes to the Athenians, in the 17th Chap. of the Acts where he makes use of the
Inscription upon an Altar, and the Words of a Greek Poet, and gives them the
best Meaning he could, to endeavor to gain these Idolaters, as it were, out of
their own proper Principles. We likewise find in his Writings that he managed
the Jews with great dexterity, before they had constrained him by their ill
treatment to break off with them, and address himself to the Gentiles. On these
Occasions, he says abundance of things which suppose the vulgar Opinions, though
he did not at the same time believe them to be altogether true. But we ought
never to use this Method, but when we are compelled, that is to say, when the
Truth would be rejected at first sight, if it appeared to be such, as it is
really in itself.

The third Fault that is to be censured in the Eloquence of several People, is
that they believe that they ought to be considered as Authors or Orators of a
good Judgment and Taste, when their Reasons are just and concluding, though they
never trouble themselves, whether they make for the Subject, or at least
whether what they propose to prove, is precisely the same with what they prove.
They don't explain the Questions in hand so clearly as they ought to be, and
the Reasons which afterward they bring, don't direct the Reader or Hearer to
find out those Truths that they engage to prove. They choose certain Reasonings
which they extend by diverse Reflections, and embellish with several Examples,
without concerning themselves about any thing else, but that what they deliver
be true in itself, and has some relation to what they treat of. Thus they put
the change upon their Auditors, and if they don't deceive them in the bottom of
things, they deceive them at least in their expectation. The Authors, whom I
have named, are full of this Cheat. The Title of their Works, and the fine
Promises they make at first to treat of certain Matters, draw on the Reader,
who is desirous to be instructed in them. But so soon as he sets himself to
read them, he perceives that his Author shams him off with something else than
what he expected to find in him. He cannot then forbear to cry out, Quo nunc se
proripit ille? Whither is the Man a going? It seems that so soon as he would
enter upon the Matter, the irregularity of his Imagination hurries his Reason
whither it never intended to go; like a restif Horse that runs away with a Man
in spite of his Teeth, when he has not strength or skill enough to keep him in
and govern him. He gallops away with mighty speed, and does not stumble, but
goes where no Body expected he should go.

On the contrary, those that know how to speak and write according to the Rules
of Art, propose at first the Question they intend to treat of, with all
Perspicuity imaginable, so that neither themselves, nor those that hear or read
them can possibly be deceived. They go to their Journey's end in the straitest
and plainest Road, and their whole Discourse conspires, if I may use the
Expression, to prove the same thing. The Auditor, or the Reader on his side,
perfectly well comprehending what he had a mind to demonstrate, and the Proofs
he brings to support it, finds himself satisfied and instructed, so that he is
never deceived upon the same Subject, so long as he remembers what he has
heard, or read.

The ill Effects of false Rhetoric.
THE Defects, I have remarked in false Eloquence, are at least in part the
occasion of several Disorders we see in the World, which nothing but true
Rhetoric can remedy.

The first is, that such People as suffer themselves to be born away by a
multitude of Words, by false Reasons, or Thoughts that make nothing to the
Subject in hand, are overwhelmed indeed with the noise of the Words, and the
great number of the Thoughts, but they understand not a syllable of the Matter.
Although they fancy they are much bettered by a Discourse of this nature which
they have heard or read, yet they cannot tell what it contains, nor reduce it
to certain clear and continued Heads. Every thing is confused, every thing is
turned upside down in their Minds and as Connection and Order are of excellent
use to the Memory, which otherwise is apt to be disordered and to lose what it
has learnt, these Gentlemen soon forget what they have read or heard.

The second Disorder, which this pretended Eloquence produces, is that those
People that are accustomed to it, come to lose their Taste and Judgment
insensibly, and at last find themselves utterly incapable of judging what ought
to be said and what omitted, what is good and what is bad reasoning, what is to
the purpose and what not. They are no longer able to separate what is treated
of from what makes nothing to the Subject, nor to discern the Proofs that are
brought to bring about ones Ends, from what is introduced merely for Show and
Ornament, or for the sake of some resemblance.

The third Disorder is, that if the End of the Discourse be to correct the
Faults of the Readers and Auditors, the multitude of impertinent Words, the
weakness of the Reasonings, and the judicious Choice of the Thoughts, produce
but very sorry Effects. As we are persuaded without knowing why or wherefore,
and have no clear and continued Principles to preserve ourselves from Error,
and to regulate our Conduct aright, our Manners will infalliby derive an
unhappy Tincture from the disorder of our Minds we do Good and Evil without
discerning them so distinctly as we ought to do, and our Lives become a
perpetual mixture of a little Virtue and a great deal of Vice. We know the
general Rules of Good and Evil confusedly, and we apply them almost by mere
accident to the particular Actions of Life.

Let us suppose on the contrary, that by some Miracle or other it so fell out
in some Kingdom or Republic, that they had no public Orator (the Reader will
soon perceive that I mean our Preachers here) nor so much as one Writer that
exactly observed the Rules abovementioned of good Rhetoric, I don't in the
least question but that we should soon behold a considerable change in their
Discourses and in their Lives. The public Assemblies would be excellent
Schools for the Heart and Mind to take a true cast in: We should not learn the
Trick there to pay ourselves with a parcel of insignificant words, we should
say nothing but what was to the purpose, and reason justly upon the Opinions of
Religion and upon Morality, and this Knowledge would loon diffuse itself all
over our Lives and Actions. We should no longer see such vast numbers of
People, that only do Good by mere accident almost, and only avoid Evil by mere
good luck, by reason of their confused and uncertain Lights, by which they
regulate their Conduct. But we must needs own, if we will speak out the truth,
as we ought to do in a Matter of so great importance, that we for the most part
see ten Orators that are proper to do Mischief, for one that is capable to
edify us solidly; so that we ought not to wonder if the uncertain Multitude
blunder and grope their way at midday, without knowing what Road they should
take, or implicitly follow the first Man they meet.

Of Disposition
II. THIS is enough to be said upon the Article of Invention, which is the most
important part of Rhetoric, and the foundation of all the rest, since it is
necessary we know what we ought to say, before we think how to range and
express it. Nevertheless it is of very great consequence to dispose the matter,
we have found out by Meditation, in a right order, because the disposition is
of infinite use to make others rightly understand what we intend to say, and to
make them perceive the force of the Proofs which we allege.

The Rhetors lay down good general Precepts concerning the disposition of a
Discourse, in regard to the Order we ought to observe between the parts which
compose it, and what we ought to follow in each of these parts. I find nothing
to censure in them as for what they teach upon this Head, and am of Opinion,
that those that speak in public would do very well to read over from time to
time the Precepts of the Masters of this Art, the greatest part of which are
founded upon good Sense. But there is one thing wanting in them, which is of
that consideration, that without it all their Precepts signify just nothing.
It Is this, that they say almost nothing about the essential ordering of the
Thoughts among one another, in each part of the Discourse, and which is
absolutely necessary, whether it be to avoid Repetions, or to instruct more
easily, and to convince the Reader or Auditor. This Order is not only necessary
in those Discourses which we pronounce without publishing them in Print; but
principally in Books of what nature soever they be. However one may justly say
that nothing has been more neglected not only by the ancient Orators, but
especially by the Philosophers, the greatest part of whose Discourses is a mere
Confusion and Chaos. Plutarch, for instance, among the Greeks, and Seneca among
the Latins, have written with the greatest Confusion in the World. The
ecclesiastical Authors have imitated them in this particular. We see both the
one and the other, frequently begin to treat of a Subject without taking the
least care to state the Question in Terms clear and without equivocation, and
then on they gallop, without knowing from whence they set out or whither they
are going, till such time as their Imagination is perfectly foundered, and they
can run no longer. Read their Treatises and Discourses over and over again, and
you will find a vast number of them, wherein you can neither comprehend the
principal Design they drive at, nor the Method they proposed to follow, in
order to execute it. The best are those, whose Design we can perceive in gross,
and where the Matter is not too far fetched, although there is no Order in it.
They heap together a world of Materials to build, as one would think, a fine
Structure, but afterward they throw them one upon another without Order and
any Rules of Architecture. Thus it is a difficult matter well to disentangle
this confusion of Thoughts, and to form a clear and continued Idea of their
Sentiments, which has in part proved the occasion of so many Disputes about
their Doctrine.

It must be owned, that those that write or speak now a days have much more
Method, at least for the greatest part; and it is an undeniable Truth, that in
this respect we very much surpass the Ancients, whatever the Admirers of
Antiquity may pretend. However there are abundance of People still in the
World, who never made any serious reflection upon a Method to dispose their
Reasons, in such a manner as shall be proper to make their Discourse clear and
concluding. If they sometimes succeed in this, it is by mere hazard, for they
trespass oftener against the most essential Rules.

These Rules had continued as it were hidden among the Geometricians till the
time of Descartes, who first discovered the great Use that might be made of
them upon all occasions. Since the Discoveries that have been made in our Age
about them, several Persons have enlarged and even rectified his Thoughts as we
may see in the Logic of the Port Royal, and the By F. Male Branche
Search after Truth. The same Matter has likewise been treated with care in a
Latin Logicae Joannis Clerici, denuo edita, anno School
Logic, printed twice at Amsterdam within a few Years, where the use that may
be made of it in all sorts of Disquisitions, is shown at large. These Books are
too common, to want any transcribing here.

I will only say in general, that these Rules teach us that we ought in the
first place to have an exact knowledge of the Question we intend to handle, and
to express it without Ambiguity: In the second place, That we must divide it
into its parts, if it is composed of several Propositions: Thirdly, That we
must range these Propositions in that Order, that the most simple and most
easy may march first; Fourthly, That the Propositions that follow ought to be
deduced from the preceding ones, as far as is possible. There are other
particular Rules with which I shall not meddle here. It Is sufficient to remark
that these general Rules are notoriously violated both in Discourses and in
Writings. We set ourselves to compose, without knowing well what we are minded
to treat of, and after some division ill understood, we say in each part what
we think belongs to it, without troubling ourselves in what Order we range it.
What is more, several Persons, who affect to be thought Wits, take a pride in
retailing their Thoughts without any manner of connection, and think it enough
that each Thought in particular has a relation to the Subject they treat upon.
This is called Writing and Preaching by Thoughts, and after this manner it is
that a good part of the Treatises, which compose the famous Collection of the
Essays of Morality are written, the drift and end of which we cannot
comprehend, but in a general way, and whose Method is exceedingly embroiled.
Although the Style of them is pure and fine, and there are abundance of noble
independent Thoughts in 'em; yet, to speak freely what I think, these Works
taken in the Gross, are full of nonsensical Stuff, and Sophisms: The reason of
which, in my Opinion, is only this, because those that composed them, either
did not know what a good Method was, or at least did not know the importance of
observing it.

In the mean time no Man can question the Excellence of the abovementioned
Rules, if it were only because all the Truths of the Mathematicians depend upon
them. It Is impossible to deny that the Order they prescribe is admirable, both
to enlighten the Mind, and touch the Heart of reasonable Persons. It Is likewise
as plain it is extremely useful and convenient for those that write; for by this
means they form a Plan of what they should say with all the ease imaginable,
when once they are accustomed to them: They avoid impertinent Repetitions, and
the Pain of finding out independent Thoughts, and afterward of connecting them
together by unnatural Transitions. I own indeed, that such as have not used to
make themselves a Plan, which they are to follow, and have contracted a
habitude of Speaking without one, will find themselves shackled by it; but
those that reason ^ill, don't love, for the same reason, the Rules of good
Reasoning. Does it therefore follow, that they must not endeavor to reform
themselves, or that others must imitate them?

I know nothing that can be objected against this, but some Opinions of the
Rhetors. They maintain, for Instance, Quinil. Lib. IV. c. 5.
That it is not good to divide one's Matter with exactness, because it seems
too much studied, and the generality of things are more agreeable, when they
appear to be invented on the sudden, and deduced from the thing itself, than
when we believe the Orator meditated on them at home. Pleraque gratiora si
inventa subito, nec demo allata, sed inter dicendum ex re ipsa nata videantur.
To which I answer, That this Remark may perhaps hold good in a Reply which an
Advocate makes before the Judges, where some things may seem to have been
invented upon the Spot. But on other Occasions, when all the World knows we
come prepared, in what we write and order to be Printed, this sort of a Cheat
will not pass Muster. Thus, it is plain, that Quintilian made this Remark upon
the account of the Advocates only, for whose use principally he composed his
Book of Institutions. In this Occasion, those that have a bad Cause to defend,
are often forced to make use of diverse Artifices that are below the Eloquence I
have been talking of, which will only undertake the Defense of a good Cause. Of
this kind is the Artifice that the same Rhetor speaks of in the following
Words: Sometimes, says he, we must put false Dice upon the Judge, and insinuate
ourselves into his favor by several Artifices, so that he may believe we have
a different design from that we have in reality. Now and then a Man is forced
to propose something, which it is difficult to obtain; and if the Judge foresees
it, he is afraid of it, before we speak to the Point; just as we see a wounded
Man fears the Instruments of a Surgeon, when he sees them, before the
Operation begins. But if a Discourse happens to make some Impression upon a
Judge, who distrusts nothing, and having had no Intimation of the Business, is
not upon his Guard; then it produces such Effects, which a Man could not have
believed, if they had been premised him beforehand. In the mean time we must
not only avoid the dividing of what we are about, but we must not so much as
treat of it at all. We must disturb and ruffle the Passions of the Auditors,
and hinder them from being too attentive to Matter of Fact: For an Orator not
only proposes to himself to instruct, but much more to move. Now nothing is so
contrary to this as an exact and scrupulous Division, at a time when we
endeavor to hinder the Judge from making any use of his Judgment. Interim vero
etiam fallendus est Judex, and varijs artibus subeundus, ut aliud agi, quam
quod petimus, putet. Nam est nonnumquam dura propositio, quam Judex, si
providet, non aliter reformidat, quam qui ferrum medid priusquam curetur
adspexit, etc.

It Is true, indeed, that we sometimes meet with People of so unaccountable a
Temper, and so averse to Truth, that the most exact Disposition of Reasons, and
the most proper to show their Force or Weakness, shocks and provokes them; so
that we are forced, in our own Defense, to take By-ways, and wheel round about,
to bring them to themselves. When we have such Gentlemen as these to deal with,
we must make an Exception to the General Rule, from which otherwise we ought
never to depart without a visible Necessity. As the principal End of those that
talk or write, is to recommend the Truth, we must change the order wherein it
shines with greatest Luster, if this Luster too much offends the Eyes of those,
who as yet don't love her. As the Precepts of this Art were laid down by those
that have written of them, only to lead us to this End, we must of necessity
lay them aside, when they no longer lead us to it. It would be downright
Madness to adhere superstitiously to these Precepts against the interest of the
Cause we have undertaken. Quin^. Lib. IV. c. 2.
Amentis est, superstione proeceptorum, contra rationem causoe trahi.

When this does not happen, we ought both in our Books and in our Discourses to
follow the most exact Method that is possible, so that it may be known at first
sight what is the general Design we propose to ourselves, and what are the
Parts of it; as likewise that we may show the Connection of all these Parts and
Reasonings, of which they are composed. This Order carries Light and Convicton
with it, as I have already said; and besides this, the Reader or Hearer is more
attentive to it, and is not so soon tired. This is the Judgment of Quintilian,
who tells us, that Division, where it is properly used, gives a great deal of
Light and Ornament to a Discourse. It not only occasions, continues he, that
whatever is said becomes more clear, in drawing, as it were, from among a crowd
of Thoughts, that which we have a design to say, and in setting it before the
Eyes of the Judges, but it relieves the Hearer also, in showing him the end of
each part, after the same manner as the Miles that are marked upon Stone in the
great Roads, are a refreshment to the Travelers: For it is some satisfaction to
know how far we are gone in our Journey, and we surmount what remains behind
with more Alacrity, when we know how long it is for nothing can seem long, if
we see the end of it. Lib. IV. c. 5.
Opportune adbibita plurimum orationi lucis and gratiae confert. Neque enim id
solum efficit ut clariora fiant quae dicantur, rebus velut ex turba extractis,
and in conspectu judicum positis sed resicit quoque audientem, certo
singularium partium fine: Non aliter quam facientibus iter multum detrahunt
fatigationis netata, inscriptis lapidibus, spatia. Nam and exhausti laboris
nosse mensuram voluptati est, and hortatur ad reliqua fortius exsequenda scire
quantum supersit. Nihil enim longum videri necesse est, in quo quid ultimum sit
certum est. Now if Division alone produces this Effect, according to this
judicious Rhetorician, what may we not expect from a complete Method, which
ought to reign in each part of the Discourse, and which represents all the
Reasonings, of which it is composed, in their natural Order.

There is scarce any Author or Orator to be found now adays, that writes
wholly without Division, as Plutarch and Seneca have done, and as abundance of
Greek and Latin Fathers have practiced; but then there are several that divide
their Subject amiss, and observe no Order, neither between the general Parts,
nor between the particular Reasonings. This proceeds in the first place from
their not having an Idea extensive enough of what they design to say, and from
their dividing their Subject, before they fully know the Parts of it; secondly,
from their being ignorant of the Rules of Division, or not thinking on them;
and lastly, from their not knowing of what Consequence it is to place the most
simple Idea, before those that are more compounded. While those that speak and
write, are ignorant of these general Principles of Logic, it is impossible but
there must be a world of Confusion in their Discourse, and consequently a world
of Obscurity, which cannot fail to lessen the Attention of those that either
hear or read them, and which must of necessity disgust them. I suppose that the
Discourses are good in themselves and that a Man instructed in the Method of
ordering his Thoughts, might be able to make exact and solid Discourses of
them. But it is much worse, when it is nothing but a confused Tissu of ill
Reasonings, for it is impossible to do any good with it, though you cast it into
as good Order as you please. This Confusion then serves as a Cloud to conceal
the weakness of the Reasons from those, who will not give, themselves the
trouble to examine them nearer at hand, or are not capable of doing it.

Of the Expression.
III. ALTHOUGH the Invention and Disposition of Thoughts be the two first parts of
Rhetoric, and that no one can pretend to real Eloquence, without observing the
above mentioned Rules relating to both, it is nevertheless very certain that if
we don't add to all this, the other Rules, which the Masters of this Art have
given us about Elocution, we cannot pass for Eloquent. For in short, the
Thoughts may be just and well ordered; and yet, for Example, not be
intelligible, by reason of the ill Choice of the Expressions. Now a Discourse,
unintelligible or only difficult to be understood, can never pass for Eloquent.
We may say the same thing of other Faults of the Style, upon which we may
consult the Rhetors. When a Man has nothing else to do but to satisfy himself
in Thinking or Writing, it is enough for him to observe the Rules that relate to
Invention and Disposition: But when he is to communicate his Thoughts to
others, they ought to be conceived in clear and proper Terms, that may make
such an impression upon their Minds as we desire.

We propose to ourselves three Things in Speaking or Writing, or at least one
or two of them; that is, to instruct, to give pleasure, and to move the
Passions. We may likewise reduce to three sorts of Things, all that we
undertake to talk about: The first is of that which regards common Life, or
things of pure Speculation, which of themselves are not proper to excite any
Movement in the Mind of those that hear them: The second is of that which is a
little more elevated, though for all that it has nothing extraordinary nor great:
The third is of great Things that are not common in Good and Evil. The first
require a simple and proper Style; the second an Elocution somewhat more
raised, and the third a sublime Style. We ought to look upon it as an
inviolable Law, always to suit our Style to our Matter and Design. We are not
more allowed to use a low Style when we are about great Things, nor an elevated
Style when we talk of vulgar Matters, than we can dress a fullgrown Man in the
Clothes of a little Boy, or a little Boy in the Clothes of a well-grown Man. We
are likewise as much forbidden a figurative and vehement Style, when we design
to instruct, as we are to cry out Fire, when we only see a scrap of Paper on
Fire. On the contrary, we ought to look upon it as unpardonable indifference to
express great Things in a cold and grovelling Style. This is what we may say in
general about the Style, and to this may be reduced the principal Rules of
Rhetoric, that concern the Expression.

He is truly Eloquent, says a great Orator, who so orders his Speech, as to
prove, to please, and to affect us. We are obliged to prove whatever we
advance. The Agreement of Discourse requires that it divert the Hearer; and to
make an entire Conquest of him, we must bend him. This one thing contributes
more than all the rest, to gain one's Cause. There are as many different
Styles, as there are Duties imposed on an Orator; exact Expressions serve to
prove, a middle Style to delight, and a vehement Style to move; and it is in
this that all the force of a Discourse consists. Cicero in Oratore, c. 21.
Erit cloquens is, qui -- ita dicet, ut probet, ut delectet, ut flectat.
Probare necessitatis est, delectare suavitatis, flectere victoriae; nam id unum
ex omnibus ad obtinendas causas potest plurimum. Sed quot officia Oratoris, tot
sunt genera dicendi; subtle in probando, modicum in delectando, vehemens in
flectendo; in quo uno vis omnis Oratoris est. He afterward shows that the
Judgment of an Orator appears chiefly in observing a Decorum in relation to the
Matter. All his Discourse deserves to be read, but I could not set it down here.

Above all things, he ought to be a perfect Master of the Language he makes use
of; that is to say, he should know the proper and figurative Sense of every
word, and all that concerns the Grammar of that Language; which is to be
learned by reading and consulting the choicest Authors. This ought to be
practiced from our very Infancy, for fear lest if we tarry too long, we should
have a Style formed, as it were, by hazard, before we are perfectly skilled in
our Mother Tongue, which happens very frequently. Then we have no time to study
the Language; the indispensable Affairs of Life, and the Habit we have
contracted of speaking ill, will not permit us to apply ourselves sufficiently
to it, to correct ourselves of those Faults to which we have been accustomed
for so many Years. If we say this truly of our Mother Tongue, we shall find it
much more when we have to do with Dead or Foreign Languages.

So soon as we have Taste enough to distinguish a Discourse that is written
Elegantly from one that is not, and to take pleasure in reading it, we are then
fit to hear and comprehend the Lessons of the Rhetoricians. The first thing we
ought to do, in order to arrive one day at solid Eloquence, is to accustom
ourselves to write in proper and simple Terms, so as to commit, if possible, no
Fault against the Propriety of Language, nor against the Prespicuity of Style.
As the principal End of Speaking, is to be understood, the first thing we
should endeavor to obtain, is a Habit of Speaking so well, that the Hearers
may not only divine our Thoughts, but likewise that it may not be possible not
to understand them, when we have no design to speak obscurely.

This, one would think, should be easy, since the most simple and natural
manner of Speaking ought to present itself first to the Mind: But we are
encompassed from our Cradle by People that express themselves ill, and that
have no relish for these sort of things so that we are forced to study for
that, which Nature ought to have taught us. Among the Greeks they had
Grammarians, to whom they sent their Children so soon as they were able to
write and read, to teach them to speak their own Tongue truly, which they could
not get at home with their Parents, nor by the common use of Life. Among the
Romans they not only taught Greek but Latin likewise. We ought in like manner
to have Grammarians now adays maintained at the public Salary, to teach our
Youth the Modern Languages and I wonder, for my part, that no Establishments of
this Nature have been erected any where; for in short, there is no Nation which
does not love to hear its Language spoken Politely; nay some Nations have taken
extraordinary Pains to Polish theirs.

They that dont't know what it is to write in pure and proper Terms, and to
express themselves with Perspicuity, imagine that there is nothing so easy as
this, and that it is much more difficult to speak in a more elevated Manner.
These People are of Opinion, that a stronger Genius is required to describe
some tragical Accident in a pompous magnificent manner than to discourse of the
ordinary things of Human Life, in a clear familiar way: But in this they are
extremely mistaken. It Is much easier, for instance, to imitate the Hydropic
Sublimity of Seneca or Lucan, than the unaffected simplicity of Terence, and
some Epigrams of Martial. I dare affirm that those that are capable of writing
like Terence, may reach Lucan's Grandeur, if they please: but I defy a Man who
has always used himself to a swelling Style, ever to imitate Terence happily.
To speak of a modern Language, I am persuaded that Brebeuf, who, as every one
knows, has translated the Pharsalia in Verse as bloated, as those of the
Original, would never have been able to compose two or three Pages of Moliere's
Misanthrope; and that Moliere on the contrary, if he had thought it worth his
while, could have soared as high as Brebeuf. We have several pieces of La
Fontaine written in as good an Heroic Style as any by those that have always
practiced the elevated Style, but there is not one of these sublime Genius's
that could ever come near his Fables.

What I have here maintained may seem a Paradox to those that have not
sufficiently reflected upon it: However, to convince these Gentlemen I would
only desire them to try how they can imitate any Author that has written in a
proper and simple Style, and is esteemed in his kind, and afterward to imitate
the sublime Style of any of our most elevated Writers. They will then be
convinced by experience that the ancient Masters of this Art had reason to
judge the first more difficult than the second, although the first does not seem
to be so at first sight. Cicero in Oratore. c. 23.
Orationis sublimitas imitabilis quidem illa videtur esse existimanti, sed
nihil est experienti minus. The exactness of Discourse seems easy to imitate
when we content our selves with judging without making a trial: But when we
have tried it, we shall find it to be quite otherwise. Horace said the same
thing, speaking of the natural Style of Conversation. I will make Verses
composed of known Expressions, so that in reading them every one shall hope to
do the like: But those that will endeavor to make the Experiment, will sweat
and take a world of Pains to no purpose; so much force is there in Order and
Connection, and so much elegance in a Style that is taken from the common
Language.

Art. Poet. ver. 240.
Ex noto fictum carmen se quar, ut sibi quivis
Speret idem, suder multum, frustraque laboret
Ausus idem, tantum series juncturaque pollet!
Tantum de medio sumptis accedit honoris!
This Talent, says another, is neglected by abundance of People, who look after
nothing but the Acclamations of the Multitude, whom they have to applaud them,
or else come accidentally to hear them, and who cannot endure that silence
which Approbation produces. They fancy that they are not Eloquent, unless they
deafen all that are about them with their Cries and Clamours. They believe that
it only belongs to Conversation to describe what they are talking of in vulgar
Terms, and that even ignorant People may do it; whereas no Body knows whether
they don't do that which they despise as easy, either because they will not do
it, or because they find it impossible and out of their reach. For there is
nothing in the extent of Eloquence, which those who have tried all find so
difficult to imitate, as that which every one thinks he should have said in the
same manner, when he heard it: Because People don't believe that this Style is
elegant, but that it is sincere. An Orator never speaks better, than when he
appears to speak the Truth. Quintil. Lib. IV. c. 2.
Neque enim aliud in eloquentia cuncta experti difficilius reperient, quam id
quod se dicturos fuisse omnes putant, postquam audierunt; quia non bona
judicant illa, sed vera. Tum autem optime dicit Orator, cum videtur vera
dicere.

If we may believe any one in his own Profession, when there is no Temptation
to conceal the Truth, we cannot reasonably doubt of what the three great
Masters in the Art of writing both in Verse and Prose have told us. This Style
which they commend so warmly is composed only of pure and proper Expressions,
of obvious easy Metaphors, and Figures that arise from the thing itself, which
are never used but for necessity, and to illustrate their meaning. The
principal Rock, which we ought to avoid in this simple and natural Language is
Obscurity, and it is for that reason that we carefully shun every thing that may
produce it, as equivocal Terms, too great plenty of Figures, and an ill
Disposition of Words and Thoughts. This is the Style we should employ to
instruct; this is the Language of Truth, which desires nothing more than to
appear all naked to the Eyes of Men. Those who have no other Design but to make
her appear, choose to express themselves in this manner, where every thing
frequently is neglected, except Perspicuity, and where Negligence, according to
the Judgment of Cicero, Is a Negligence which is not disagreeable, and which
comes from a Man, who is more sollicitous about Things than Words. In Oratore
c. 23.
Non ingrata negligentia, de re hominis, magis quam de verbis, laborantis.

Those that can talk and write after this manner, avoid two Faults, which in my
Opinion, are unpardonable in those that value themselves upon declaiming. The
first is Obscurity, the greatest fault that a Man can commit in speaking, since
the end of speaking, as I suppose, is to be understood. This Fault principally
reigns in the Style of Declaimers who speak nothing naturally, but muffle up
all in figurative Expressions, for fear they should fall into a low frigid
Style, who give us a clear and distinct Idea of nothing, so that it is difficult
to know exactly what they mean. With this Fault we may justly charge the
greatest part of the Greek and Latin Fathers, who are almost perpetually upon
the Harangue, and who avoid clear and proper Expressions with as much care as
the Athenian Orators sought after them. Thus every thing almost is disguised
and swelled in their Writings, in so extraordinary a manner, that a Man has all
the difficulty in the World to understand them, when they treat of a Subject
which is somewhat obscure in itself. Sometimes they carry Matters so
extravagantly high, that one cannot tell whether they talk seriously, or have a
mind only to impose upon the Populace. This in truth was the Fault of the Times
as well as of the Men; for the Eloquence of those Ages was extremely different
from that of the ancient Orators, either Athenian or Roman, as a Woman that is
loaded, and encumbred with superfluity of Habits is from one in a modest Garb.
Thus we must excuse this Fault in them, but we ought to take care not to
imitate them in it. The Reader may see this Subject treated more at large in
Vide Artem. Crit. P. 2. S. 1. cap. 15, and 16.
Authors that have composed the History of Rhetoric.

Another Fault, which we find not in a simple and natural Style, is, that there
is nothing in it to make those, that write so, suspected of a sort of
Affectation, which is exceedingly prejudicial to those that would persuade. I
mean, the Affectation to appear eloquent, which a discerning Hearer is no
sooner sensible of, but he suspects that the Orator whom he hears, or the
Author whom he reads is more intent to display his own Eloquence than to teach
him the Truth, and give him any useful Instructions from that very minute he
believes that it may be possible for the Person that speaks to believe very
little of what he says, that he only chose this Subject to get himself some
Reputation by treating of it eloquently. Besides, when we are heartily affected
by any thing, and nothing but Nature talks, we use in our Discourses no
far-fetched Ornaments of Rhetoric, but only such as arise from the Subject,
without our thinking on them. The same thing may be observed in Tragedy itself,
when it is rightly composed.

Et Horat. de Art Poet. v. 95.
Tragicus plerumque dolet sermon pedestri.
Telephus and Peleus, cum pauper and exsul uterque
Projicit ampullas and sesquipedalia verba,
Si curat cor spectantis tetigisse querela.
Even the Tragic Poets sometimes express Grief in common Language. Telephus and
Peleus, when they lie under the Hardships of Poverty and Banishment, wholly
throw aside affected Expressions and big rumbling Words, if they have a mind to
interest the Spectator in their Complaints. The Reason of this is because we
cannot be touched but by the natural representation of a Passion, and that all
Affectation shocks us. I am persuaded that a simple plain Discourse, provided
it be naturally delivered, moves those Auditors that have a true Taste, more
feelingly than the tallest Metaphors and that even upon Paper it is much more
affecting than one that is penned in a more sublime Style.

However, I confess that there are cerain occasions on which we are
indispensably obliged to rise above the vulgar Style; as, for instance, when we
are to praise or condemn any thing, when we would excite Admiration or Hatred;
in short, when our Subject is of a more elevated Character than what happens
daily. On such an occasion the Reader or Auditor is very well pleased that we
should have recourse to Rhetorical Ornaments. As it is not so much our Business
at such a time to instruct as to delight him, or to excite in him Passions more
turbulent than Pity, he is satisfied with these Decorations nay, what is more,
he expects them, so that it we disappoint him, we make him despise us, and no
longer attend to what we say. He thinks it but requisite that he that speaks or
writes to entertain him, should be well prepared beforehand, and tell him
nothing but that which does not frequently fall into every Body's Head.

When the Occasion is extraordinary, or when the Subject is naturally sublime,
we expect a Style of the same Dignity, that transports, that ravishes, that
governs and turns our Souls about as it pleases. This is the sublime Style,
concerning which Longinus has written a Treatise, which is in every Body's
Hands, especially since it has been By Mr. Boileau.
translated into French.

I will not dwell any longer upon these two latter sorts of Styles, which are
or ought to be properly the Style of Sermons if we except those places in them,
where we only explain the Matter before us, without drawing any Consequences
from it, or making any application to the Auditors. It Is sufficient to say,
That those that aspire to this Eloquence cannot too often read over those
Passages in the celebrated Masters of this Art where it is handled. An infinite
number of People confound the sublime Style with Fustian, and think they ravish
all the World with Admiration, when they lose themselves in the Clouds, and are
laughed and ridiculed by all Men of a true Palate. The reason of this is,
because they don't enough consider the Rules of this Art, and don't know that
we ought to expres s ourselves in magnificent Terms only about those things
that are Sublime in their own Nature.

Objections against what has been said.
SOME Objections, which at first sight seem to have something in them, may be
railed against what I have asserted relating to Eloquence. As for instance,
That several of the Ancients, whom I have accused of having committed very
gross Faults against the Rules, and several of the Moderns, whom I have
imitated, did pats in their own time, and still pass in ours for Models of
Eloquence, in the Opinions of a vast number of People that understand Rhetoric,
and are by no means to be called Men of an ill Relish. One may go yet farther,
and urge, That we behold every Day Books received with great Applause, and that
we hear with Admiration several Discourses wherein scarce any of the
abovementioned Rules are observed. As Eloquence, will these Gentlemen pretend,
is only for those whom we have to do with, so soon as we have found out the
Mystery to please and to affect them in Speaking or Writing, we have Title
enough to set up for Men of Eloquence.

Indeed if the established Rules of Rhetoric, which are for the generality of
them supported by the Authority of the most famous Rhetors, were arbitrary
Laws, and founded rather upon the usage of some Language, which depends upon
the Caprice of the Multitude, than upon Reason, which never changes I confess
that one might confront them with Examples, and counterballance the Authority,
they have got, by the Reputation of those who have violated them: But as they
are built upon everlasting Foundations, we can only conclude, that the Taste of
those Gentlemen, who first admired those that neglected these Laws, was a
depraved Taste, and that if there are any Men of Wit, who continue still to
praise the vicious Rhetoric of the past Ages, they only follow the Custom in
it, without consulting their Reason, and repeat without examination, what had
been told them from their Infancy. We cannot make the Fathers, and
Philosophers, who lived after Jesus Christ, pass for just Reasoners, nor for
methodical Authors but as they were the most ingenious Men of their times, nay,
and sometimes formidable by their Authority, and by their Cabals, they were
excessively praised in their own and the succeeding Ages, which yet were darker
and more ignorant than their own. These Praises have been handed down like a
Tradition to us, and we are only the Echos, if I may so express myself, of the
most barbarous and gross Centuries, without being at the pains to examine,
whether what we say after them be true or not. We daily commend, merely out of
custom, several Works, which we should have been ashamed to have written
ourselves, and which, in truth, we could not write in this Age, without drawing
the contempt of all the World upon us.

That which still keeps up this Language, which at the bottom is not sincere,
is that every Man cites the Fathers in Theological Controversies, and desires
to have them of his own side; yet this could not be done with any Advantage, if
People were generally persuaded that they were bad Orators, and yet worse
Logicians. Thus we set as high a value on them as we are able, without being
satisfied of their Merit, to make use of their Authority in Time and Place
against those who have declared against those Opinions, which we suppose to
have been favored by the Fathers. Were it not for Custom and these Politic
Reasons, we should make no scruple to treat them as a parcel of Men that stand
in need of their Antiquity to make us bear with them.

I confess s that even now adays a Man may be admired by the People, and pass
for an eloquent Writer in his own Imagination, who violates every moment the
Rules of good Rhetoric and of right Reason: But does it therefore follow, that
there is no such thing as true Rhetoric and Reason? If this were allowed, we
might say, That the Rhetoric and Reason of the Europeans, are good in Europe,
but are worth nothing in Asia and Afric, where the People neither talk, nor
reason after the same manner. We ought to commend in Asia and Afric the
ridiculous and fantastical Thoughts of the People that inhabit those two mighty
Parts of the Earth, because they find an infinite number of Admirers there. Now
if we would not fall into these Absurdities, we must own that we ought not to
accommodate ourselves to the Taste of the People, any farther than good Sense
will warrant us and that those who are so desirous to be applauded by them
without this, abuse their Ignorance, which they should endeavor to undeceive,
whereas they labor to increase it by their vicious manner of Discoursing. Thus
true Judges will not be wanting to oppose themselves to the Taste of the
Multitude; and though they don't make so great a noise as the latter, they are
the true Distributers of a solid and lasting Reputation.

We may upon this Head add, what Quintilian has observed of the Orators of his
own Time, viz. That we are obliged to accommodate ourselves to the Humor of
the People, who have no great regard for this extraordinary justness of
Thought, of Order and Expression. We are forced, said they, to compose our
Discourses according to the relish of others, and we must often speak before
People who are wholly ignorant, and have no knowledge of other Sciences. If we
don't gain them over to our Party by delighting them, if we don't persuade them
by the vehemence of our Discourse, or sometimes by moving their Passions, we
cannot obtain even those things that are just and reasonable. Lib. IV. c. 14.
Nobis ad aliorum judicia componenda est oration, and saepius apud omnino
imperitos atque aliarum certe ignaros literarum loquendum est; quos nisi and
delectatione allicimus, and viribus trahimus and nonnunquam turbamus
affectibus, ipsa quae justa ac vera sunt, tenere non possumus.

But after all good Reasonings proposed in a clear and elegant manner, and
thrown into a good order, are likelier to take with the People, than Fustian
and Bombast, which they think they understand, while at the bottom they know
nothing of it. Besides, the Rules that are given us don't in the least hinder
us from embellishing our Discourse with whatever may please the Auditor,
provided that these Embellishments don't spoil the Perspicuity. Nullum ornatum,
says Quintilian in the same place, qui modo non obscuret, subtrahendum puto. We
ought not to retrench any Ornaments, unless they make the Sense obscure. We may
likewise move the Passions of the Auditor; but this ought not to be done till
we have enlightened his Understanding that he may know why he is moved, and be
convinced by his Judgment that he has reason to be so. But the public Orators
have often incensed the People against those that did not please them, without
informing them by any clear Reason why they deserved their Indignation. They
think it enough to charge them with a thousand odious things, but don't give
themselves the trouble to prove them; but speaking them in a vehement, pathetic
manner, and appearing to be persuaded themselves of the Truth they say, they
easily gain the People to their side, without any solid Reason. We cannot
pretend that this Conduct ought to be imitated, without openly declaring
oneself an Enemy to good Sense and Equity.

Of the Pronunciation.
IV. I SHOULD now, according to the method I proposed to my self, speak of
Pronunciation, but I cannot do better than to send my Reader to a little Book
about the Action of an Orator, composed by Michael le Faucheur: It Is a
Masterpiece in its kind, to which nothing can be added. I will only mention
two things which at the bottom comprehend all: The first is, That we ought to
recite naturally, I mean to modulate the Tone of our Voice, so as the Nature of
the Things, we treat about, requires, to explain or relate any thing in the
same Pitch of Voice as we are used to observe when we relate or explain any
thing, and wherein we show a great concern before grave Persons, and to express
the Passions, that may reign in the Discourse, as we commonly do when we don't
think of haranguing, but only follow the movement of the Passion by which we
are animated. It ought to be with the Gesture exactly as with the Voice. The
second thing we ought to remark, is, That when they tell us we ought to follow
Nature, they mean Nature polished by a Gentleman-like Education, and by
conversing with Persons of good Breeding: Otherwise, if those that have been
meanly educated, and have contracted vicious Habits, which by length of time
become natural to them, should be so ill advised as to recite in Public, before
they have reformed their ill manner, they would certainly be laughed at by all
the World. There are some Persons, whose Behavior is naturally so cold and
unconcerned, that if they did not show a little more Heat and Life when they
appeared in Public, they would most infallibly set the whole Company a
sleeping. Others on the contrary, are of so fiery a Temper, that they cry out
from the beginning to the end, without having the least regard to the
difference of the matter of which they talk. We ought therefore to follow
Nature, but Nature polished by Education and Care, if we have a mind to speak
in Public.

We have often seen a Discourse, that has been neither faulty in the Matter,
the Disposition, nor the Expression, to displease merely for the ill
Pronunciation of him that delivered it, but especially because his
Pronunciation had something forced and affected, which did not show the Man to
be in earnest. It Is one of the most common Faults, with our Preachers, to
deliver themselves in such a Tone of Voice as was never heard out of a Pulpit,
and to have such Gestures with them as express no Passion, and are no where
seen but there. One would swear, that so soon as they begin to talk and to toss
their Arms, they were not the same Men, and that they talk to a sort of People
whose Manners are clearly different: They complain, they are angry, they
admire, in a word, they express all the Passions which they have a mind to
represent, after another way than the rest of the World are acquainted with. If
a Man should behave himself so ridiculously at the Bar, there is no question
but that he would set the Judges a laughing; and in a serious Conversation,
where things of great Consequence are to be treated off, the Tone of the Pulpit
would be much more insufferable. A Man would be to entrench upon a Merry
Andrew's Province, should he fling about his Arms, and show a thousand Gestures
that are only good to drive away the Flies. I have been told that a famous
Advocate discoursing on a day with a very awkward Orator, of this Character, as
the Orator asked him how he liked his manner of reciting, and whether he
thought it would not succeed at the Bar: The Advocate bluntly told him, That
the very first thing, those young Gentlemen that designed to appear at the Bar,
ought to do, was to forget all his Lessons, and return to that natural manner
which he had endeavored to efface instead of polishing.

I have frequently heard an Orator, who was scarce Master of any one of the
other Talents we quire in a Man of his Profession, but who recited in so
natural and so lively a manner, that he charmed his Auditors by this single
Qualification, accompanied with a strong articulate Voice; I never heard him,
but he put me in mind of a certain Story of Cicero in Orat. C. 17.
Demosthenes, who being asked what was the chief part of Rhetoric, answered,
Pronunciation; being next asked, what was the second best, he still answered,
Pronunciation; and so on, till they dropped the Question. His meaning was, that
this Talent was of the last Consequence in Athens, where Affairs of the
greatest importance, in relation to the State and to private Men, were often
determined in a bare Pleading, without the drawing of any Writings. It Is
likewise extremely serviceable in our Pulpits; but it is only for the Reputation
of the Preacher, and not for the public Advantage, when it is not joined with
the other parts of good Rhetoric. At such times the People go from the Sermon,
full of Admiration for the Parson, although they scarce understand a Word he told
them, and are not in the least convinced, by Reason, of any one thing he would
have persuaded to do. On the contrary, they ought to go out of Church full of
Admiration for the Gospel, full of a true Sense of their own Faults, and full
of a vigorous Resolution to correct them, without thinking upon the Orator:
They ought to be able to repeat whatever they have learnt, and to carry home
with them an exact Idea of their Duties, without minding the Person from whom
they learnt them. A good Judge takes no notice at all of an Advocate's Action,
but of his Reasonings, when he is to pass a definitive Sentence but especially
if it be a matter of any importance.

We cannot blame those that take a due care of their Pronunciation: On the
contrary, we should have just Reason to complain of them, if they did not do
it; but then it is necessary they should join the other parts of Rhetoric with
it, and cultivate them with so much the more care, as they are of more
importance. An Orator ought to be ashamed to deceive the People, who only
consider the outside, because they have been used to be paid in that Money: It
should make him blush to think that he sends home his Auditors well satisfied,
that he recites well, but little instructed in the Matter he treated of; like
those Orators, of whom Quintilian has observed very judiciously, That they
soften their Voice, and turn themselves in different manners; that they hang
down the Head, and toss their Arms about; that they affect a great abundance of
Things, and artificial Words; and that at last (what seems to be monstrous)
People commend the Action, but don't understand a Jot of the Cause they have
pleaded. Lib. 4. c. 2.
Vocem flectunt et cervicem reponunt, et brachium in latus jactant, totoque et
rerum et verborum et compositionis genere lasciviunt; deinde (id quod sit
monstro simile) placet actio, causa non intelligitur.

Those that have any tenderness of Conscience ought to employ this Talent of
reciting agreeably; and by that means of rend'ring the Auditors attentive, only
to instruct them better, and make them relish the great Truths of the Gospel.
To effect this, they should vigorously apply themselves to perform their other
Duties that are requisite in a public Orator, and to speak to the Congregation
that listens to them; not as if they hoped the manner of their Recital would
make every thing pass, but as if they spoke before severe Judges, who would not
pardon them one false Thought, who would require from them an exact Order, and
a Style suited to the Matter they talk of; and as if when they come out of the
Pulpit, they were to leave the written Sermon in their Hands, to be examined by
them at leisure. Without this, what can one say of the Eloquence of the Pulpit,
which he cannot at the same time apply to that of the Stage, which we go to
hear not for Instruction, but only for our Diversion? What can we think of the
Office of a public Orator, but what we think of the vilest and worst employed
of all Trades, the Followers of which endeavor to get what we promised them,
without troubling themselves whether their Work be good or no? Our Orators
ought to fear these Reproaches with so much the more reason, as they retail to
the People things of the highest importance; nay, and call their Discourses the
Word of God, upon pretense that the first Preachers of the Gospel, whom God had
honored with the Gift of Miracles, and of extraordinary Revelations, gave this
Name to what they preached to the People. It Is now adays a sort of Sacrilege
to speak in this manner of a negligent Discourse, where we can neither see good
Sense, nor Method, nor Language suitable to the Occasion, but which is
delivered with a great deal of Boldness and Presumption, as if it comprehended
in effect nothing but heavenly Oracles.

Since God does not make himself known to Men, but by Reason and Revelation, we
ought to call nothing his Word, but what is clearly founded either upon one, or
the other, and not a dull trifling Discourse, where we find no traces of any
light either natural, or supernatural. If we ought to endeavor to have an
agreeable outside, it is not because from that moment we are in possession of
Saying all, and shamming every thing upon a blind ignorant Congregation, by
means of their Voice and Gesture that please them; but only to accommodate
ourselves to their Weakness, and be in a condition to make them listen to that
which is really the Word of God. Formerly the Miracles, which the Apostles
performed, and the great Sanctity of their Lives rendered their Auditors
attentive to what they uttered, though it was destitute of the Ornaments of
Humane Eloquence. But nowadays, when Miracles are no longer wrought, and that
the Holiness of the Lives of these public Orators is not so very extraordinary,
it is but reasonable, that, in order to attract our Attention, they should
employ, not the secular Arm, as is the practice of some Countries, but all that
may serve to enlighten and touch reasonable Men, and sometimes even those that
are a little too delicate.

I am afraid I have said too much upon this sort of Eloquence; but must we
always dissemble, either out of fearfulness or interest, those Truths that
would be of infinite Use, if one Day we should listen to them? If all those
that might profit themselves by it, neglect to do it, perhaps some one may do
it, and be followed by some others. Quintilian after having spoken scurvily
enough of the Orators of his time, concludes, That it is better to omit these
sorts of things, for fear of offending more People by reproving what is bad,
than we oblige them by giving them good Advice. Lib. IV. c. 2.
Haec omittamus, ne minus gratiae, praecipiendo recta; quam offensae,
reprehendendo prava, mereamur. But when should we speak Truth, though the most
important in the World, if we were to stay till it would make us Friends among
the generality of Mankind? Perhaps never.

CHAP. III. Of History and the Defference between the Modern and Ancient
Historians.
NOTHING is so entertaining and instructive as History, when it is well
written; and on the contrary, nothing more infamous and hurtful, when it is not
written as it ought to be: that is to say, when it delivers Lies instead of
Truth, nay even when it dissembles it. The former supplies us with what we want
in Experience, which is always shut up in narrow bounds, by faithfully relating
all that happened before us, by which we may reap as great Benefit, as if we
had actually seen them. On the other hand, the latter instructs us in nothing,
because it reports things otherwise than they fell out, and indeed than they
commonly do fall out. The first represents a Man, such as he is, with his good
and bad Qualities, with his laudable Actions, and those that deserve Censure:
The second describes him such as the Historian wishes him to have been, whether
bad or good, or rather it substitutes a Phantome in his place. As a true and
sincere History proposes the Advantage of the Reader by discovering Truth to
him: So that which is false and disguised has no other end but the Profit of
the Historian, who hopes to get something by lying or by dissembling what he
knows.

Four things, in my Opinion, are requisite to make a good Historian, and
without them we cannot expect any thing considerable from him. The first is, To
be well Instructed in what he attempts to Relate: The second, To be capable of
Saying without any Disguise what he believes to be true: The third, To know how
to Relate what he knows: And lastly, the fourth, To be able to form a true
Judgment of the Events he reports, and of the Men who contributed to bring them
about.
It will not be amiss to make some Reflections upon these four things; a general
Knowledge of which may enable us to judge whether a History be good, or bad.

Of the Matter of History.
I. A MAN may be instructed two several ways in what he relates when he writes
the History of his own time, that is to say, either by himself or others. He is
instructed by himself in what he saw and what he managed, the consequence of
which he observed himself: But it must be confessed that this does not go very
far, since that absolutely speaking, he could do but very few things by
himself, and could be present but in one place at a time. That which others do,
they relate to us, just as they themselves think sit, especially if there were
but few Witnesses of their Actions, or if these Witnesses are dead, or dare not
contradict them. They either take care not to speak of the Faults they
committed, or else they strangely disguise them. If any Disadvantageous
Accident befalls them, they attribute it either to the Malice of others, or to
ill Fortune, but never to their own Indiscretion. He that questions this, needs
only cast his Eyes upon the Memoirs, which abundance of illustrious Persons
have composed of their own Life, and there he will everywhere find enough to
justify my Assertion. These are not Historians, who speak of themselves
without Passion: They are rather Advocates that plead their own Cause, or that
make their own Apology before Posterity, as well as before those who lived in
their own time. What has been said of these Memoirs, the same, and perhaps much
worse we may say of the Reports that have been made to Princes and Generals
concerning Matters that were transacted in those places where they were not.
This occasioned Asinius Pollio to say, That the Memoirs of Caesar (for so we
ought to call his Commentaries in English) were written with little Care, and
with too little regard to the Truth; because he too easily believed the
greatest part of what was related to him about the Actions of other Men, and
has unfaithfully reported what he himself did, either out of Design, or through
defect of Memory. Sueton. in Jul. Caesare. c. 56.
Pollio Asinius parum diligenter, parumque integra veritate compositos
(Caesaris Commentarios) putat; cum pleraque, quae per alios erant gesta temere
crediderit, and quae per se, vel consulto, vel etiam memoria lapsus perperam
ediderit. It is not to be doubted but that those that afterward writ Memoirs
in imitation of him, have been guilty of the same Practice. Cicero in one of
his Ad Fam. Lib. V. Epist. 12.
Letters, wherein he testifies an extraordinary desire to see the History of
his Consulship written by Lucceius, says merrily, that if this Historian
refused him this favor, he would write it himself, after the Example of
several Persons before him. But as you know well enough, continues he, there
are Inconveniences in this manner of Writing: Because a Man is obliged to speak
of himself with too much reservedness, when he comes to recount any thing that
deserves Commendation, and to omit whatever is to be found fault with: Sed quod
te non fugit, haec sunt in hoc genere vitia; and ut verecundius de se ipsi
scribant necesse est, siquid est laudandum, et praetereant suquid forte
reprehendendum est.

The Case being thus, we must not expect to learn the whole truth exactly
either from Princes, or their Ministers, or their Generals, even though we might
ask them any Questions we desired to be informed in, and they were inclined
fairly to answer them, which however but very rarely happens. What course then
shall an Historian take to inform himself of the Truth? For my part I see no
other way for him, than to enquire of all the People he can, to listen to what
is said of all sides, and what Enemies report one of another, to heap together
all that is published in several Languages of both the Parties, and especially
the public Acts: And lastly, To compare all these different Reports with
abundance of care. By this means he comes to be convinced, that there are
certain incontestable matters of Fact in which all the World are a greed; but
that there are several Circumstances of which a Man cannot be certain, by
reason of all the great variety of Reports. An Historian ought to pass over
these doubtful Matters in general terms, for fear of deceiving his Reader by a
Relation, which he cannot warrant.

In order to collect his Materials well, it is requisite that he should be
skilled in several Languages, that he should know the form of Government of
those places, whose History he writes, as also their Interests; that he be
acquainted with the Genius of the People and their Forces; that he be not
ignorant of the Situation of Places; and, above all this, that he be laborious,
attentive, and diligent, have a good Discernment, a solid Judgment, and a
sincere Mind. If one of these Qualifications be wanting, it is enough to make an
Author incapable of succeeding. For Instance, we have seen some Years ago
several Histories published in France, wherein are related abundance of matters
of Fact, and other things relating to England and Holland. A Man will at first
sight observe that many of these Authors were not in a Capacity to consult the
Writings and Relations that were daily published in these two places, and that
they were entirely ignorant of their manner of Government and their Forces, as
well as of the Genius of their People, He will likewise find that the
Difference of Opinions, concerning the Principles of Religion and Politics, has
made them take things quite otherwise than they were. I don't at all question
but that on the other side great Faults have been committed, in relation to
France, especially by those, who do not understand French, or never were in
France, or suffered themselves to be too much influenced by a Spirit of
Partiality. It must however be said, that the Government of France, and all
that belongs to it, is more easy to be understood by Strangers, than the
Affairs of Strangers by French Men.

Sometimes though we are furnished with all the necessary Assistances to know
the truth of a Fact, Negligence makes us commit abominable Mistakes. Thus
Vittorio Siri, in his Tom. ^. p. 665.
Memory Recondite, speaks of the Night, in which Lewis the XIV. was born.
Quattro hoar spese il Re in quel colloquio, si che l'hora trovatasi troppo
tarda per ritornare quella notte nevosissima (correndo il mese di Decembre a
Grobois, convenne per forzosa necessita dormire) a Parige; and rimasto il letto
del Re a Grobois, la Regina colla cena li fece part del suo; notte
fortunatissima per la Francia, perch per un intrecciamento di circostance si
stupende, s'infanto il Dolfino, etc. Not to take notice of the nonsensical
Bombast in these words, which might suffer a little perhaps too through the Fault
of the Printer; Siri might easily have known that Lewis the XIV. was not born
in December but September, and not at Paris, but at St. Germain en Lay. So
gross a Mistake as this must needs be the effect of an inexcusable Negligence.
Some have been of Opinion, that the Example alleged out of Siri, is not well
chosen, but see what the Author has said about it, in the Nouvelles de la
Republiquae des Lettres of this present Year, in September.

Perhaps it will be told me, that I require so many things in an Historian to
judge him only capable of informing himself as to matters of Fact for which he
has occasion, that there are but very few, who, in my Opinion, ought to be
suffered to write History. I own it, and further add, that I look upon it to be
the most difficult Task in the World, if a Man would acquit himself in it as he
ought. But then the Advantages, that those who are now living, and those that
come after us, may reap from a good History, are so great, we ought not to
expect it from an ordinary Man.

It will still be objected perhaps, that suppose an able Man, such as I have
described, had done all that lay in his power to inform himself of the Truth,
he would still be at a loss to find out the Springs and Motives of several very
considerable Actions, because the Persons concerned in them are obliged in
Interest to keep 'em concealed, and that without this Knowledge, a History will
resemble a Body without a Soul, all whose Movements appear to be forced. To
this I answer, That by diverse indisputable Matters of Fact, and by the General
Knowledge we have of the Interests and Designs of the several Powers that are
mentioned there, we may clearly enough know the General Motives that set them
in Action, and which are undoubtedly the most important and, as it were, the
principal Wheels, which move the whole Machine, whose Motion is there
described: As for the others, which we cannot penetrate into, we must either
let them alone, and else relate them in a doubting manner. An Historian is not
obliged to recount every thing, and to advance nothing but what he is
positively certain of: He is only obliged not to relate any thing that is false
for true, and not warrant any thing that is uncertain.

What I have said, concerns the History of the present Age, or what happens
during the Life of the Historian. When we undertake an History, in which we
cannot instruct ourselves from the Mouths of ocular Witnesses who are all dead,
either lately, or a long while ago; all we can do, is to consult the Writings
that are remaining, whether they be Public or Private; and for this end we must
take the same care, and have the same Knowledge and Qualifications, which I
have already mentioned, in respect of Witnesses and Modern Writings. Above all,
we ought to bring with us a great stock of Discernment for this sort of
Reading, that we may not be surprised by Relations stuffed with lies, or too
passionately written.

The ancient Greek and Latin Historians, that have attempted to write the
History of the remotest Times, or at least of the Ages which immediately
preceded theirs, have, often observed this Maxim very religiously, although I
cannot deny that several of them have neglected it. When they speak of the
fabulous Times, they give us the History of them for no more than they are
worth, that is to say, for a Narration, where among some true Matters of Fact,
there are an infinite number of Lies. When they come down to the History of
those Ages, of which they had certain Monuments extant, they took a great deal
of Pains to distinguish between the true and the false. Of this we find some
remarkable Examples, in the Roman History of Dionysius Halicarnasseus, and even
in that of Livy, though it is not so judicious nor exact. Polybius has given us
undoubted Marks of an exquisite Judgment in his History; a fair Instance of
which we may find in the Lib. I. p. 18.
Judgment he makes of two Historians, one of which favored the Romans, and the
other the Carthaginians: I was so much the more induced to attempt the History
of this War, because those who are commonly supposed to have written it the
best, have not so carefully followed the Truth, as they ought to have done. I
don't believe indeed that they published Lies with a design, when I consider
their Life and the Party they followed: But in my Opinion, the same thing befell
them which happens to Men who are blinded by Love. It appears to Philinus, by
reason of his Prepossession for his own Side, that the Carthaginians did every
thing bravely, and the Romans quite otherwise. Fabius is of a different
Opinion. He afterward most admirably describes that disinteressed
Impartiality, in which an Historian ought always to continue, and I will cite
some of his words a little lower. But I must here set down an Instance he gives
us of the Passion of these two Historians, and after what manner we ought to
judge of passionate Relations. Philinus, says he, in the beginning of his
Narration and of his second Book tells us, that while the Carthaginians and
Syracusians besieged Messina, the Romans got into the Town by Sea, and sallying
out immediately against the Syracusians, they were obliged to turn back to the
Town with a considerable Loss: That afterward making another Sally upon the
Carthaginians, they were not only soundly beaten, but a great number of their
Soldiers were made Prisoners. After having related this, he says, that Hiero
King of Syracuse, after this Battle became so extravagant that he not only set
Fire on his Camp that Instant, and retired in the Night to Syracuse, but
abandoned all the strong Places he possessed upon the Frontier of those of
Messina: That the Carthaginians, after the same Battle, abandoned likewise
their Camp, and dispersed themselves in the Towns, daring to defend nothing of
that which had not been fortified: That for this reason, their Leaders
perceiving the fear of their Soldiers, resolved not to hazard a Battle: That
the Romans who followed them, not only plundered the Country, but also
attempted to Besiege Syracuse, and take it by Force. This Narration, adds
Polybius, appears to me so full of Absurdities, that I don't think it necessary
to bestow a longer Examination upon it; for those whom he had represented as
Besieging Messina, and Conquerors of the Romans, he describes afterward
flying, abandoning all Places that were not fortified, and at last besieged,
and full of fears. On the contrary, those whom he had described as vanquished
and besieged, he represents them persuing their Enemies, Masters of the Field,
and at last Besieging Syracuse. It Is impossible to reconcile these Matters of
Fact; for it follows of necessity, that either what he said at first is false,
or that the following Narration is false: But this Narration in effect is true,
for the Carthaginians and Syracusians abandoned the Field, and the Romans
immediately besieged Syracuse, etc. We must therefore confess, that what he had
said in the beginning was false, and that although the Romans came off Conquerors
in the Battles they fought about Messina, he had represented them as beaten. We
shall find that Philinus does the same in all his Work, and that Fabius comes
not short of him. By this it is evident, that we may discover the falsity of
several Matters of Fact, by examining what follows in the History.

It would be an easy matter to apply this to the different Relations we have
had published of the War, which was lately concluded between France, England,
and Holland. One side describes France to us always Victorious, acting
prudently on all Occasions, abounding in every thing, in a Condition to
continue the War several Years longer: And on the contrary, its Enemies almost
always beaten, losing their Towns one after another for want of Provisions,
exhausted and ready to beg a Peace at the Feet of the Conquerors. It would
follow naturally from hence, that the great Superiority of the Conqueror would
put him in a Condition to give such a Peace as he pleased. Nevertheless we have
seen the contrary, since he has restored all that he has taken, and more than
that; after he had pressed in an extraordinary manner to have a Peace. On the
other side, they have represented France as drained and dispeopled to all
Eternity, by the gross Solecisms of its Politics, and by its excessive
Expenses; whereas its Enemies were still formidable, and in very flourishing
Circumstances. If this had been entirely true, the Peace ought to have been
more Advantageous for them, as well as their Success in the War. To say the
truth, both Parties ought to abate very much of their Rodomantades and
Calumnies. Some People perhaps will think that I have expressed my self too
freely about an Affair so recent; but when I was speaking of the Laws of
History, was it possible for me to speak otherwise? A Man must have a very mean
Opinion of the People that were interessed in the last War, to think they are
incapable of hearing the least truth upon that occasion. For my part, I don't
believe them to be so unreasonable.

It Is a common Question, whether those who write ancient History, or at least a
History of which there are no living Witnesses, ought to cite the Authors, whom
they make use of, in every Page, or every Article. Upon this there are
different Opinions; some believe that it is not at all necessary to make use of
such Citations, and that the Reader ought to rely upon the Choice and Sincerity
of the Historian, without asking him from whence he took the Matters of Fact,
he recounts. They ground themselves upon the Practice of the ancient Greek and
Latin Historians, who very rarely quote the Authors they make use of; as for
instance, when there is some difference of Opinion between them. Since
therefore we trust the Relations of these Historians, they maintain that we
ought to show the same Complaisance to the Moderns. If an Historian finds it
for his purpose, he may publish, say they, a List of the Historians, whom he
has consulted, either at the beginning or end of his History, that we may see
from whom he has borrowed his Materials; but he is not obliged to cite them for
every Fact in particular.

Others maintain, that an Historian ought to cite his Authors all along, and
pretend that the Ancients were in the wrong not to do it; and that we ought not
so entirely to depend upon them for that very reason. Indeed, if the thing be
ill in itself, the Example of the Ancients does not make it a jot the better,
and nothing ought to hinder us from doing better than they. The Republic of
Letters is at last become a Country of Reason and Light, and not of Authority
and implicit Faith, as it has been but too long. Multitudes pass no longer
there for Arguments, and all Cabals are silenced. There is no Divine or Humane
Law which prohibits us to bring the Art of writing History to Perfection, as we
have endeavored to bring to Perfection the other Arts and Sciences. As a
Philosoper is not to be excused now adays if he speaks obscurely, or supposes
uncertain things for certain, after the Example of Aristotle and other ancient
Philosophers, who have committed the same Faults: So the Example of Herodotus
or Livy is no manner of Protection to those that imitate their Defects and
Vices. If we commend them, it must always be remembered that these Commendations
are paid to what is good in them, as the Purity and Elegance of their Style but
by no means to their Faults and Imperfections. Besides, we ought to consider
that we esteem them in part, because we have no other Monuments left but
theirs; and that we don't believe them but when we have no just Reason to
contradict them, or for the sake of the Probability of their Narrations, or
because we have no Testimony more ancient and more exact than theirs, to
correct them. We believe in short the Gross of the History, but we remain in
suspense as to the Circumstances.

The Case being thus, if there are great inconveniences in making no Citations,
neither the Example of the Ancients nor their Imitators, is enough to cover
from Censure such as have omitted to do it. We therefore maintain, that if a
Man avoids to quote his Vouchers, the reason of it is, because he would not
have any one to examine the History, as he relates it, by comparing the
Narration with that of other Historians who writ before him. For what way is
there to examine what any Author says, in case he cites no one in particular,
unless we had every Book that he consulted, and had carefully read them, and
preserved them in our Memory? Not one Man in a thousand is capable of it, and
not one Man in a thousand has all the Books which he ought to have for this
purpose. But besides this, we have always a just Pretense to think that we are
imposed upon; for it may so happen; that the Author whom we read, has followed
some Historian, whom those who have an interest to examine the History, have
not by them, or else have not read him, or lastly, have forgotten him. But though
we dare not immediately charge that Historian with Falsehood, who has not made
his Citations, so neither dare we rely upon him. As by following this Method,
it is easy for a Man to sham a Romance upon the World without fear of
discovery, and to give his History whatever Turn he pleases, the suspicious
Reader does not know where to take his Word, and immediately throws aside a
Book, on which he cannot safety depend.

It has been affirmed, that a Modern Historian who has composed a very large
History concerning the Troubles of Religion, took this course, that he might
with more safety invent what might make for his side, and satisfy the Facts
that displeased him. For my part, I never examined him, and therefore can say
nothing to this Business; but I must confess that the Method he has followed,
makes him suspected of all that has been laid to his Charge, and that he has no
other way to justify himself, but by fairly producing his Witnesses; otherwise
he will never answer the Objections and Complaints that have been made against
his Books, and which without question have come to his Ears before now.

Besides this, they maintain that the Precaution which some Writers have taken
to place the Authors whom they followed, at the Head of their History, is
altogether insignificant, unless they had cited the particular Places, because
that it is liable to almost all the Inconveniences which we complained of in
those who don't cite at all. In effect it is a very difficult matter to know
what Historian a Man may have followed, in every Fact, even though he had them
all: But they carry the Matter farther, and say, That oftentimes this pompous
Catalogue of Authors is, only made for Ostentation, and that the Compiler of it
perhaps never saw the Covers of half the Books he puts in his Muster-Roll. It Is
certain that nothing is so easy as to compose a great List of Historians whom
we never beheld, and to place them boldly at the Head of a History; but
supposing it composed with never so much sincerity, yet still it depends upon
the Reader, whether he will believe it or no. There is only one thing I know
of, which can pardon this in an Historian, and that is our being assured of his
Veracity. For this reason it is that we don't think the worse of Thuanus, for
having used this Conduct. Those evident Marks of Sincerity and Moderation which
he shows all along, have made us forgive him this Fault, although we don't
forgive it in such People as Varillas, whose Passion and Romancing Genius are
conspicuous in every Line of his Works.

Of Truth.
II. THE second thing we require of an Historian, is that after he has taken all
poffible care to instruct himself in the Truth, to have the Courage to declare
it without being biased. Who is it but must know that the principal Law of
History, is that it dare to utter nothing which is false, and that it dare to
speak all the truth, that it may not give the least Umbrage, that it is
influenced either by Affection or Prejudice? These, in short, are its
Foundations that are known by all the World. Cicero Lib. II. de Oratore c. 15.
Quis nescit primam esse Historiae legem, nequid falsi dicere audeat; deinde
nequid very non audeat; ne qua suspicio gratiae sit in scribendo, nequa
simultatis? Haec scilicet fundamenta nota suns omnibus.

But in order to observe this Law, which is without dispute essential to
History, a Man before he sets himself down to Write, ought entirely to
disengage himself from all sorts of Passions and Prepossessions, without which
he will certainly suppress or disguise the Truth, nay and publish a thousand
Lies either on purpose, or else for want of taking due heed. It Is impossible to
say any thing upon this Article more vehement, or more solid, or more necessary
than what Lucian has said in that Treatise, where he teaches us in what manner
a History ought to be written. I will here set down some of his words, and will
follow d' Ablancourt's Translation, although it only expresses the Author's
Meaning, and has retrenched a great deal from the Original. Above all, says he,
we ought not to be devoted to any Party; for we must not do like that Painter
who painted a Monarch de profil, because he had only one Eye: We ought to
represent him entire. Let not his Respect for his Country hinder him from
relating the Losses she has sustained, or the Faults she has committed; for an
Historian, no more than a Player, is to be blamed for the Misfortunes he
represents. If it were in our power to repair Disorders by disguising them, or
passing them over in silence, Thucydides had not been wanting to have razed
with a stroke of his Pen the Fortifications of the Enemy, and to have
re-establsh'd the Affairs of his Country; but even the Gods themselves are not
able to change whatever is past. Therefore it is the Duty of an Historian to
recount all Transactions, just as they happened, which it is impossible for him
to do, when he is a Dependant upon any Prince or Republic, from whom he has any
thing to hope or fear. Whenever he is obliged to speak of 'em, he ought to
have a greater regard for Truth, than for his Interest, or Passion. For she is
the only Divinity to whom he ought to Sacrifice, without thinking of the rest.
In short he ought always to have before his Eyes the judgment of Posterity, if
he would not rather wear the Character of a Flatterer than that of an
Historian. -- I would have my Historian zealous to speak the Truth, and that he
lie under no Temptations to conceal it; let him make no Allowances to Fear or
Hope, to Friendship or Hatred; let him not be of any Country or Party, and let
him call every thing by its true Name, without remembering either to offend or
please. And this, continues he, is the Method which Thucydides followed, although
he saw Herodotus was in so great Esteem, that his Books had the Names of the
Muses bestowed upon them. It is infinitely better for me, said he, to write
something that will last for ever, than only endeavor to please for the
present. I ought not to take in fabulous Stories, but to transmit to Posterity
the Truth, as it happened. -- See now what ought to be the Sentiments of a true
Historian.

These are such evident Truths that it is impossible to reject them, however it
may be convenient to enlarge upon them a little more, to show the great
Importance of them, in a more sensible manner. I say then that an Historian
ought at first setting out to forget that he has any Friends, Relations, or any
Country; that he may be able to speak of them with the same disinteressed
Freedom as if he had no manner of Engagements to them. The Duties of a Friend,
of a Relation, or of a Citizen are one thing, and the Duty of an Historian
another. The former are confined to certain Persons and Places, whose advantage
we endeavor to procure, but the latter concerns all Mankind in general, that
are able to read History, in whatever place or time they are born. As it is but
convenient that the Interests of our Friends and Relations should give way to
those of our Country, because it is much better to procure the Advantage of a
great number of Persons, or of a whole Society, than that of some few of its
Members, so in the same manner the present Interest of one's Country ought to
be less considered, than that which is infinitely more extensive, the Interest
of all Mankind. Lib. I. p. 18. Edit. Amstel.
Polybius speaking of some Historians who had been too favorable to their
Country, says admirably well, That in other Duties of Life this Disposition was
not to be blamed. For it is just that a good Man should be a Friend to his
Friend, and to his Country, and bear a Hatred to their Enemies, and a Friend to
their Friends. But so soon as he takes the Character of an Historian upon him,
that very moment he ought to forget all this. An Historian is frequently
obliged to speak well of his Enemies, and to give them-great Commendations,
when their Actions deserve it. He must often censure his nearest Relations, and
cover them with Infamy, when they have committed such Faults that he cannot
speak otherwise of them. As a Creature which has lost its Eyes becomes
unserviceable; in the same manner, if you take away Truth from History, what
remains is good for nothing. For this Consideration he should not make any
difficulty to condemn his Friends, and blame his Enemies. He must not be afraid
to censure the same Persons upon whom he has bestowed Commendations, since
those that are in the Government cannot always succeed, nor on the other hand,
commit Faults perpetually. Without having any regard to the Persons, he ought
to relate things by themselves, and to speak of them in his History, as they
deserve. Some one will say perhaps that these are fine words, and that they
comprehend an excellent Lesson, but a Man must be Master of a great deal of
Courage and Resolution, he must love Truth in an extraordinary manner to
observe the Rules which this Historian has laid down. These are Qualities that
are not easily to be found; and has he followed the same Precepts himself,
which he recommends to others?

But I ask the Gentlemen, who start these Difficulties, Whether they imagine
that to Write a History be an Employment proper for every one that can express
himself with Facility? Whether they believe that a mean-spirited Wretch, that a
Flatterer, that a covetous interessed Man is fit to instruct all Posterity? A
Man's Talents ought to answer the Greatness of such an Enterprise; and if it is
a rare matter to find Persons that possess them all, it is equally as rare to
find Histories that deserve to be read. As for Polybius, only those that never
read him, can possibly take him for a Philosopher or Preacher, which People
often do the quite contrary to what they recommend to others. He shows all
along that he had a very great Esteem for Aratus, the General of the Achaeans:
However, that does not hinder him from censuring in his Conduct, with great
freedom, whatever he thought was amiss in it. For instance, He describes at
length, in the fourth Book of his History, the Faults, which Aratus committed
in a Battle against the Aetolians, that was purely lost by his means; without
dissembling any thing of, and endeavoring to excuse what would admit of no
Apology. He knew what difference there is between Pardoning and Justifying; and
although he was of opinion that the Achaeans ought to pardon Aratus for the
Faults he had committed upon this Occasion, in consideration of the great
Services he had done their Republic, and the Honesty of his Intentions, yet he
knew that 'twas not an Historian's Business to endeavor to Justify them. But
Polybius was by no means capable of betraying the Truth in favor of Aratus: he
who does in no manner conceal the Faults of Philopoemen, nor those of Lycortas;
the latter of whom was his Father, and the former his Friend and Protector.
This the Reader may easily remark in his Excerpta Legate. 41.
Narration of the Embassy of Lycortas in Egypt, in the Name of the Achaeans.
He went thither to renew the Alliance which the Achaeans had long before made
with the Ptolomys, and this Design had been vigorously supported by
Philopoemen. However heacquitted himself so negligently in this Employ, that he
contented himself with making the King of Egypt Swear, and with swearing
himself in the Name or the Achaeans, before he had agreed upon any Articles
with him; although the Achaeans had made several different Treaties with the
Ptolomys. At his return home, Aristenus, General of the Achaeans, who was of
the contrary Faction, as he was giving his Advice in the general Assembly of
Achaia, asked him what sort of an Alliance he had renewed with the King of
Egypt, and reckoned up several Treaties which the Republic had made with his
Predecessors. Upon this the Assembly was eager to know which of these Treaties
he had confirmed. Now this, says the Son of Lycortas, was what neither
Philopoemen himself, who, as being General, had advised the renewing of the
Alliance, nor Lycortas, nor the other Ambassadors, who had been at Alexandria,
could say any thing to. It was therefore unanimously adjudged, that they had
acquitted themselves very negligently in their Commission. Aristenus, on the
contrary, seemed to be a Man of Ability, as being the only Person who knew what
he said. It Is after this manner that Polybius speaks of his Protector and of
his Father. He observes the same Conduct, when he speaks of those Persons for
whom he had no Kindness. He lays down their Virtues with as much Impartiality
as their Vices; because his only pleasure was to speak Truth. I will give an
Instance of it below.

The best Historians have imitated him more or less, according as they had more
or less Courage, or Love for the Truth. It is almost impossible for a Man not
to have an Aversion for the Enemies of his Country, or those from whom he has
received any personal Injury. He will have an Idea of Injustice generally
before his Eyes, whenever he thinks of them, and this will so far influence him
as to make him represent them for a People, or a Set of Men that are Enemies to
Justice. The Princes that entered into a Cofederacy against France, (in the War
which began in 1688, and ended in 1697) and their Subjects have looked upon,
and do still look upon France as an unjust Power, which designed to make itself
Mistress of all Europe. In France, on the other hand, they have accused the
Allies of Injustice, and it may be they are still prepossessed with this
Opinion. Thus it happens that when Writers of these different Countries,
undertake to speak of the contrary Party, they seldom fail to load it with an
odious Character, and to make an Apology for their own. As their Minds are
possessed by prejudice and Passion, their Thoughts consequently take the same
Tincture, even without, their being sensible of it; and this is the Reason why
we see nothing almost upon these Subjects, that deserves to be read. But as we
ought to forget that we have Friends, Relations, and a Country, when we are
obliged to mention them in History, so we ought not to number whether others,
whom we have occasion to speak of, be Enemies, whether public or private. It Is
impossible to say any thing more proper to this purpose, than what Polybius has
said upon the occasion of Timaeus the Historian, and Agathocles, the Tyrant of
Syracuse; and this is so much the more worthy of our observation, as Polybius
was born in a Commonwealth, and extremely tinctured with Republican
Inclinations, as appears by what remains of his Works. Lib. XII. p. 917.
As wise People, says he, when they have a mind to be revenged on their
Enemies, don't so much consider what their Enemies have deserved at their
Hands, as what Equity and good Manners will suffer them to do them; in like
manner, when we are to say any thing disadvantagious of them, we should not so
much consider what they deserve should be said of them, as what is fitting for
us to publish; and indeed it is necessary that we should have a regard to this
above all things. Those that measure every thing by their Anger and Hatred,
fall unavoidably into a thousand Faults, and speak more III of them than they
ought to do. For this Reason we have Justice on our side to refuse our belief
to the greatest part of those things, which Timaeus has alleged against
Demochares. No body can excuse this in him, or believe him, because he has
exceeded all the bounds of Justice, in gratifying his reviling Humor. Nay I
cannot endure the scandalous things he tells us of Agathocles, he who was a
wicked Man: I mean what says of him toward the conclusion of his History,
where he lays the most infamous Debaucheries to his Charge, etc. There is no
question but Nature had bestowed very eminent Qualities upon Agathocles, which
sufficiently appears even by what Timaeus has said of him. For since he left
the Wheel, the Smoke, and Clay of his Father's Shop, who was an ordinary
Potter, being scarce eighteen Years old when he came to Syracuse, yet from
these disadvantagious Circumstances, he was able some time after to make
himself Master of all Sicily, and to involve the Carthaginians in very great
Difficulties; and lastly, since he had grown old in Tyranny, he died with the
Name and Dignity of a King; are we not forced to own that he was an
extraordinary Man, and that he was possessed of admirable Talents for the
execution of great Affairs? Upon this account an Historian is obliged to
recount to Posterity not only what was ill and blamable in Agathocles, but
likewise whatever was worthy of Commendation. This ought to be the Aim and
Intention of History: But Timaeus blinded by his natural Inclination to
Calumny, reports the Bad with a world of Animosity and Exaggeration, and passes
over all his noble Actions in a few words. In all appearance he was ignorant,
that to suppress in a History what really happened is no less a Lie than to
advance what never was.

We may join to Polybius a famous modern Historian, who after he had suffered
exceedingly by the Injustice of a great Prince, yet for all that was not
wanting to relate his great Exploits, with as much care and diligence as any
other Historian, and to speak all along of him, as his eminent Qualities
deserved, without suffering the least word to drop from him, which might show
that he had a just occasion to complain of him. I mean the incomparable Hugo
Grotius, who, in his History of the Low Countries, has spoke of Prince Maurice
of Nassau, as if he had never had any Quarrel with him. Here is now a
remarkable Instance of Impartiality, which shows that it is by no means
impossible for a Man to overcome his Passion, and to speak honorably of his
Enemies, as abundance of People imagine, who judge of others by themselves.

Another thing that has contributed to ruin the Sincerity of several
Historians, is that they undertook the writing of History, to obtain some
Reward, or to Advance themselves in the Party wherein they were obliged.
Suppose that an Historian lies really under such Circumstances that he has
occasion for some Acknowledgment, and that he believes to obtain it by
favoring a Party, it is a hundred to one if his Occasions don't prevail over
his Love for Truth. There are but few Men that are able without some regret to
behold Flatterers recompensed for their Writings, living in Reputation and
enjoying their Pleasures, when melancholy Truth is discouraged and contemned,
together with all those that dare admire her, or speak of her in public. And
there are as few learned Men, whose Fortunes, generally speaking, are none of
the greatest, whom Rewards cannot gain, or at least prevail with to conceal
what is III, if they don't invent advantageous Facts for those that recompense
them. From hence it follows that the business of writing modern History, in
those places where a Man is any ways interessed, ought not to be an Office or
Employment, by which one proposes purely Profit to himself. A Man may write
foreign or ancient Histories, in which all the World is pleased to hear the
truth, because we are no farther concerned in that than only to know what has
happened. But it is almost impossible to write in any Government by public
Order, and in consequence of a Pension, the Transactions that lately fell out
in it, and at the same time to confine himself religiously to the Truth. After
this, when we see throngs of People crowd and press to obtain the like
Employments, who can forbear crying out, Oh! Homines ad mentiendum paratos!
Here are Men that are ready to tell Lies for their Interest.

But may it not so happen that a Prince or a Government may be pleased for a
Man to say the Truth, nay and even recompense the generous Liberty of an
Historian, who has told both the good and bad without dissembling in the least?
Is this Virtue impracticable, or above Humane Nature? There is no question to
be made but this is possible to God, who is able to change the Hearts of Men as
he pleases; but I look upon it to be impossible to Men, in the present
Condition wherein we find them. Flatterers are not only rewarded in all places
of the World, but we look upon those Persons to be disaffected and seditious,
that dare proclaim any Faults that we have committed; and we are more severe in
punishing such People, than we are liberal in rewarding those that Flatter us.
Princes imagine that it is not so advantageous for them that we speak Well of
them, as it is dangerous to suffer us to speak the least III of them. Mankind is
everywhere violently prejudiced against the Praises of those, that cannot
blame without exposing themselves to some Disgrace, and easily believe the Ill,
which it is dangerous to speak. This is the reason why we are much more afraid
of a sincere Writer, than we love those that are ready to say all that we would
have them say. Thus even those Persons who would scorn to prostitute themselves
so meanly as to tell Lies for a Reward, have not Courage enough oftentimes to
expose themselves to Persecutions for speaking the Truth.

If Sovereign Princes had a mind to instruct Posterity at their own Expense,
they ought so to manage Matters, that Historians might have nothing to fear
from them, for describing their Defects as well as their Virtues, and the
Faults they have committed as well as their fine Actions. Those to whom they
address themselves to write their History, ought to answer them in some such a
manner as follows. If you would have the World believe the Good I can write of
you, give me leave not to dissemble, whatever may with truth be said to your
disadvantage. If you would have them think that it is not out of Interest that
I commend you, take care that they have not any reason to suspect that the fear
of being Ill-used has not hindered my Pen from writing what may be justly
censured. Otherwise leave me at liberty to hold my Tongue, and reserve your
Favors for other Persons than for Flatterers, who are as little believed when
they praise those, to whom they have sold their Liberty, as when they blame
without reason the Enemies of their Benefactors. For my part, there are no Lies
or Dissimulations to be bought of me, and I will never sell the Truth. But to
make such a plain-dealing Speech as this is, a Man must be of the Humor of
Philoxenus who rather chose to drudge in the vilest Employment, with Irons upon
his Feet, than not to ridicule the wretched Verses of a certain Tyrant of
Syracuse: But we have few Men of this Temper.

But it is not only Passion that may mislead an Historian, for there are
Prepossessions that may have the same Effect upon him, and equally lead him out
of his way. When we have once entertained a good Opinion of a Man, we are
resolved without farther Examination to believe all that is said to his
Advantage; and on the other hand we readily believe all the Ill that is
reported of those whom we don't esteem. However, it may so fall out, that
Persons, who in all Respects deserve our Admiration, may commit very great
Faults, and that others, who little deserve to be esteemed, may sometimes do
very good Actions. Humane Nature is not so equal in itself, whatever condition
it may be in, but it frequently passes from Good to Evil, and from Evil to
Good, when we least intend it. The Examples of Aratus and Agathocles which I
have already cited, are an evident Proof of it. Therefore an Historian ought to
disengage himself from all Prevention, and to exanine in themselves the Proofs
of those Facts he is going to relate: To censure, if there be a just Occasion
for it, those whom he has Esteemed, and, on the contrary, to praise those of
whom he had a bad Opinion, if they deserve it.

Polybius infinitely esteemed the Romans upon the score of moral and military
Virtues, and in truth he had reason to admire them upon several Accounts. It is
not to be supposed that he could have so advantageous an Idea of the
Carthaginians, and to say the truth, they did not equal the Romans. However,
this does not hinder him from publishing the Faults of the former, and their
Violation of Faith upon diverse occasions, as particularly their Usage of the
Carthaginians after the end of the first Punic War. In like manner he commends
the good conduct of the Carthaginian Generals, when they deserved it. Thus the
Romans had so great an esteem for his Sincerity and Judgment, that Brutus, who
killed Julius Caesar, made an Abridgment of his History in the latter part of
his Life, at which time he was most of all taken up with Business.

But we find few Historians so impartial and sincere. The present Writers of
France don't think that it is possible for the Council that governs it, to
commit the least Indiscretions, so high an Idea they have of their wise Maxims,
and steady Conduct. I will not pretend to oppose this Idea of theirs, because
in truth it is founded upon diverse weighty Reasons: But they should judge of
Facts and their Consequences, without having any regard to them; because the
most prudent Councils are not always infallible, but are subject to take false
Measures, although this does not happen so often to them. It is likewise
reasonable that those that admire the Conduct of the other Princes of Europe,
who joined against France, should remember that the best Heads are sometimes
over-seen: We ought to do Justice reciprocally one to another, and to judge of
Faults and great Actions, by themselves, and by their Consequences, and not
altogether by Preposession.

Of Ecclesiastic History
THESE Precautions, in my Opinion, are absolutely necessary for an Historian, if
he would acquit himself, as he ought, in his Undertaking. We may find, as
already has been observed, Examples and Proofs of it in the best Historians of
Pagan Antiquity. But there is a sort of History among Christians, wherein, if
we must talk Historically, that is to say, without being biased, all the
abovementioned Rules, that have been prescribed for the Writing of History,
are neglected and violated. An Orthodox Author that undertakes to Compose an
Ecclesiastic History, cannot be too hotheaded and zealous for his own Party,
nor have too violent an Aversion for the other Sects: He must show this
Disposition of Mind all along in his Work; for therwise he will be defamed not
only for a Man of no Abilities, but likewise for an impious Person. It Is but
just he should propose to himself, as a Recompense for his Labor, some
Ecclesiastic Dignities, if he is of a Profession to pretend to them, or some
other equivalent, if he is a Laic, upon condition he all along favor
Orthodoxy, that is, his own Party. If he be so ill advised, as to speak never
so little in favor of the Heretics, or such as are opposite to his own side,
he must expect to be exposed to the fury of Zealots, to their Accusations, and
perhaps to all the Punishments, Ecclesiastic and Civil, that are inflicted in
the place where he lives; unless he will retract these rash Truths, which are
to be found in him, advantageous to Heresy. He ought to fore-arm himself with
this Prejudice and never lay it aside, viz. That all that may be honorable in
Heretics is false, and that all that is said to their Disreputation is true: As
on the contrary, every thing that can do honor to the Orthodox is undoubted,
and all that reflects upon them is a downright Life. It Is necessary that an
Orthodox Historian should carefully suppress, or at least extenuate, as far as
in him lies, the Errors and Vices of those that are respected among the
Orthodox, although they are not well known by them; and on the other hand, that
he exaggerate, as much as he can, the Mistakes and Faults of the Heretics.
Besides, he ought to remember that any Orthodox may serve as a Witness against
a Heretic, and ought to be believed upon his word; and that on the contrary, a
Heretic's word ought never to be taken against the Orthodox. All the honor
that must be allowed him, is to hearken to him when he has any thing to say in
favor of Orthodoxy, or against himself. An Orthodox may be cited as a Witness
in his own proper Cause, but a Heretic must not be so even in that of another.
In short, there are Maxims, which he must not examine but follow, if he
undertakes to write Ecclesiastic History, under pain of Infamy,
Excommunication, Banishment, etc. After this manner the Centuriators of
Magdeburg have written on one side, and Cardinal Baronius on the other; which
has obtained both of them among their own Party, an immortal Reputation: But we
must confess at the same time that they were not the first; and that they only
imitated the generality of those that preceded them, in this way of Writing. It
had been the fashion several Ages before this, to search out in Antiquity, not
what was really there, but what we judged ought to be there, for the good of
the Party which we had espoused; and to represent the Ancients, such as we
found it for our porpose, that they should be, for the advantage of the Cause,
which we have undertaken to defend. A Man certainly found his profit in writing
after this manner, and danger in doing otherwise.

Sozomen, in Lib. I. c. 1.
his Ecclesiastic History, after having enumerated the Monuments, out of which
he compiled it, goes on as follows: For fear lest any one should condemn my
Work of Falsehood, upon my not being sufficiently instructed in Matters as they
happened, because he finds the Relations in other Authors different from mine;
he must understand that upon the occasion of Arius's Opinions, and those which
sprung up afterward, the Governors of the Church being divided, every one
writ to those of his own Opinion concerning those things, which he himself had
taken to Heart: That having assembled Synods apart, they confirmed whatever
they had a mind to, and frequently condemned their Adversaries in their
absence; That they made their Court to the Emperors and the Great Men about
them, and left no Stone unturned to gain them over to their side, and make them
receive their own Opinions; That in order to pass for Orthodox in the World,
each Party took a particular care to collect the Letters which favored their
Sect, and omitted the rest. And this, says he, has given me abundance of
trouble in my Search after the Truth. But since the Sincerity of History
requires that we should do all that in us lies to discover the Truth, I thought
myself obliged diligently to examine these sorts of Writings. If I relate the
Quarrels which the Ecclesiastics have had among one another, about the
Preference of their Sects; let no one believe that this proceeds from Malice,
or any sinister Design. Besides that, it is just, as I have already observed,
that an Historian should prefer the Truth to all things; the Truth of the
Doctrins of the Catholic Church does but appear the more by it, having been
several times put to the Proof, by the cunning Designs of those that opposed
it, etc. It seems that he durst not speak all that he thought, for after he had
taken notice of the Quarrels and Ambition of the Ecclesiastics, as well as of
their Writings and Letters, directly opposite one to the other; he ought to
have told his Reader what Rules he had followed in his History, to distinguish
the Truth from Falsehood: Besides, he ought to have concluded otherwise than he
has done, and have said that the vicious Lives, and wicked Actions of the
Ecclesiastics have no Connection with the Christian Religion, which condemns
them, and consequently ought not to be set down to her Account; That therefore
for his speaking Truth of the first Fathers of the Church, although it was not
advantageous for them, no such Conclusion ought to be drawn, as that he
designed to do the least injury to Religion; That we ought not to confound the
private and personal Interests of the Churchmen with the general Interest of
the Gospel; That this was an Artifice which the irregular Clergy made use of,
to authorize their ill living, or hinder others from daring to reprove it, as
if what was levelled only at their disorders, must needs strike directly at
Religion itself, whose unworthy Ministers they must own themselves to be; That
we ought likewise to distinguish between good and bad, between Orders that were
instituted with Reason in the Church, and the Abuse that was made of them; in
order to let the World see that those who blame the Abuse, don't censure the
thing itself, and that those who recount the ill Actions of wicked Men, don't
lose the Respect which ought to be paid to the Good; That it is notoriously
manifest that the Truth of Opinions don't make all such as profess them,
virtuous; and that speculative Errors don't corrupt the Manners of all those
who are engaged in them; so that the mixture of good and bad in the Conduct of
Life, is almost equal between the Orthodox and the Heretics; That therefore we
ought not to take all for Gospel which the former say, nor yet to reject every
thing as false that comes from the second; but that we ought to examine what
both of them can say, according to the same Rules which the Law prescribes for
sifting of Witnesses, in Civil and Criminal Affairs; That in fine, it is of the
last importance to speak out the truth freely in all this, lest the Libertines
should imagine that it is a Belief among the Christians, that the Opinions of
the Mind, or Employments in the Church, change Vice into Virtue, and Virtue
into Vice; and lest Persons of weak Judgments should insensibly be led into it
by seeing both one and the other equally consecrated in the Person of
Ecclesiastics, and at last forget that the Christian Religion consists in
believing the Doctrins of the Gospel, and obeying its Precepts, and not in the
Respect that is paid to Men, who are neither made better, nor more knowing by
their Dignities. This is what ought to be said in a Preface to an Ecclesiastic
History, and what Sozomen perhaps would have said, if he had dared to speak all
that he thought: But it was too dangerous at that time to speak thus at
Constantinople, as it is still so in the greatest part of Europe.

Of the Style of History.
III. IT is not necessary that I should speak of the Order which an Historian
ought to observe, because the Series of the Time sufficiently directs him in
that, and the Rhetors have assigned Rules for the Narration, which are as
suitable to an Historian as they are to an Orator. As for the Style, the only
Qualities which it ought to have, is to be pure, clear, and as concise as
possible, without becoming obscure. It Is in History where we ought principally
to employ that simple and natural Style, which the Masters of this Art so
exceedingly commend. As an Historian only proposes to himself to inform his
Reader of what has happened, without any design to move or divert him, any
farther than the Matter may contribute to it, without the Historians having any
such Thought; all sorts of studied Ornaments are superfluous, and an
Affectation of showing one's Eloquence is altogether impertinent. We ought to
hear what is said upon this Head by Lucian, or by d'Ablancourt; for it
signifies nothing which of the two speaks, provided that the Rules are good.
History, say they, is more chaste than Poetry, and can no more employ the
Ornaments of the latter, than a virtuous Woman those of a Harlot; and so much
the more as it has no occasion to be beholding to Fiction, and has none of
those Figures and Movements which transport and disorder the Soul. If you
bestow too much Decoration upon it, you make it resemble Hercules, when he has
Omphale's Clothes on, which is the highest piece of Extravagance. They likewise
say in another place, discoursing of an Historian; That his Style ought to be
clear and natural, without being low; for as we assign him Freedom and Truth to
regulate the Matter of his Narration, so Clearness and Perspicuity ought to
regulate the Manner of it. The Figures ought neither to be too sublime, nor too
far fetched; unless when he comes to describe a Battle, or to make an Harangue:
For upon those occasions, he is allowed to elevate his Style, and if I may so
express myself, to unfurl all the Sails of his Eloquence. However, it is not
necessary that he should raise himself in proportion to the things, of which he
talks; and he ought to preserve his Style altogether free from the Enthusiasm
and Fury of Poetry; for it is to be feared that if he rises too high, his Head
will be apt to grow giddy, and lose itself in Fiction -- Therefore if he has a
mind to rise, let it rather be by the Things than the Words; for it is
infinitely better that his Style should be ordinary, and his Thoughts sublime,
than that his Thoughts should be mean and his Style elevated, or that he should
suffer himself to be too violently hurried by the force of his Imagination. Let
his Periods be neither too long nor too much studied; his Style neither too
harmonious, nor too negligent, because one has a tincture of Barbarity, and the
other of Affectation.

This is all that may reasonably be said in general of an Historical Style; for
I am by no means of their Opinion, who pretend that the Style of an Historian
ought to be more elevated than that of an Orator, and almost Poetical, as Lib.
X. c. 1.
Quintilian believed. Neither do I believe that it is necessary for a Man to be
an Orator to be an Historian, as Lib. II. de Oratore, c. 9. and seq.
Cicero has maintained. As Instruction is his main and principal Business, all
that is not serviceable to that end, has no relation to the History, what Taste
soever the Ancients had of these Matters, who were somewhat too fond of the
Ornaments of Rhetoric. If a Man has a mind to please his Reader by his Style,
it is enough if it has the abovementioned Qualities. A Narration conceived in
pure Terms, clear and short, is sufficiently agreeable of itself, and needs no
Foreign Ornaments to recommend it, if the things we relate do otherwise deserve
to be read. So soon as the Reader perceives that an Historian makes it his
Business to display his Eloquence, he has a very just Reason to suspect his
want of Integrity, because it is the Custom of Declamers to alter the things
they relate, that they may make a better show in the Declamatory manner. Cicero
in his Brutus, having compared the death of Coriolanus with that of
Themistocles, as if both one and the other had been slain, Cap. 11.
excuses himself for doing so to his Friend Atticus, who believed that he died
of a natural Death, and accordingly had affirmed so much in a History of his
own Composing; upon which Atticus answers him very handsomely, That he might use
what liberty he pleased, because the Rhetors were allowed to depart from the
truth of History, to have a better opportunity of showing their Parts. For as
for what you have feigned about Coriolanus, is no more than what Clitarehus and
Stratocles have feigned about Themistocles. Thucydides, who was an Athenian,
descended from a good Family, and a great Man; and what is more, one that lived
a little time after him, only tells us that he died, that he was buried
privately in Attica, and that some suspected that he was Poisoned. But these
two Authors relate, how that having sacrfic'd a Bull, he received the Blood in
a Cup, and fell down dead after he had drank it. The reason was, that they were
able to describe this Death in a Tragical magnificent manner, where this common
Death furnished them with no Topics, on which they might display their
Rhetoric. Therefore since your Occasions require that Themistocles and
Coriolanus should resemble one another in every thing, I will, if you please,
lend you a Cup for the latter; nay, I will provide you with a Victim, that
Coriolanus may be in all respects another: Themistocles. Concessum est
Rhetoribus ementiri in Historiis, ut aliquid dicere possint argutius.

For this very Reason a Man ought to avoid all sort of Affectation in an
Historical Style: But above all things, he ought to take care that it be pure,
because since the Purity of the Style is by no means incompatible with the
Truth, it is ridiculous to dishearten the Reader by a barbarous Style. Such, for
instance, is that of Aubigne in his History, which we can hardly endure to read
for that very Reason, and which nothing can excuse, since it was in his power
to write otherwise, as we may find by his other Works.

Such is likewise, in part, the Style of Mezeray, in his great History of
France, and likewise in his Abridgment. Without being a jot the worse
Historian, he might have written much better French, at a time when the
Language was infinitely more pure and polite, than it seems to have been by his
Writings. By Purity and Politeness, I don't mean a Style elaborately turned in
a Declamatory strain, such as are the Styles of John Baptist Nani, in his
History of Venice; or of Emanuel Tesauro, in his Historical Writings; but a
Choice of Words and Expressions conformable to the best use of the Tongue, and
the connecting of them, which has nothing harsh nor intricate. In this way of
writing, Cornelius Nepos, and Julius Caesar, excel among the Ancients; and
among the Moderns, the Author of the Life of St. Lewis (I mean the Abbot de la
Chaise) and he that writ the History of Theodosius the Great, and the Life of
Cardinal Ximenes.

If a Man follows this Advice, it is almost impossible for him to be obscure;
for it is certain, that the good use of any Tongue, authorizes nothing that may
make the Narration obscure. Those that talk obscurely, don't fall into this
Fault, by conforming themselves to the general Use, but by affecting to talk
otherwise than the rest of the World do. Not one of those that spoke well at
Athens or Rome, talked so obscurely as Thucydides and Tacitus have written. It
proceeded from their endeavoring to rise above the common use, that they have
fallen into this obscurity, which we so justly blame in their Style. No one can
deny that this sort of Style is not affected, and that these Authors thought to
recommend their Histories by a masculine Eloquence, if I may so express myself,
in which a Man thinks to express abundance of things in a few words, which is
above the vulgar way. I cannot imagine what Charms some learned Men discovered
in this manner of writing, who have attempted to imitate them, as Hugo Grotius,
and Denis Vossius in his Translation of de Rheide's History. For after all,
good Thoughts need not be made obscure to appear good to those that understand
them; and the Reader, who is forced to stop every moment to find out the
meaning, is not at all obliged to the Historian who gives him this trouble. By
this means they have brought it to pass, that excellent Histories, in regard of
their Matter, are read but by very few People; whereas, instead of proposing to
instruct those, who understand the Latin Tongue well enough to read an
Historian with pleasure, they should endeavor to make themselves understood,
without difficulty, by those who have not arrived to that perfection in that
Language, and to render their Works useful to as many Persons, as is possible.
The more any History is worthy of being Read, for the variety of Events it
comprehends, the more it deserves to be spread abroad. The Authority of the
Ancients, who have neglected this perspicuity of Style, ought to be no
protection to the Moderns, who have imitated them, against the Reasons I have
mentioned above, or rather against good Sense.

All that we can say is, That the obscurity of these Authors comes in part from
the brevity of their Expressions and Periods, which necessarily carries along
with it something of Darkness, though it has I know not what more Majesty and
Life than a more extended Style. I own it has, but then I maintain, that to
represent truly the Character of these Historians, we must join to this brevity
an impropriety of Terms and Expressions, and a perplexed Construction, which
without dispute are no Ornaments to any Style. We ought no farther to be
Concise than Perspicuity will give us leave, whatever Advantage we may
otherwise find in Brevity; for indeed there is no Advantage that can equal that
of being rightly understood, when a Man writes to be so. The impropriety of
Terms and perplexity of the Constuction can never make a Discourse more fit to
be read, but only by those who like better what they don't understand, than
what they do, and whose Votes, in my opinion, it is worth no learned Man's
while to obtain.

Salust's Style is not so concise as that of Tacitus, but it is no less
animated; and were it not for his Antique manner of Speaking, and the boldness
of his Metaphors, he would be infinitely more clear, without losing any thing
of his force. If we compare Strada to Grotius, or to de Rheide, we shall find
him in truth somewhat more diffusive, and his Expressions sometimes bordering
more upon Poetry than History. Nevertheless, he has nothing languishing in him,
and if we retrench his Superfluities in some places, and correct the vicious
Latin in others, there are few Historians that would be more delightful to be
read, in respect of the Style; unless there were a perfect necessity to make
him speak after the manner of Oracles.

I might add some other things relating to the Style of History, but it never
was in my Thoughts to write any thing complete upon this matter. The famous
Gerard John Vossius has gone through all the Questions almost, that use to be
proposed upon this Subject, and though in some places he seems to have made a
greater use of his Reading, than of his Judgment, (a common Fault, with Writers
of his Character) yet I have no design to contradict him.

Of the Judgments that are made in History.
IV. TO make a perfect Historian, a Man ought not only to know the Verity of the
Facts which he recounts, and have a Will to publish and Art to express it, as
it ought to be; he likewise ought to be profoundly read in Morality and
Politics, without which he will never be able to pass a true Judgment upon
Humane Actions. See Vossius de Art Histor. c. 18.
It is true, there are some Persons, who believe that an Historian ought to
content himself with recounting things as they happened, without interposing
his own Opinion, and leave the Reader to take that side which the things
themselves will incline him to take, without endeavoring to prepossess him.
But as this reservedness may be justifiable in doubtful Matters, yet when the
Events themselves speak, if I may be allowed so to express myself, who can take
it ill if the Historian joins his Judgment to them? The generality of Readers
are pleased to read it, and indeed want such helps to refresh their Memories as
to what results from what they have read. That Man can by no means be said to
prepossess them, who only judges of a thing which he has related, and that too
upon incontestable Facts, which themselves have read. Thus we find this has
been the constant practice of almost all Historians, some of whom however judge
in a more direct manner, and others more obliquely, according to their
different Genius. Some intermix more Sentences than others do, and some again
would have them interwoven into the Series of the Narration, although others
place them independently by themselves, and out of the Design of the History,
that they may be the more taken notice of. In this we ought to observe certain
Bounds, within which we shall not be liable to censure, that is to say, the
Sentences ought neither to be too frequent, nor too far fetched. Otherwise it
will look as if we had written a History to have an opportunity of retailing
Sentences, than Sentences to render the History more useful. We cannot accuse
Strada with having had a design to publish his Collections of moral Sentences
when he was composing his History, but we cannot deny that he was a little too
profuse of them. Any Man may observe this in the Indexes of his two Volumes,
where we find a great number of them upon every Letter of the Alphabet.

But what is of most importance in this Occasion, the Judgments we make ought
to be just, and the Sentences such as may pass for unquestionable Maxims. For
this Effect, we ought to apply ourselves vigorously to Morality and Politics,
without which we shall be liable to make wrong Reflections, and to utter
deceitful Maxims. This is not a place to establish the Principles of these
Sciences. I will only remark in general, that as History takes in all Ages and
all Nations, and that an Historian ought to be an equitable Judge of so many
different Nations, whose Opinions differ so vastly one from another; it is
necessary he should keep himself within the general Ideas which good Sense will
furnish him with, about Religion, about Virtue and Vice, about the reciprocal
Duties of the People, and of those that govern them; and lastly, about whatever
Nations may owe one to another.

Otherwise, if an Historian judges of a Nation by the Principles of a Religion,
which is unknown to it, or which it disapproves, he takes a Party, and exposes
his own Religion to undergo the same Law, when Historians of a different
Religion shall write the History of a Nation whose Opinions he shall approve.
For no Man upon the Face of the Earth has a right to lay down contested
Opinions as if they were indisputable, and if he will needs condemn others upon
this Foot, he cannot in justice complain if others condemn him in asserting
contrary Opinions, which they believe to be true. For example, let a Catholic
Historian write a History of the Troubles of Religion, which have happened in
Europe since the last Age, he ought not, in the Judgments which he makes of the
Protestants, to set up such Ideas as the Mobb and those that are no better
instructed, frame to themselves of the Deity, as if it had the same Passions
with the Ecclesiastics, and ought to destroy in this and to'ther World, those
that have had the Presumption to find fault with their Doctrine and their
Conduct. Or at least if he have any such Ideas, they ought never to come into
his History, where we only see these Quarrels, which Men have with one another,
and by no means the secret Thoughts of the Divinity, who does not always send
Prosperity as a mark of his Favor, nor calamitous Accidents as a sign of his
Indignation. Whatever Sentiments a Man may have upon the Subject of Religion,
we want not Examples to prove, That Prosperity as often accompanies what we
believe to be Error and Injustice, as what we look upon to be Truth and a a
good Cause. There is no Party, upon which what they object to others, may not
be retorted in this Case.

For instance, it was ridiculous in Strada to remark, as he frequently does,
upon the Eve of what Festival, a Town was attacked by the Spanish Army; as if
the Saint to whom the Church of Rome has consecrated that Day, had favored the
Spaniards to make them Victorious. In like manner, we should laugh at any
Protestant who should affirm it to be a sensible Mark that the Invocation of
saints is a Practice disagreeable to God, because the Protestants did beat the
Catholics in such and such Engagements, although the latter had recommended
themselves, before the Battle began, to all the Saints in Paradise. The same
Strada often menaceth what he calls Heresy, with all sorts of Calamities, and
promises Victories to the Monarchy of Spain against the United Provinces, upon
the score of its Zeal for the Catholic Religion. We are now sensible how ill a
Prophet he has proved in this particular; and if we are to judge of God's
Designs by the Events, we ought to say that Providence had decreed that the
United Provinces should become an absolute independent Republic, for the
Preservation of the Crown of Spain, to the Interests of which it was to be as
firmly devoted at the end of the XVII. Century, as it had been opposite to it
till toward the middle of the same Age, and about the end of the former.

To show how little a stress we ought to lay upon these Theological Reflections,
the abovementioned Historian, who never fails to attribute the Advantages of
the Spaniards to a particular Favor of Heaven, which declared itself against
Heresy, is obliged shamefully to turn the Tables, when he comes to speak of
the Victory, which the English obtained over the pretended invincible Armada of
the Spaniards, and to reason in the following manner: Toward the end of Lib.
IX. Dec. 2.
It Is reported that Queen Elizabeth went to Church in a Triumphal Chariot, in
the midst of the Colors of the vanquished Enemy, and that she ordered the
Spoils of the Spaniards to be hung up there, after she had given Thanks to God
for this Victory, who had been, as she believed, so favorable to her upon this
Occasion: Whereas at that very time when she made it be believed that he most
favored her, he showed that he was incensed against her, since he permitted
her to abuse this good Success, to confirm Heresy, the Yoke of which she might
have shaken off, both for herself and for her Kingdom, to her great Advantage,
if she had been overcome. Besides the Winds and Tempests did not give the
English much reason to magnify themselves, and they had no reason to believe
themselves better Men, because they were more fortunate, unless they conclude
that we ought to prefer the Impiety of Saracens and Turks to the Piety of the
Christians, since these Barbarians have often beaten the best prepared Forces
of the Christians. This last Reflection is very true: But if Strada had
remembered it all along, where he speaks of the Victories of the Spaniards, he
might very well have spared a great deal of impertinent Rhetoric, to show the
favors of Heaven toward the Catholics, in the Advantages they gained over
their Enemies. This it is to have two Weights and two Measures, to pretend that
Providence favors one side, when it gives them Victory, and that it is angry
with the other, when it treats them after the same manner. However I am of
Opinion, that one may safely say, that in case the Spaniards had succeeded in
their designed Invasion of England, Strada would have said, That God had
changed the Winds in their favor, and blessed a Fleet, which went to exterpate
Heresy in that Kingdom.

It will perhaps be offered in favor of Strada, and other Historians, who
write in this manner, of whatsoever party they are, that it is not possible
they should believe that Religion not to be true, which they follow, and
consequently that they should not look upon every thing as a favor of Heaven,
which serves to establish it. For my part, I don't in the least hinder them
from thinking so, but I maintain that these Reflections ought not to be allowed
a place in History, when it is no part of our Business to render to our Religion
what we owe to it, but to instruct all Mankind, if we are able, by Truths which
cannot be contested on any side. Let them believe what they please, as for what
concerns their own particular, but let them censure none, except it be upon
Principles of good Sense, or of Religion, that are acknowledged even by those
whom they censure. No Man ought to be blamed for not doing what he believes he
ought not to do, according to his own Principles, so long as he retains them,
although these Principles are false. If we can blame him, it is for receiving
Falsities without examination, but it belongs to Divines to enter into this
Dispute and not to Historians, who don't treat of the Errors but of the
Actions of Men.

Besides this, these Historians, that are so partial in the matter of Religion,
are extremely subject to give an advantageous turn to all the conduct of that
Party, which supports what they believe to be the Truth, to say no worse of
them. I don't speak of the Varilla's and Maimbourgs, and other Liers of that
stamp, who have renounced all Truth; but even of more moderate Historians. It
were to be wished that when they begin to write their Histories, they had
forgotten the Party which they espoused, in the present Divisions of
Christendom; that they might have been able to speak of their Disputes and
Differences, as Men would do that were not at all concerned in them. The Love
of a Party, as reasonable as it may appear to be, makes us always lean somewhat
toward it, when we come to relate any thing that is disadvantagious to the
good Cause.

If I might here be allowed to describe the Idea, which I would have an
Historian frame to himself of the Divinity, in relation to those Events that
are comprehended in History, I would tell him that he ought to consider God as
the common Father of all Mankind, who looks down with compassion upon their
Errors and their Vices, but contents himself with giving them Laws, which they
may observe or violate, without his intervening to make them be obeyed by
Rewards or by sensible Pains during this Life, reserving it to himself to
display his Justice, when he shall have judged that Mankind has continued long
enough upon the Earth. As these Sentiments can be called in question by no Man,
an Historian ought to look upon what we call Happiness or Unhappiness in the
things of this Life, as Accidents that neither denote the Anger, nor the
Approbation of Heaven, and to draw no Consequences in this respect, either to
the Advantage or Disadvantage of any Party whatsoever.

Although God has discovered to Mankind by Reason and by Revelation, what is
agreeable to him, yet he has accompanied neither the one nor the other with so
great a Light, that it should be impossible for us to take that for Reason or
Revelation, which is not really so. He permits Men to dispute upon these
Principles, and without doubt he likewise looks upon them with pity, yet for
all that he does not draw the Curtain, if I may so speak, which conceals him
from our Eyes, and appear in an uncontestable manner to come to decide our
Controversies. He will do that, whenever he sees it convenient; in the mean
time it is every one's Duty to remember that he is a Man, subject to Error as
well as another, and equally submitted to this last Judgment of the Creator of
the World. None among us Christians disagree about these Principles, and
Historians in particular ought to remember them more than any other Men. If
they thought seriously of them, they would not be ready to make such sharp and
violent Invectives, against the speculative Errors of other Men, even
supposing them to be Errors.

Strada, for example, had not declaimed so eagerly against Heresy, as he does
upon all Occasions, and principally in his In the beginning of Lib. II. Dec. 1.
History, when he assigns the Causes of the Wars of the Low Countries, where he
employs all his Eloquence to persuade the World, that Heresy causes nothing
but Disorders and Rebellions, and makes Men wicked and Atheists. When the
Protestant Historians fall into the like Invectives, speaking of the famous
Catholic League, which for so long a time tore France in pieces, the contrary
Party cannot endure this bitter Language, and say, That this is to Preach, and
not to Write a History. If we had any remainders of Equity left among us, we
should unanimously condemn these Practices, and be so honest as to own that the
Vices of Men have infinitely a greater share in the Disorders of Europe, than
Religion, in whatsoever manner it is explained. We should forbear all these
Invectives, which indeed are pardonable in no Man, but much less in an
Historian; or if we must needs be venting our Malice against those Parties whom
we disapprove, we must not take it ill, if they return us the same Language in
their turn.

But herein lies our Weakness, to imagine that God is as partial and peevish as
ourselves are, and consequently that he requires of us that we lose no
opportunity of railing and exclaiming against those, whose Creator and Father
he is as well as of the most fiery Zealots, and rendering them odious whatever
it costs us.

Historians ought to be more prudent, and those that read them ought likewise
to approve those generally who come nearest to this noble Idea, which the
Masters of this Art give us of a disinteressed Historian. True Judges have
exceedingly commended Thuanus, who in his History has observed so admirable a
moderation, in relation to the Party wherein he was born and wherein he died:
But those who could not endure to hear any Truths prejudicial to their Party,
have exclaimed vehemently against him. Such a Man was Justus Lipsius, a great
Critic, but one of a shallow Judgment in every thing besides, who writ to him,
See the Scaligerana, p. 391. Ed. Amstel. an. 1695.
That this History very much displeased him, and the Liberty he took in writing
it, was not suitable for this Age. These are the Terms which de Thou uses in a
Letter to Jos. Scaliger, dated June 29th. 1606. I don't know, continues he,
whether I ought to make him any answer. He is mightily changed since he left
Leyden for Louvain. I am the very same I ever was, and will be, if it pleases
God, ready to correct any thing which I have written. He exhorts me strongly to
this correction, but does not tell me wherein, so that I know not what to make
of his Advice. -- I believe he would send me to the Inquisition, but it will be
a hard matter to reconcile the French Liberty to that Yoke. He deserves a
sharper Answer than I am in a Humor to write. I was willing to set down the
greatest part of this Letter, that I might draw two Consequences from it: The
first is, that oftentimes even Men of Learning; who know the value of Liberty,
are the very first to betray her infamously, as Lipsius did, although they know
well enough that they do ill in it. This Grammarian, who bound himself hand and
foot, like a mean-spirited Slave, to the Jesuits, when he retired to Louvain,
was well enough satisfied in his own Conscience that de Thou had advanced
nothing false, at least out of Passion, and did not tax him with deserting the
Interest of Truth, but only with taking a liberty, which was not suitable for
this Age; as if we were born to be Slaves, rather than those that were born in
former Ages! What Privilege of Heaven did they receive, which we have not? We
are no less free than they, except it be because we are afraid of our own
Shadows, and that instead of defending at least modestly those that have more
Generosity than others, we not only abandon them to the fury of the Factious,
who make use of the pretense of Religion to hinder Truth from being spoken, but
even endeavor to destroy them, to procure to ourselves the favor of the
Druids. If all the Men of Learning in France had been of Lipsius's Humor, we
had lost this illustrious President, to whom Posterity is so much obliged, and
who is, if I must say it, the last of the French Historians, who has spoken
with moderation of an opposite Party in respect of Religion. For as for
Mezeray, he was very far from observing the Laws of History in this particular,
although they still commend that little liberty he shows, in a Country, where it
is entirely extinct.

Another Consequence which I draw from this slavish and cowardly Advice of
Lipsius, is that we ought to be glad that he was only Historiographer of Spain;
for a Man of his Temper would at least have dissembled all that he knew
disadvantageous to his own Party, and have poisoned all the rest, See his
Epist. ad Belgas Cent. 2. Ep. 67.
although he pretends to set up for a Philosopher, and what is more, for a Stoic.
The King of Spain did very well to give him a Pension in consideration of his
great Learning, but he should not give him a Farthing, in quality of an
Historian, a Title for which he was altogether unfit. The History of the
Miracles of the two Notre-dames, for which he has been so justly ridiculed,
sufficiently shows what he was capable of doing, in a History, wherein Religion
was any ways concerned.

The second thing, wherein those that attempt to write a History, ought to be
perfectly instructed, is the Principles upon which Humane Society in general,
and particular Societies are founded, and principally all that has a relation
to Justice and Injustice. Without this, they will never be able to pass a solid
Judgment upon almost any single Action that comes before them. They will be
liable to take very wicked Men for Models of Virtue, and on the other hand,
virtuous Persons for Men of a most flagitious Character. They will bestow the
Elogiums of Virtue upon Vice, and treat Virtue herself no better than a
Criminal. What is Vice with some People, passes for Virtue with others, and
what we approve in our own Country, we look upon as execrable in an Enemy.
Those that afterward read these Histories, and have not a better stock of
Knowledge than the Historians, instead of drawing those Advantages which they
ought from 'em, will soon fill their Minds with false Ideas, which at long run
will have but too great an Influence upon their Conduct.

An Historian therefore ought to consider what are the Duties, which the very
Constitution of Humane Nature has imposed upon all Men, of what Condition or
Quality soever, and in what place or time sover they are born. These are the
Laws which all Men are obliged to observe one with another, which can never
suffer any change, nor be altered by any form of Government whatsoever; without
violating the Principles of Humanity, and consequently without deserving
Censure. For example, (for it is not my Business here to treat at large of that
matter) the weakness of Humane Nature has imposed a necessity upon us of
assisting one another, and the least experience of Life teaches us that we
ought not to do that to another, which we should call Injustice if they did to
us. This Principle being put, and it is impossible to shake it, it will
necessarily follow that whatever is contrary to it, ought to be blamed, let the
Person who did it be who he will, and under what pretense he pleases.

Therefore those that write History ought to condemn without partiality
whatever opposes this Principle of Humane Society. This ought chiefly to
discover itself in those that write Lives, where they have an occasion to speak
distinctly of the Virtues and Vices of those Persons whose History they write.
We can hardly blame the Pagan Authors in this respect, I mean such as are of
any Esteem; for it is certain that they don't in the least dissemble the Vices
which were known to them, and that they likewise bestow upon Virtue the
Commendations she deserved, according to the Idea which they had of it. This is
what we may remark in the Lives of Plutarch, for Instance, and of Suetonius,
wherein they distribute their Censures and their Praises with a great deal of
Justice and Freedom. All that we can find fault in them, is that they had not
the clearest and exactest Ideas of Virtue and Vice. For Example, Ambition and a
Passion for making War, either to gain a Crown, or acquire Reputation, or to
oppress one's Neighbor, and to be admired by the wickedest of Men, pass for
Virtues in their Writings, or at least for the Qualities of an Heroic Soul,
that is elevated above the Vulgar. We may easily perceive by the manner wherein
these Authors speak of their Heroes, that they took several for Great Men, who
were indeed Great Scourges both of their own Country and the neighboring
Nations.

The mischief is, that after the Revelation of the Gospel, we are not much
wiser than before. We may discover, by the Style of some Christian Historians,
who have written the Lives of several illustrious Men, either separately, or in
the course of their general Histories, that they no less admired them
notwithstanding their Injustices, and all the other Artifices they employed to
advance themselves, than if they had always observed the nicest Justice in all
their Actions. Nay, several People believe that this scrupulous Virtue is
incompatible with that which makes what we call a great Prince, or a great
Statesman. To illustrate this by a famous Instance, we framed to ourselves a
high Idea of Charles the Fifth, as heretofore we did of Julius Caesar, though
very little Justice went into his Composition; as if the Idea of a great Man
could possibly subsist without this Virtue. Historians that are full of this
vulgar Prepossession, merely for not having studied enough the Principles of
Morality, deceive their Readers, who know no better than themselves; and thus
we continue from Generation to Generation to admire these fine People, because
they have had the good Fortune, if I may be allowed so to speak, to do a world
of Mischief to infinite numbers of their Contemporaries, without being called
to an account for it.

There is however this difference between the ancient Historians and the
Moderns, that the former speak much more freely of the Persons, whose Lives
they write, and dissemble their Vices much less than the Moderns have done in
the like Compositions. At least I don't remember that I ever met any Modern who
writ his Thoughts with that freedom and sincerity, which is so emphatically
conspicuous in the two abovementioned Authors. The greatest part of them
endeavor to set off their Hero as much as they can; as if the Reader were
more obliged to them for concealing from him the Defects of those whose Lives
they write, than for discovering them to him; whereas the very Essence of
History requires of us, that we describe their Defects and the ill Consequences
occasioned by them, that we teach the rest of the World to shun them, as well
as to imitate those Virtues, of which she gives us the Examples. If a Man of
the Genius of Plutarch or Suetonius, as far as he can reasonably be so
nowadays, had written the Life of Cardinal Richelieu, or of Cardinal Mazarin,
he would have written it after another manner than the Sieur Aubery has done,
who has had so bad an opinion of our Age, that he has endeavored to persuade
the World that they were pious Men, and good Bishops. He would not have
forgotten their good Qualities, such as were their Vigilance and Address, but
he would not have presumed so far upon his Reader as to have talked of their
Devotion and Humility. Several Persons are likewise of opinion, that it was
downright Raillery to strive to make a Saint of Cardinal Ximenes, since all
the Actions of his Life sufficiently discovered that he was a very haughty and
ambitious Man.

The Greeks and Romans have generally committed a very great fault against the
Principles of Humanity, and that is, when they speak of the Incursions which
their Generals made into those Countries which they call Barbarous, of their
manner of subduing them, and how they treated the People who rebelled against
them, after they had overcome by force; they slide gently over these places, as
if the Greeks and Romans had committed no Inhumanity in all this. When the
Greeks made Depredations upon the Persians and their Subjects, to carry them
into Slavery and killed all such as pretended to oppose them, they See Grotius
de jure B. and P. Lib. II. ^^ 20. n. 41. etc. 22. n. 10.
called this Civilizing the barbarous Nations. Nay, they said that the Greeks
were naturally Enemies of the Persians, and that Nature taught them to make War
against them. On the contrary, when the Persians or any other People, whom they
called Barbarous, that is to say, All those who could not talk Greek, showed
any such Civilities to them, these were a pack of Monsters that made nothing of
violating the most sacred things in the World, and 'twou'd surprise you to see
what See Isocrat. Panegyr.
terrible Descriptions they make of their Inhumanities. The Romans were guilty
of the same Trick, and never speak with Horror, but when they talk of the
Mischiefs they suffered from other Nations. When they overrun these very same
Nations with Fire and Sword, and make Slaves of the Inhabitants of a whole
City, for having endeavored to throw off their injust Yoke, or when they force
the Prisoners of War to turn Gladiators, and kill one another to divert the
Roman Mobb, all this is nothing but sport and pastime. But when the Gauls or
the Parthians ill used those whom they had taken Prisoners, why then they
thought no Punishment could be too severe, to mortify these People as they
deserved.

The Greek and Roman Historians are full of an excessive Indulgence for their
own Nation, and forgive nothing in others; because their Ideas of Justice and
Humanity were too limited and narrow, and they knew not that all Men are equal
in matter of natural Right. See Plutarch in his Life.
Caesar had no more right to make War upon the Gauls and Germans, than the
Pirates of Cilicia had to take him Prisoner, and sell him for so much Ransom.
In the mean time, these Pirates are never mentioned but with Detestation, and
the Victories of Caesar are infinitely extolled.

Christians ought not to imitate the Pagans, knowing by the Gospel that all Men
are Brothers, and are subject to the same Laws one toward another, by the
Right of Nature proceeding from God himself who is the common Father of all
Mankind. However, when they come to speak of Christians and Turks, one would
often be tempted to think that the Turks were created by the bad Principle of
the Manichaeans, whom we were not at all obliged to treat with Humanity, but
when we could not hurt them with safety to ourselves; but that on the contrary,
the Turks were obliged to observe all the Laws of Justice toward the
Christians, as if they were the only Creatures of the good Principle. The Turks
on their side are not much more reasonable toward the Christians; but these
latter as having received a fuller Light, ought to be more Wise and Humane.
When they speak of the Violences committed by the Knights of Malta upon the
Turks, they ought to speak of them in the same Terms, as of the Robberies of
the Pirates of Barbary upon the Christians. On the contrary, all the Ports of
Christendom are full of Groans and Complaints, when those of Algiers or Tunis
have taken a Christian Prize; and all the World rejoices when the Knights of
Malta take any Turkish Vessel. The Lives of several grand Masters of Malta, and
many Knights of that Order are full of that Injustice. There is no sort of
Punishment which the Robberies of these Turkish Pirates upon the Christians
don't deserve: there are no Commendations which the like Civilities of the
Knights of Malta to the Mahumetans don't challenge.

If the Turks should endeavor to pervert the Christians in their Empire, by
Rewards, or Punishments; by giving Money to such as would take the Turban, and
by ill using those that should continue firm to their Religion, how should we
exclaim against this Barbarity, and what dismal Complaints should we hear in
all parts of Christendom upon so Tragical a Scene! And if the Mahumetans tired
out with the Constancy of the Christians, who obeyed them, should all at once
turn them out of their Habitations, and oblige them to quit the Dominions of
the Grand Signior, when we should see all Christendom filled with Grecian
Refugees, all People would Curse the Mahumetan Tyranny, and exclaim at such
horrid Injustice. And no doubt on it they would have good reason so to do,
because there is no Authority in the World, which has a Right to impose a
Religion upon any Man whatever, nor to persecute those that are of a different
Opinion, merely upon that account.

But when Cardinal See his Life by M. Flechier. Lib. I.
Ximenes converted the Moors of Granada with a Purse in one Hand and Chains in
the other, some People will tell you that the Moors had no Reason to Complain.
What is a detestable Action in a Mufti or an Alfaqui, becomes a meritorious
Work when a Christian Churchman does it; though he cannot produce any Power from
Heaven, which authorizes him to treat the Mahumetans in a manner which they
cannot employ against the Christians, without Injustice. By what Revelation do
we know that God has given certain Rules of Justice to the Christians, and Laws
altogether different to other People? For my part, I confess I don't know.

But if it should be replied, That Truth has this right over Falsity, that it
may persecute those that are in an Error, by those whose Sentiments are true,
I have two things by way of answer to it. The first is, That Men still dispute
what is true and what false; and that the Mahumetans, for instance, are as fond
of their Opinions as the Christians can be persuaded of theirs. Thus if you lay
it down for a Rule, that Truth has a right to persecute Error, you furnish
them with Weapons, and you cannot complain of their Persecutions. For, in
short, so long as they are fond of Mahumetanism, it is a necessary Consequence
that they fancy themselves in the right to persecute the Christians. The second
thing is, That although I should allow you, that the Persons whom you persecute
are in an Error, yet I will always maintain that Error is not a Crime, when
those that are engaged in it, in all other Respects observe the Laws of Civil
Society, and are not punishable for any breach of good Manners. It Is evident
therefore that there is no Power which has a right to ill Use, and persecute
its Subjects under a pretense of Error in Religion; as there is no Magistrate
that can punish a Mathematician for making a Mistake in Calculation.

It follows from hence that an Historian, who ought to ground his Judgment upon
Truths that are indisputable and universally received, ought to speak with
Indignation of the Conduct of Cardinal Ximenes, and the Catholic Kings toward
the Moors, instead of approving or palliating it, as some Historians have done.
They describe Ximenes and these Princes to us, as Lovers of Justice, yet make
them commit a crying Injustice against several thousands of Moors, by
persecuting them, and forcing them out of their Native Country, because they
would not turn Christians. If the Moors that lived on the South Side of the
Strait of Gibraltar, had used the same Cruelties toward the Christians that
had been found among them, what horrid Descriptions had they not made of it in
Spain!

It Is not only the Infidels, who have smarted under this sort of Justice, which
is never good but when it has the stronger side to support it: Christians have
employed it against Christians, I mean those whom we call Heretics. The
Historians of each Party being prepossessed with this strange Idea, have in
scandalous manner extolled the Justice of Princes, who have made use of violent
Methods to ruin those that were of their own Opinion, and exclaim without
Reason against the contrary party, when they take the same course. Now we must
either condemn all those that persecute for the sake of Opinion, or equally
absolve them. When they deposed the Arian Bishops and Priests, and sent them
into Banishment; when they used their Followers ill, and took away their
Churches from them, then they did nothing but Justice, and care was taken to
suppress all the Complaints which they made of these ill Treatments, and of the
odious Circumstances that attended them. But when the Arians returned the like
Kindness to the Bishop of Alexandria and some others, and endeavored to
oppress their Party, then there was a horrible Violation of all manner of
Justice, and both the East and the West have reason to rise up in Arms, to
oblige the Emperor Constantius to re-establish them. For my part, I cannot
endure the Visions of the Arians, concerning their three unequal Gods, neither
do I pretend to excuse the Violence of their Conduct; but I don't comprehend
how these that were subject to Error as well as they, and who erred in effect,
if they believed three colateral Gods, as they are accused to have done, which
I will not examine here; I don't comprehend, I say, how they could complain of
their Persecutions, after they had persecuted them before. Neither can I see
how the Ecclesiastic Historians can clear themselves of what we may lay to
their charge, that is, of having no certain fixed Rule of Justice and
Injustice; since Eusebius of Nicomedia passes for an injust Man because he
persecuted, while the same thing is called Justice in Athanasius of Alexandria.
This was the case of the other Heresies, who used the Orthodox III, when they
were uppermost; and who were ill used in their turn, when they happened to be
the weakest.

Thus, as the Result of the Majority of Voices, is called Truth in such a
History; so whatever the strongest Party does, goes by the Name of Justice. The
weakest side is always accounted Erroneous and Unjust. I believe that no such
thing can be objected to the Heathen Historians. Though they were often partial,
as I have already said; yet they never referred to any Assembly the care of
deciding for them, what is True or False, Just or Unjust, and in so absolute a
manner as to oblige Men to Sacrifice to such Decisions all the Notions they had
before of Truth and Falsehood, Equity and Iniquity; as the Christians have done
for several Ages, and as many of them do it still to this Day.

Many other things might be said concerning the Proceedings of those
Assemblies, which have often trampled on all the Rules of Equity or Justice,
which the Civil Laws so wisely prescribe.

The Assemblies, which condemned those they called Heretics, have often
deprived them of the liberty of defending themselves, and were made up of Men,
who could be, without any Scruple, both Judges and Parties. Notwithstanding,
most Historians applaud them, and speak of them with an extraordinary Respect.
Thus, what would be called Injustice, Cabal and Oppression, in a judiciary
Court, goes by the Name of Justice, Zeal and Equity, in the Councils. It ought
therefore to be remembered that those Words signify quite another thing in the
Writings of a Church-Historian, than they do in another History. The Reason of
it, is, because they who write the History of the Church, have, for the most
part, no true and exact Ideas of Virtue and Vice.

What I have said, relates to the Ideas of Morality, which an Historian ought
to have, before he undertakes to inform Posterity; one may see how necessary
they are to him; but it is no less necessary that he should have true Notions of
Politics; since History is not only concerned about private Men's Actions, but
also about the reciprocal Duties of People and their Governors, and what the
several Nations owe to one another, To this all Policy may be reduced, which is
nothing else but the Art of making a People Happy, by a good and just
Government, and by protecting them against their Enemies.

I will not undertake to treat here of that Science at large: I shall only
touch upon some of its general Principles, which, I think, an Historian ought
to kep always in mind, and which are too much neglected at present. The first
is, That they, who govern Nations, ought to make the Happiness of those, whom
God has committed to their Care, the chief End of their Government. Which
comprehends all the Duties of those, who are at the Head of a Society, and is a
Principle so generally received, that the most unjust Tyrants durst scarce
contradict it. The Happiness of a People, (that there may be no Equivocation in
that Word) does undeniably consist, 1. In being only obliged to obey the Laws,
which are approved by a long Use, or enacted according to the usual manner. 2.
In enjoying quietly one's Estate, and the Fruit of one's Labor, as long as one
obeys the Laws, without being under the apprehension of being deprived of it by
any violent Means. 3. In contributing to the public Charges, as much as the
Subjects can bear, without being over-burthened.
It Is manifest, that if the Will of a fickle and inconstant Man, surrounded
with Flatterers, takes place of the Law; or if one is not sure of what he
possesses; or pays more than he is able, there can be no Happiness under such a
Government. This we may observe in the Despotick Empires of Asia, where the
People, subject to those three Inconveniences, are the most unfortunate Men in
the World.

Those general Principles being laid down, no manner of Government ought to be
Praised by an Historian, but as much as it is agreeable to them; nor ought a
Prince to be Esteemed further than he conforms himself to the same. This was
the Sense of the Greek and Latin Historians on this Matter: They Brand with the
Name of Tyranny any sort of Government, wherein the Laws are Arbitrary, and
where no Man is sure of what he has, and the Charges are so Exorbitant, that
the People have much ado to live. They also call Tyrants those, who govern
after that manner, whether there be but one, or many. Such were their Notions
concerning a good Policy; as one may see by a careful Reading of Aristotle's
Politics.

Though it is manifest that a People cannot be Happy under such a Government, as
I have described; and though it cannot be doubted, but that Men formed several
Societies in order to their Happiness; yet there have been some Men, since the
XVI. Century, of which Nicholas Machiavel may be accounted the Chief, who have
endeavored to introduce a Notion of Policy quite different from that which I
have described. They have had no Regard to the Natural and Inviolable End of
all Rational Societies but only enquired by what means the Heads of Societies
might render themselves absolute Masters of the Laws, and the People's Lives
and Estates, and make themselves greater at their Neighbor's Cost, without any
regard to Justice. This is the only thing, which the Policy of a Sovereign
ought to aim at, according to those Authors, and he ought to place all his
Prudence in compassing his Designs by any means, provided they be safe. They do
not concern themselves about what is Just or Unjust, but only about that which
the Supreme Power can do, without endangering itself. That sort of Politicians
look upon People, not as Men, whose Good their Rulers ought to procure, as much
as they can; but as a Pack of Hunting-Dogs, which ought to be kept only as far
as they can afford Sport. Machiavel's Prince minds only his own Good, and is no
farther concerned in the Good of his Subjects, than he can better himself by
it. This is exactly the Notion the Graecians had of a Tyrant, according to
Polit. Lib. III. c. 7.
Aristotle's Definition, who says, That Tyranny is a Monarchy, which aims only
at the Good of a Monarch.

This is not a fit place to confute that Doctrine; which being compared with
what I have said of a true Policy, will easily appear unworthy of a Man, who
has not lost all Sense of Virtue. Indeed those, who are most fond of it, dare
not openly own such pernicious Principles. The most Arbitrary Princes, without
excepting the Grand Signior, endeavor to persuade their Subjects, that the
Good of the State, is the only thing they aim at, to which they Sacrifice all
things, if they aim to be believed. Thus Tyranny and Vice make, as it were,
satisfaction to Freedom and Virtue. But because there are everywhere,
especially among those, who are the nearest Attendants of Princes, a great many
Men, who only mind their private Advantage, by flattering Sovereign Princes,
and so Reigning with them, if they can, Machiavelism, though never so detestable,
has made a great Progress in the World. Those, who are infected with it, brand
with the Name of Seditious Doctrine the Sentiments of those, who believe that
the Power of Princes is bounded by the Laws; and they continually say, in
Europe as well as in Asia, that a Prince is Master of his Subjects Lives and
Estates. And because it is not safe in many Countries to contradict those
scandalous Discourses; that Doctrine, or at least part of it, has been
entertained by several Historians. They intimate everywhere, that a State
cannot be Happy and Quiet, unless People blindly submit to the Will of a
Prince; as being born, not to form, with their Fellow Creatures, a Society
advantageous to all its Members, but to be Slaves to the Prince.

Churchmen, most of whom claim a Right to a like Monarchy over the Souls of
Men, have flattered the temporal Power, as much as they could; in hopes of
being upheld by it in their Claim, and of reigning likewise over the Bodies, as
well as the Souls of Men; because of the strict Connection there is between
those two things. And the better to succeed in their Design, they have made use
of the Divine Authority, as if the Christian Religion was only consistent with
an absolute Empire over Men's Bodies and Souls: as the Muftis and Alfaquis
promise Mahomet's Paradise to those, who are the best Slaves to the Sultan.

This is the Reason why we see so many Histories written by such Men, full of
that Spirit of Slavery toward spiritual and temporal Sovereigns: And herein
many of our Modern Historians are much inferior to the Heathen Historians. We
may observe in the latter, constant and settled Principles of Equity and
Justice, when they treat of Princes and their Subjects. Every Page of their
Histories contains such Sentiments as become free and rational Men. But the
Histories of many Modern Authors are full of shameful Flatteries of Princes, to
whose Will they Sacrifice all their Notions of Equity and Justice. They will
tell you, that the least Irregularities of the People toward their Sovereigns,
deserve all the Punishments of this Life, and the Life to come; but the
greatest Crimes of a Prince against his Subjects are but Venial Sins.

I have often observed, that many of those, who speak of the Revolutions of
England, in Histories, or in common Discourse, express a great Indignation
against the Inhabitants of that Country; because they have not submitted
themselves to their Kings, as Slaves, in imitation of their Neighbors. The
English are commonly accounted a wild and inconstant Nation, for no other
reason but because they obey their Kings, when they do not incroach upon their
Privileges; and oppose their Designs, when they go about to destroy them;
whereas, in other Countries, they are used to obey unjust as well as just
Commands. That happy Nation is as Dutiful and Obedient to its Kings; as it can
be, without endangering the loss of the public Liberty: and whilst their Kings
require nothing from them that is contrary to their Privileges, they are ready
to do any thing for them: as we have seen in this last War, ended in 1697.
under the Reign of a Prince, who lets them enjoy their Liberties. But they will
not make themselves Slaves, as others have done. Their Neighbors, who are
submitted to an Arbitrary Power, call it Wildness and Inconstancy; whereas a
Greek or Roman Historian would call it Constancy and Love of Liberty. On the
contrary a blind Obedience, ready to commit all sorts of Crimes at a Prince's
Command, is accounted by them Faithfulness to one's Prince and Country; whereas
the Greek and Latin Authors would have called it Slavery. Thus the Change of
Notions and Customs has brought in the Change of the Names of Virtues and
Vices. The Words of Cato to the Senate, as we find them in Salust, may be
applied to those Men: We have lost a great while ago, says he, speaking of his
time, the true Names of things; because to give away another Man's Estate, goes
by the Name of Liberality, and Boldness in doing Ill is called Courage. Jam
pridem nos vera rerum Vocabula amisimus, quia bona aliena largiri Liberalitas,
malarum rerum Audacia Fortitudo vocatur.

It Is certain that the ancient Historians very much exceed the Modern in this
respect; but there is one thing, in which the latter do perhaps exceed the
former. It seems that the ancient Historians were ignorant of what Nations owe
to one another. Justice and Equity seemed to them to be Virtues, good for
private Men, but to which a whole Nation was not bound. It Is for this reason
that they describe with great admiration the Conquests of great Empires, such
as the Persian, and Roman. If at any time they find fault with the Conduct of
those ancient Conquerors, they do it only, when they shamefully broke their
Promise, or were excessively Cruel. But they seldom blame the desire of
domineering, and enslaving neighboring Countries, on the first favorable
Opportunity. Such a desire, if it can be satisfied by the way of Arms, is
accounted by the heathen Historians a noble and heroical Act. They very much
esteemed those, who enlarged the Bounds of the Empire, without enquiring
whether it was just or not, provided they were successful in their
Undertakings. The Romans, for Example, made continual Wars, not so much in
their own Defense, as to make themselves Masters, first, of Italy, and then of
the neighboring Countries; till they had submitted to their Empire the best
parts of Europe, Asia, and Africa, all along the Mediterranean Sea. The Greek
and Latin Historians strived who should describe best their Wars and Conquests,
in such a manner as easily shows that they much more admired their Bravery and
Skill in improving the Occasions of making themselves greater, than they would
have admired the justest People in the World, who keeping within their Bounds,
would have been contented to repulse the Injuries of their Neighbors, without
endeavoring to enlarge their Territories. If at any time they blame their
Ambition and Injustice, as they do sometimes; it is nothing if compared with the
Praises they bestow on them, when they mention their Victories.

The Christian Religion having given us more exact and complete Notions of
Justice, than the Heathens commonly had, several Christian Historians have
spoken of the Ambition of the ancient Conquerors, in Terms more agreeable to
the immutable Law of Justice, than the Heathen Historians ever did. I confess
that the ancient Philosophers have said a great many things on this Point,
which are almost as sound as what has been said by Christians; but it was only
the Philosophers that spoke so, and the Historians had no great Regard to their
Opinions.

An H. Grotius.
Incomparable Author has, the first shown, in this XVII. Century, what are not
only, the Laws of Peace, but also of War; and has so clearly taught what
Nations owe to one another, that it can no longer be doubted whether making War
out of mere Ambition be not perfect Robbing and Murdering. That great Man has
reduced into an Art, and methodically proved the Truths, which were dispersed
in several Authors, on this Matter, and has confirmed them with many Examples
and Quotations. So that if any Historian will give the Title of Just and Pious
to any Prince, who made, or will hereafter make War out of Ambition; he ought
not to take it ill, if he is accounted a base and shameful Flatterer. A Prince,
who has reduced several Provinces to an extreme Misery and Poverty, and
destroyed several Millions of People, out of mere Ambition, and without being
provoked, will never be looked upon as a good Man, unless Paganism should
prevail again, or Machiavelism should become everywhere the Religion in
fashion. The Heathens praised much the Clemency of Julius Caesar, to whom, what
I have said, might have been justly objected; because he spared the Lives of
many of his Fellow-Citizens, who had fought against him to preserve the Liberty
of their Country, and at last submitted to his Tyranny. But no Historian,
worthy of that Name, can hereafter cry up the Clemency of those, who have done,
or will do any such thing. Princes, who little think of the Miseries, which a
War brings on their Subjects and Neighbors; or are not moved with the
Calamities and Tears of an infinte number of innocent and unfortunate Families,
or the great Bloodshed which attends a long War, will never be cried up as
Merciful and Just, but by such Men as have scarce any Notion of those Virtues,
or by Flatterers, whom no Body can bear with, but they who dare not contradict
'em.

This is what I had to say concerning History. If I have spoken somewhat freely,
let no Body find fault with me for it, but rather with the Matter itself, which
admits of no Palliation. I know very well that this Discourse and the like will
not hinder Historians from Flattering and Lying; but I suppose those Gentlemen
will not take it ill, if one speaks sometimes the Truth.

CHAP. IV. Of the Decay of Humane Learning, and the Causes of it.
THERE is without doubt a Decay in the Commonwealth of Learning, in several
Respects; but I shall only mention that which concerns Philology. It Is certain
we have not seen, for a long time, in any part of Europe, any Men, who equal
the illustrious Critics, who lived in the last Century, and the beginning of
this. For Example, We see no Body, who equals in Learning, Application of Mind,
and Bulk as well as Number of Books, Joseph Scaliger, Justus Lipsius, Isaac
Casaubon, Claudius Salmasius, Hugo Grotius, John Meursius, John Seldom, and a
great many others, whom I need not name, because they are known to every Body.
I have a due Esteem for many learned Men of my Acquaintance; but I am persuaded
that none of them will complain, if I say that I know none, who equals those
great Men in Learning. We have seen nothing for a long time, that can be
compared with their Works.

I have enquired into the Reasons of it, and I think I have found some
satisfactory ones. Some of them concern those, who should favor the Study of
Humane Learning, but do it not: and some concern them, that profess that Study,
and bring Contempt upon it. I shall instance upon some few, to which the Reader
may add his own, and what he has observed by his Experience.

The Difficulties of that Study.
I. TO begin with the latter, I mean, that which can be objected to the Men of
Learning. The first Reason why few Men have applied themselves to the Study of
Humane Learning, and consequently why fewer still have had an extraordinary
Success in it, is that they who were learned in that sort of Science, did not
care to make it easy to others. Because most of them attained to the Learning
they had, not by a short and methodical Way, but by a vast Reading and a
prodigious Labor; they did not at all care to facilitate to others the means
of acquiring that Learning. Having, if I may so say, got with much ado to the
top of the Rock, through steep and thorny Ways, they thought it just that others
should undergo the same Toil, if they would attain to the same degree of
Learning. But because there are few Men, whose Genius is so bent to the Study
of Humane Learning, as to resolve upon taking so much Pains, to get the
Knowledge of it; it is no wonder if most Men have been discouraged, almost from
the Beginning, and if a great Knowledge of that sort of Learning is so scarce
at present.

Perhaps it will be asked, What those learned Men of the first Rank should have
done, to facilitate that Study, besides what they have done? I answer that
there are two-sorts of Books, which may serve to acquire that sort of
Knowledge; which have been wanting, ever since the Study of Humane Learning
has been in Vogue.

Of Critical Notes upon the Latin Authors.
THE first Books we want are good Editions of all the Greek and Latin Authors,
not only correct, but also illustrated with all necessary Notes, to make them
more Intelligible. But to come to Particulars, I begin with the Latin Authors,
and I say that the learned Men, I have mentioned, or others like them, should
have given us at least all the good Latin Authors, not only revised upon such
ancient Manuscripts as we have, but also illustrated with short, clear and
methodical Notes on all the difficult Places, and such as were not above the
Capacity of young Men, and might serve those, who have made some Progress.
Whereas the learned Men I spoke of, have been most times contented to publish
Authors with mere critical Notes, about the true Reading; to which if they have
added any thing for the understanding of the Expressions, Opinions or Customs,
they have done it only upon some few places, to make a show of their great
Reading, by publishing their common Places, or Compilations; besides, what they
say is often so much out of the way, that it is of no use for the bettter
Understanding of an Author. But there are a great many other places, which will
put not only a young Beginner to a stand, but also such as have made a greater
Progress, upon which they say nothing at all. When the Text of an Author is
clear, they will often speak much and enlarge upon it; but when it is difficult
and obscure, they say nothing at all. There are some Critics, who think it
beneath them to make such Notes; they say that they are only good for young
Men, and that those who have made some Progress, may easily be without 'em: But
neither of them is altogether true. There are many grave Men, who have nobler
Employments, and want good Notes upon the difficult Places of ancient Authors,
and would be very glad to find some. They have not time enough to look in other
Books for the Explications they want; because they read those Authors only for
their Recreation, when their Business is over, and not to weary themselves in
turning over large Volumes, to find the Explication of a Place they do not
understand. Besides, it is; a more difficult thing to write such Notes, than
it is commonly believed. The Notes of Paul Manucius upon Cicero's Epistles,
which are such as I would have, cost him much more Pains than the Critical
Notes of many others, though never so much esteemed; and it had been much better
to put them under the Text, rather than several others, which are only about
the true Reading. Eight Readers in ten want Manucius's Notes, but scarce look
on what is said concerning the Various Readings. It Is to no purpose to say that
it is an Abuse: Such is Men's Humor, and few have time enough to examine so
many needless Punctilio's. The most Curious are contented to have recourse to
those Compilations, when it is necessary they should exactly understand the
Sense of a Passage; otherwise they would not look on them. And indeed, the
Reader retains not much in his Memory, when he has read them.

Short Notes, well worded, which contain nothing without a Proof for it, or at
least referr the Reader to a good Author for the Truth of what they say,
quoting exactly the place, that it may be easily found; such Notes, I say, are
a great Treasure for most Readers. But it is not so easy to make 'em, as to
Quibble about some various Readings, or to make some Digressions.

Some Men of Learning, much inferior to those I have mentioned, have
undertaken in our Age, especially in Holland, to supply that Defect, and to
collect several Notes out of several Critics, who had written upon the best
Authors, or explained them by the by in some other Works. They go by the Name
of Notes Variorum: But the greatest part of the first Collections were very ill
made, because those who went about it, were not qualified for it. They have
often pitched upon the worst, have not alleged the Proofs of the Authors they
abridged, and have often misrepresented their Thoughts. And to insert Notes
everywhere, they have been as large on the clear as the obscure Passages, and
filled their Collections with useless or unseasonable Digressions.

Every Body complaining of the Notes Variorum, some learned Men thought it
necessary to make a Choice of the best Critics, and insert all their Notes
together with some other good Remarks of other Authors. Such are the Latter
Editions, Cum Notis Variorum, and they are without doubt to be preferred before
the former. The Public has been better pleased with them, and all those, who
love Humane Learning, have been extremely glad to have a complete Collection
out of all the best Critics, to consult it when there is an occasion for it.
Notwithstanding, they complain still of one thing, and I think they have some
Reason for it. They wish that those, who make such Collections, would only put
under the Text such Notes as may serve for the understanding of the
Expressions, Opinions, Customs, etc. Supplying what is wanting in them, as much
as it can be done; and that all the complete and full Notes should be referred
to the end of the Book, to consult them upon occasion. They wish besides that
those Notes of several Authors were so disposed, that one might find them all
at once in one place; whereas one must run over a whole Volume, to find what
each Author says, which is too long and tedious. We have two Editions of
Caesar's Commentaries by Goth. Junger^annus, wherein all the Notes are at the
end of the Book, and it is no easy thing to make use of them, because every one
of those Notes is by itself, in ^ts order; whereas if they were mixed, one
might see with a glance of the Eye whatever the Commentators say upon each
Place.

They thought in France it were better, if those, who undertook to publish the
Classick Authors for the Use of the Dauphin, should take out of the ^earned
Men, who wrote before them, what they should think fit. But, if I may be
allowed to ^peak the Truth, Most of those Interpreters have but indifferently
performed their Part. First, They made use of very bad Editions; whereas ^hey
should have followed the best: which, I ^hink, is an unpardonable Fault.
Secondly, One may see In their Notes, the same Faults I have observed in the
first Holland Editions, Cum Notis ^ariorum. However there is one thing in the
Paris Editions, which is wanting in the Holland Editions. There are in the
former some Index's of all the Words, which may be of great Use to ^ind out the
Passages wanted, when one remembers but some Words of them. But it must be
confessed that those Indexes would be better and shorter, if laying aside all the
trivial and common Words, which no Body ever looks for, as the Verb Sum with
all its Tenses, Conjunctions, Adverbs and Prepositions, when they contain no
particular Signification, that deserves to be taken notice of, etc. they had
inserted not only the Words by themselves, but also the Phrases. The Reason of
it is, beause no Body looks in an Index for the Verb Sum, for instance, in its
ordinary Signification; and if any Body looked for it in an uncommon sense, it
would perhaps take up a whole Day to find it in the Index, unless one knew near
at hand where to find it. The same may be said of a great many other Words.
Whereas, if the Phraeses were contained in the Index, when they are not common,
one might presently find the Passage one looks for. It Is for this Reason we so
much esteem the Indexes of Matthias Berneggerus and John Freinshemius, who were
learned Men, and made exact and judiciouss Indexes of several good Authors,
though they inserted not all the Words. But it may be that those who had the
direction of the Editions, For the Use of the Dauphin, did not think fit to
trust the Authors of those Indexes, and ordered them to insert all the Words,
lest they should forget some material thing. The Authors of the Notes should
have taken upon them the care of doing it; and if they were learned enough to
write Notes, they should have been judged capable of making good Indexes.

If therefore the Liberality of a great Prince and his Ministers has had no
better Success; it is the Fault of those, who have been put upon that Work: But
that Project was very good in itself, and becoming the Generosity of a great
Prince, and the Learning of those, who were entrusted with the Education of the
Dauphin. At the same time that they were writing for Him, they would have done
a great piece of Service, not only to France, but also to, the rest of Europe;
if they had gone about it according to the Method, which, as I said before, the
Compilers of the Notes Variorum should have followed.

Of the Translations of Greek Authors, and Notes upon them.
HAVING spoken of the Latin Authors, I must now say something of the Greek. The
Performances of the learned Men of the first Rank, ^re here more deficient
still. There are but few, whose Translations are exact, most of them being
rather Paraphrases, than Translations, especially on the difficult Places;
which makes them far less useful. One would think that they, who made 'em,
designed they should be read, by themselves, by those, who understood not the
Greek Tongue: whereas such Translations should be placed by the Text, to help
those, who read the original, when they meet with some difficult Passages. The
worst of all is, that most of 'em are not faithful enough, and often
misrepresent the Sense of the Original; because few of 'em were made by very
learned Men. They, who were able to do it well, were discouraged, looking upon
it as a tedious Labor, and which was beneath them; and those, who undertook
it, were not qualified for it. Isaac Casaubon has very well Translated
Polybius, Aeneas Tacticus, and the Characters of Theophrast. It were to be
wished, that that learned Man had Translated many other Authors as well as
those. He would have done a much greater Service to the Public, than by
writing against Baronius concerning some Matters he understood not so well, and
which 'twas too late for him to Study in his old Age.

Perhaps some will say that I insist too much upon the Translations of Greek
Authors, and that studious Men should use themselves to read the Originals
without the help of a Translation. But I answer, That to use ones self to it,
one must have some help, and that there can be none better than a Translation
placed by the Text. I appeal to them, who have attained to so great a Knowledge
of the Greek Tongue, as to want such a help no longer. It has been useful to
every Body, especially in the Reading of difficult Authors, such as the
tragical Poets, and the like, as Pindar, Lycophron, Thucydides, etc. A good
Translation is as useful as a Commentary, and no Body needs be more ashamed to
consult it, than to consult some Notes. If the Translator was a learned Man,
it is to be presumed that he took more Pains to explain his Author, than one can
often take by Reading him, and certainly he deserves to be taken notice of.
Menagius says, in the Menagiana, that though he had studied that Tongue for a
long time, he could not be without a Translation; and I think several People
would say the same, if they were as sincere as he was.

We have few Greek Authors, illustrated with Notes upon all the difficult
places, and the Notes we have are as Deficient as those that have been made
upon the Latin Authors. However they have lately published in Holland three
Greek Authors, Cum Notis Variorum, which one may approve of; because they
contain the entire Notes of several learned Men. I mean Diogenes Laertius,
Longinus and Callimachus. They have also within these few Years printed some
Greek Authors in England, with the ancient Scholia, and some critical Notes;
but they are not to be compared to those of Holland, either for Order, or the
excellency of the Notes, though they are not at all to be despised. They should
have placed all the Notes under the Text, which was an easy thing to do,
because they are short enough; to save the Time and Labor of the Reader, who
is unwilling to have recourse to the end of a Book, whilst he reads an Author;
especially being uncertain whether he will find some Notes upon the Passage he
does not understand. Some Critics will frown at the Reading of what I say; but
in this they oppose the Judgment of every Body, who may justly desire to save
his Time and Labor, as much as is possible.

I know there are some Men, whose Learning ought by no means to be despised,
who will complain that what I have said, tends to facilitate the Knowledge of
the Sciences to Lazy Men, and even to render 'em contemptible, by making them
too common. I confess I could wish that the way to Learning were made so plain
and easy, that the most Lazy Men might become Learned: Indeeed, what signifies
it to take much Pains, which in itself is of no Ufe? We esteem those, who
labor hard, and apply themselves to Study for a long time, only because a
great Labor and Application serve to acquire a useful Knowledge. It Is well to
use oneself to take Pains, not because it is a Meritorious thing in itself; but
because in this Life we can get nothing without Pains. This Truth, confirmed by
the Experience of all Ages, ought to free our morose Philologers from the fear
of being soon overtaken by those, who go a more smooth and shorter way than
they went. Which way soever one takes to learn the Greek Tongue, it will always
require much time, and a great Application and Memory, without which it is
impossible to attain to a considerable Knowledge of it.

Besides, it is altogether false, That if the Knowledge of ancient Authors
should grow common, learned Men would be less esteemed. Such a fear would be
well grounded, if it was a barren Science, which could afford no Pleasure; for
such a Science, ought to be despised, as soon as it is known. But when a Science
is useful and pleasant; the better it is known, the more it is cherished, and
those, who know it, are so much the more esteemed. On the contrary, however
useful it might be in itself, and whatever Pleasure it could afford to those
who knew it; if it be known only to few, those who are Strangers to it, are apt
to doubt of its Usefulness and Charms; because things, that are seen only with
another Man's Eyes, are not so easily believed. Whilst the Learning of the
Grecians, and the Beauty of their Language, were known at Rome only by the
Report of some few Men, who had studied them; others, who knew but little or
nothing at all of them, despised and even hated 'em. Cato the Censor, in a Book
of Precepts directed to his Son, spoke of that Nation Apud Plinium. H. N. Lib.
XXIX. c. 1.
in these Terms: I Will tell you in a proper time what I have discovered
concerning the Grecians at Athens, and I Will demonstrate to you that it is good
to know something of their Learning, but not to learn it thoroughly. It is a very
wicked and intractable Nation. Take it as the Words of a Prophet: If ever that
Nation teaches others its Learning, it will spoil all, especially if it sends
its Physicians hither. The Grecians are sworn to kill all the Barbarians with
the Art of Physic: Dicam de istis Graecis suo loco, Marce Fili, quid Athenis
exquisitum habeam; and quod bonum sit illorum litteras inspicere, non
perdiscere, vincam. Nequissimum and indocile genus illorum, and hoc puta Vatem
dixisse: quandocunque ista gens suas litteras dabit, omnia corrumpet. Tum etiam
magis, si Medicos suos huc mittet. Jurarunt inter se barbaros necare omnes
Medicina. There is no need I should show the Unjustice and Falsehood of that
Judgment. Yet such Discourses were the Reason why a great while after the
Grecians, especially the Physicians, were expelled from Rome, as we find it in
the next Words of Pliny. But when the Romans grew more Learned, and became
generally acquainted with the Greek Tongue; they were ashamed of their
Rusticity, and the Grecians were infinitely more esteemed. There was not one
Rich Man in Rome, but kept a Greek Grammarian or Philosopher in his House, as
we learn from Lucian in a Treatise, which he wrote a purpose on that Subject.

Our Humanists should endeavor, for the same Reason, to make the Reading of
the Greek Authors as easy as they can. And then perhaps Men of the highest
Rank would take delight in the Reading of them, and upon that account be great
Benefctors to those, who should contribute to their Diversion. I only mention
Diversion, though I am fully persuaded, that such a Reading would be very useful;
because they, who have some Employments in the State, have not time enough, to
make a formal Study of that sort of Learning, and read the ancient Authors only
for their Pleasure. On the contrary, whilst Men in Authority believe that it is
so difficult a thing to read the Greek Authors, that it requires all the
Leisure of a Canon; they will look on that Study as a thing, wherein they are
not at all concerned, and at last will altogether despise it and those, who
esteem it. It were to be wished that such a thing had not already happened; but
it will be much worse hereafter, unless the Lovers of the Greek Antiquities
prevent it, by making that sort of Learning more easy than it has been
hitherto.

Other Helps wanting.
IN order to it, we should have not only good Editions of the Greek Authors, and
such as I have before described; but also good Dictionaries, which should
contain all the Discoveries that have been made in the Greek Tongue, since
Henry Stephen and Robert Constantin, who are the last who made good
Dictionaries. We have only had since pitiful Abridgments, to which nothing new
has been added. It were to be wished that some learned Men, well versed in the
Writings of the Critics, who have written since, as well as in the Reading of
ancient Authors, would undertake to Augment Constantin's Dictionary.

We want also some methodical Treatises of the Greek Antiquities, by the
Reading of which one might learn the Opinions and Customs of the Grecians,
without being obliged to read all the Treatises that have been published on
that Subject. Notwithstanding all the Collections that have been made, we have
nothing that is exact and complete on that Matter. But if no Body will make a
methodical Treatise of all those things, it were at least to be wished that in
an Age, wherein Dictionaries are so much in vogue, some Body would write a good
one, that should contain whatever was written on that Subject, to have recourse
to it on occasion; the Collections we have, being so confused and imperfect,
that it is a hard matter to make use of 'em, or to find in them the Solution of
one's Difficulties.

What I have said of these latter Helps, for the understanding of the Greek
Authors, ought also to be understood of the Latin; though we have greater Helps
to understand the latter than the former.

Humanists praise their Trade too much.
II. THERE are some Men, who believe that it the best way to have their
Profession esteemed, is to Praise it excessively; without scrupling to
undervalue all the rest in comparison of that, which they would have esteemed.
They are like those Preachers, who extol the Saints, they will Praise on their
Festival-Days, above all others. Such a Method may be good, to impose on the
Common People for a little time; but at the bottom it is good for nothing,
because it never fails to offend reasonable Men, who will have every thing to
be valued according to its Worth, and take it ill when they perceive they have
been deceived. They despise nothing that is useful, but they will not have any
thing to be accounted more useful than really it is.

They, who have spent their time in the Reading of ancient Authors, are
commonly guilty of that Fault. If you would believe them, they that never read
'em, are not to be compared with those, that have. All other Sciences come not
near this, which, they say, opens the way to all the Learning in the World.
They, that have not studied it, are deprived of so great a Help, that there is
none like it; and they, who applied themselves to it, are the only Men, who can
raise the highest Designs to the greatest perfection.

It cannot be denied but that the Reading of ancient Authors is very useful to
us; but, if it were possible that we should be as ancient as they are, and that
they should be in our place and read our Writings as we read theirs; would they
get no Benefit by it? They would without doubt learn more from our Works, than
we can from theirs. From whence it follows that we ought to read the ancient
Authors, perfect their Knowledge by ours, and not despise those, who excel in
the Modern Learning. I will not meddle with the famous Dispute, whether the
ancient Authors ought to be preferred before the modern, or not; but I think,
that those, who are Strangers to Antiquity, have reason to complain that they
are despised, because they have no other Knowledge but such as the present time
can afford 'em.

I will readily grant that it is necessary to join the Knowledge of ancient
Times with ours, and to take out of the original Authors what we desire to know
of them; but it is not just to cry up that Knowledge, as if it contained
whatever is necessary to be known. Quintilian rightly said: Instit. Lib. 1. c.
1.
Si quid discere satis non est, ideo necesse non est: What is not sufficient to
make one Learned, is notwithstanding necessary: And such are the Principles of
Grammar, which he speaks of. But I would alto invert his Thought, Thus: Siquid
dicere necesse est, ideo satis non est: Though a Science be necessary, yet we
must not fancy that it is sufficient to make one Learned.

It were much better to Praise the ancient Authors and the means of
understanding them, less than they deserve, and that those who study them,
should find in 'em more than they expected; than to Praise them so much, that
they who read them, may justly complain they were deceived. And then they will
not only abate of those excessive Praises, but the Discontent, which arises
from their having been deceived, will make 'em apt to deprive that Science of
the Praises it justly deserves. How many Men are there, who having applied
themselves, for example, to the Reading of Aristotle, because of the great
Encomiums bestowed on him, left it off with a great Contempt for that
Philosopher; because they had not found in him the tenth part of what they were
told? whereas, had that Author been moderately praised, they would have read
his Works with great satisfaction; because of the great variety of the Subjects
he treats of, and the occasion he gives to think of several things, which
perhaps no Body would think of, if he had not read 'em; not to mention the
Knowledge of the Opinions of many other Philosophers, which he furnishes his
Reader with.

It requires some Pains, application of Mind, and Sagacity, to make a more than
ordinary Improvement in Humane Learning. The Reading of good critical Books is
both pleasant and useful; no Body doubts of it. But the Knowledge of Words
ought not to be preferred to the Knowledge of Things; which is the Fault of
some Humanists, who despise all other Sciences, and fancy they ought to be
placed in the first Rank of Learned Men, Thus they raise against themselves
those who profess other Sciences, and they draw Contempt on their Learning,
which would be esteemed, if they spoke modestly of it.

Personal Faults of the Humanists.
III. But that which is worse, and makes Humane Learning much more Contemptible,
is, that many of those, who have very much applied themselves to it, show by
their own Example, that that Science, which they so excessively Praise,
produces not the Effects one might have expected after so many Praises. When we
hear any of those Gentlemen say in a very elegant Latin Style, and prove by the
Testimony of all the Greek and Roman Authors, that the Study of Humane Learning
will, far better than any other Science, make a Man judicious, exact and
discerning, soften his Manners, and take away his Wildress and Rusticity, when,
I say, we hear so many Encomiums, and look for the admirable Effects of that
Science in its Panegyrists, we are strangely surprised to find often the quite
contrary. One can hardly imagine but that if it could really produce so happy a
Change in Men, it would chiefly be observed in those, who profess it; and when
one sees there is nothing of it, all those Praises seem to be groundless.

some Men of that Profession, who cannot be rankt among the Vulgar, do often
Reason very pitifully, and know not how to order well their Thoughts; they load
their Memory with a vast number of Words, and very few Things; they are full of
a ridiculous Pride, which makes 'em decide every thing with a magisterial Air,
which wise Men cannot endure; they bite every Body, quarrel with one another
for Trifles, and give one another the foulest Language; in a word, instead of
that charming Politeness, which, they say, is only to be found in the ancient
Writers, we see nothing in them but a Pedantry, which can be endured no where
but amongst Scholars.

It would require a whole Volume, if I would enlarge upon the several Faults of
the Humanists, as much as it were necessary, to draw a full Picture of them. But
there is no need to enlarge upon those Faults, whereof we see every day but too
many Examples; and I neither design to defame that Trade, not those who profess
it. All that I could with, is that those, who know themselves to be guilty of
Faults, which make their Profession contemptible, would seriously mend them,
and endeavor to get the Affection of honest Men by a contrary Method. Who
could forbear loving Humane Learning, if those who have most applied themselves
to it, did reason With more exactness and clearness than others; if they
displaid before their Readers not only an elegant Latin Style, but such things
as are above the Capacity of the Common People, and useful to be known; if they
showed as much Modesty as reading, and never boldly decided any thing but what
may be evidently proved; if they exceeded other Men in good Nature and
Condescension for one another, and never defended themselves, or attacked
others but with Reasons, without Bitterness and Animosity: Lastly, if they
showed in their Manners as much Politeness as is to be seen in the Style of
good Authors, Who could forbear cherishing such Men, and bestowing upon them as
many Favors as one could?

If we could see such a Change, there would be no farther occasion to complain
of the Contempt, which Humane Learning, and those who profess it, commonly lie
under; for certainly it were impossible they should not be valued.

Some morose Humanists will perhaps say, That it is ill done of me to censure
after that manner those of his Profession; since it is certain that those, who
apply themselves to other Sciences, as Divines and Philosophers, do no less
scandalize the World, by not living according to their Profession. But I do not
intend to excuse or defend those, of whom I say nothing, and ought not to speak
in this place. It is enough for me that I have said nothing of those, whom I
have mentioned, but what is confirmed by a daily experience. If other Men are
guilty of the same Faults with us; ours are not less real, and we ate no less
bound to mend them, than if others were free from them; especially when those
Faults are so prejudicial to a Science, and to those who profess it.

I have heard of a rich Man, who had no tincture of Humane Learning, that
having heard it very much praised by a Friend of his, who besides that
Knowledge, had all the Qualifications necessary to gain esteem, he resolved to
carry his Son to a famous University, and to spare no cost for his Education.
But having very good natural Parts, and having been told too, that Scholarship
makes one very often Pedantick and Proud; he would go himself and spend some
time in that University together with his Son, to make choice of a good
Professor, under whose care he might improve without being infected with the
Pedantry and foolish Pride which Scholars are wont to bring with them from the
Universities. He went therefore to the University, and the better to know the
Professors, before he should resolve on the Choice he was to make, he often
treated them together, and one after another, heard them speak, and gave them
occasion to Discourse of several things, especially of such as he was thoroughly
acquainted with. He did the like with their best Scholars. He knew in a little
time all the Intrigues of the University, and soon perceived that those who
professed the Study of Humane Learning, were exactly like those, whom I have said
to be the cause of the Contempt it lies under. The Gentleman left that
University very much dissatisfied, and went to another to make a new Trial, in
which he had no better Success. He began then to think that the Gentleman, who
had praised so much the Study of Humane Learning, had played him a Trick, and
would hear no more on it, believing that his Friend had had a good Success by
reason of his Natural Parts, not by the Reading of ancient Authors. He thought
that his Son would improve enough, by the Knowledge of the Affairs of the
World, without troubling himself with a Science, which seemed to him to be no
better than a Cheat; and being a Man of great Authority, he did not a little
Prejudice the Universities, where he had looked in vain for some Men like his
Friend. Nay, he came to fancy that the great Men amongst the Ancients, whose
Works he had heard so much praised, had been such Pedants as he had seen in the
University; and he was like to believe that Demosthenes and Cicero were
Professors of Rhetoric like those he had lately converted with, and that the
Authors of an inferior Rank were mere Vshers.

Perhaps it will be said that such Censures and the like are unjust, and that
Men's Faults ought always to be distinguished from the Defects of the Sciences
they profess. I grant it; but such Censures have always been so common in the
World, that it cannot be expected that Men should have other Thoughts
concerning this Matter; and they, who, by their personal Faults, defame the
Sciences they Teach, are still more to blame, than those who make a wrong
Judgment of them, upon such an account. I could willingly tell those Gentlemen,
what one said to the Declamators of his Time: Pace vestra liceat dixisse, primi
omnium eloquentiam perdidistis: Give me leave to tell you, That you are the
chief Men, who have destroyed Humane Learn-in.

Humane Learning neglected by those, who used to encourage it.
IV. LET us now see what the Humanists have to say against others; for we must
do every Body Justice, and it is certain that they, who should Honor and
Reward those, who excel in the Knowledge of Humane Learning, do it no more:
which without doubt is one of the chief Reasons of its decay. For there are
very few Men generous enough, to Cultivate with much pains a barren Science,
which is of no use in the World. Men fit for that sort of Learning would no
more be wanting now than they were till the middle of this Age; but there being
no Rewards, they who are qualified for it, are altogether discouraged, looking
upon it as an ungrateful Work. One may say, on this occasion, something like to
what Martial said to those, who wondered that there were no Virgils in their
time: Lib. VIII. Ep. 58.
Let there be Maecenas's, and no Virgils will be wanting; your very
Country-Farms will afford you some.

Sint Maecenates, non deerunt, Flacce, Marones;
Virgiliumque tibi vel tua Rura dabunt.
Lib. 1. Ep. 108.
You tell me often, replied he to another, that I am an idle Man, and that I
should write some noble Piece. Procure me such a Leisure as Maecenas procured
to Horaece and Virgil; and then I Will endeavor to Write something that will
never Die, and to immortalize my Name. Oxen take no delight in Ploughing a
Barren Ground: A fat Soil wearies the Labourer; but the Manuring of it is
Profitable.

Saepe mihi dicis, Luci clarissime Juli;
Scribe aliquid magnum, desidiosus homo es.
Otia da nobis, sed qualia fecerat olim
Maecenas Flacco, Virgilioque suo.
Condere victuras tentem per saecula chartas,
Et nomen flammis eripuisse meum.
In steriles campos nolunt juga far Juvenci;
Pingue solum lassat, sed juvat ipse labor.
Humane Learning, in Popish Countries, is of no use in order to get
Church-Dignities; which are bestowed for quite another reason than to put a Man
in a condition of serving the Public, and illustrating Antiquity; and the
Places of Professors in Humane Learning are too few in their Universities, and
of too small an Income, to encourage many People to Study. Some Religious
Orders, which teach that Science, as the Jesuits, cultivate it only as much as
it is necessary for them, to be Teachers of Rhetoric, that is, very slightly.
Besides they seldom read the Protestant Critics, who notwithstanding are much
more Learned than theirs; at least one Age since, or there-abouts. So that
there can be but few among Papists, who make an extraordinary Progress in that
Science; because few have a Genius that leads 'em to it, and are under proper
Circumstances for it.

Most Scholars, among Protestants, are maintained by the Public only to
Preach, and are obliged to spend their time in making of Sermons. And as to the
Places of Professors of Humane Learning, they are neither more numerous nor
better than in the Popish Countries. So that it is no wonder if there be so few
Men, among the Protestants, who excel in that sort of Learning.

But what is the reason, will some say, that Humane Learning is no more
encouraged? Have the Defects of it been found out, and is it looked upon now as
an useless Science? No new Defects have been discovered in it, but it is not in
Fashion now, as it was before, no more than other things. Toward the end of
the XV. Century, and the beginning of the XVI. Princes were great Encouragers
of those, who excelled in Humane Learning. They bestowed Gifts and Pensions on
them, and raised them to several Dignities; which was the Reason why there were
so many very Learned Men in Italy and France, especially under Leo X. and
Francis I. It was then the Fashion, among great Princes, to encourage Learning,
whether they themselves were acquainted with it, or loved it only because they
heard others discourse of it. The Favors they bestowed on Men of Learning
produced so great an Encouragement, that it lasted not only whilst Learning was
favored by Princes, but also a good while after. That first Impetuosity of the
Mind, which is so agreeable to our natural Curiosity of knowing the Opinions
and Actions of those, who lived before us; that Motion, I say, like that which
the Wind raises in the Sea, could not be calmed all of a sudden, and yield
everywhere to the Carelessness of those, who mind only the present Time, and
care as little for the Time past, as for the Time to come.

But a great many learned Men having embraced the Protestant Religion, and
proclaimed everywhere, That the Knowledge of Humane Learning had opened a Way
to the Understanding of Holy Scripture, and Church History; so that the best
Way to know the Errors and Abuses, which wanted a Reformation, was to Learn
thoroughly the ancient Tongues; the Party, who had no mind to make any
Alteration in the Practices, or Opinions of the latter Ages, began to suspect
those who so much cried up Humane Learning, and so by degrees neglected to
promote it. All Favors were only bestowed upon the zealous Defenders of the
Ecclesiastical Monarchy; and Learning, which had been so much admired before,
was looked upon by degrees as a thing, which might do it more Harm than Good.
Thus Italy and Spain ceased almost to produce any thing of that kind, and the
Libraries became useless Ornaments for the Inhabitants of those Countries. That
Dislike of Humane Learning spread, as a Contagion, in the neighboring
Countries, and even in those, where they should be of quite another Opinion.

It Is reported that a great Minister of State, who was altogether a Stranger to
Learning, used to call those who professed it Seditious Persons; in all
likelihood because they are the Men, who have most insisted upon the Authority
of the Laws, Justice and Equity. Indeed in the Countries, where Machiavelism
prevails, the Notions of the Ancients concerning those things, do not at all
agree with the ungovernable Passions of a Supreme Power. And this I think is
one of the Reasons, which are very Prejudicial to Learning in some Countries.

Thus the Defenders of the Supreme Authority of the Ecclesiastical Monarchy, on
the one side, and the Defenders of the Arbitrary Power of Temporal Princes, on
the other, have been of Opinion that the Reading of the ancient Heathen or
Christian Writers was so far from being necessary, that it was believed for
some time, it were much better on the contrary that the Republican Notions of
the Grecians and Romans should be forgotten, and that the Opinions of the
ancient Christians both in the East and West, which do not agree with the
Modern Doctrine and Interests, should be covered with the Vail of an
unintelligible Language. They have looked for Men, who would obey without any
Reply, and make it their Business to Maintain and Increase the Spiritual and
Temporal Power, without any regard to the Notions which Men had in former
Times. Soldiers, who have no Principles, nor Sense of Virtue, and Clergymen,
who are blind Slaves to the present Power, and examine nothing, and execute
with the utmost Rigor whatever Orders they receive, are looked upon as the
most unmovable Pillars of the Church and State; and they, who quote ancient
Authors, and whose Principles are independent on the Will of Princes, can have
no Hearing.

Some Reasons to cultivate Humane Learning anew.
BUT in the Countries, where they make it their Business to have no Laws but
such as are founded upon natural Equity, they need not fear that the Republican
Antiquity should contradict 'em; and therefore they should encourage those, who
endeavor to give the Knowledge of it. They, who are not afraid to find any
thing in the original Works of Ecclesiastical Writers, that may be prejudicial
to the Notions of Religion and Virtue, which Holy Scripture affords, should
omit nothing, to encnourage Men to enquire after Truth. The better it is known,
the greater the Authority of the Laws will be, and Justice more flourishing.

Though properly speaking, Humane Learning includes only the Knowledge of ancient
Languages, and what is necessary to know Antiquity; yet it puts us in a
condition of knowing things themselves, by furnishing us with the means of
Conversing, as it were, with a great many learned Men both Heathen and
Christians. So that it has a strict Connection with all the Knowledge we can get
by the Reading of ancient Authors: And the Desire of Knowing what they, who
lived before us, believed, said, or did, as much as it can be Known, cannot be
satisfied without such a Learning. The Knowledge of Dead Languages is, as it
were, an Interpreter, whom we carry along with us, to Travel, if I may so say,
in an Intelligible World, which exists only in Books written in Languages, that
are not spoken at present. Without such an Interpreter, it is impossible to know
what past in it. And as great Princes have Interpreters of several Languages to
treat with Strangers; so we must keep up that Knowledge, and make in as common,
as it can possibly be; unless we give over the Thoughts of knowing what past in
former Times.

These general Reasons, and several particular ones, which I pass by, should
engage Princes to encourage the Study of Humane Learning; and they, who apply
themselves to it, should use their utmost endeavors, to make it Easy and
Pleasant to those, whose Favors can make it flourish again, more than ever it
did. I do not pretend to have shown all the ways that can be taken in order to
it: It Is enough for me that I have pointed at some of the chief, and given
occasion to think of it to those, whom it most concerns.

CHAP. V. Of the Decay of some States.
THERE are some States, which do manifestly Decay, in respect of Arts, and
Strength. There is no need I should name them, and show their Weakness
particularly. Every Body knows it; but every Body knows not how they come to be
weakened.

The better to understand the Reasons of the Decay of a State, it is necessary
to know what can make it flourish; since it falls to Decay, because it wants
that which could put it in a flouishing Condition. There are chiefly three
things, which can make a State Happy at Home, and Dreaded Abroad. The first is
a great number of Inhabitants: The second, The Revenues of the State, which
ought to be great, without oppressing the People: And the third is, The Union
of the several Members of the State; who ought to contribute to the public
Good.
Wherever those things are to be found, it may be said there is Peace and
Happiness, unless a very violent Storm raised by a greater Power, should fall
upon such a State; and wherever they are wanting, one may certainly affirm,
that the State will fall to Decay, if the Disorder last never so little. But I
must come to Particulars, and prove each of those three things at large.

First, It cannot be doubted but that the number of the Inhabitants does so
much contribute to the Greatness of a State, that without it any State will be
Poor, Weak and in Danger, if the Neighbouring-Countries are better stocked with
Inhabitants. The better a Country is Peopled, the more Industrious are the
Inhabitants; every one striving to Maintain himself as well as he can; which
very much increases Trade, brings in Money from Foreign Countries, and all the
Conveniences of Life, as much as the Situation of the Country can permit it.
On the contrary, Few Inhabitants can have no great Industry, because they
consume few Commodities, and consequently Trade is far less considerable. They
cannot bring in Foreign Money, by exporting their Manufactures, or such things
as grow in their Country; because they have but a small quantity of them. Nor
can they Import what they want, but in a small quantity, and consequently it
will prove too dear.

If such a State happens to be attacked by some Neighbors, whose Country is
better Inhabited, it will not be able to send out an equal Army of its
Inhabitants, and consequently it will be sooner or later Invaded; unless they
send for Foreign Help, to supply their Weakness. But how can they send for it,
having but small Revenues, by reason of the scarcity of the Inhabitants and
their want of Industry?

From whence it necessarily follows, that no greater Fault can be committed
against Politics, than to make such Laws as hinder a Country from growing as
populous as it can be. For Example, If there are some Laws or Customs in a
Country, which do not allow Strangers to settle in it, or make such a
Settlement too difficult; such Laws and Customs only serve to weaken the State.
But if you suppose that the Country we speak of, is an Island, or near the Sea,
and that it has some remote Colonies, or a great Sea-Trade; it must be confessed
that the number of its Inhabitants will grow less every day, by reason of those
Colonies, and the great number of those who die every Year in their Voyages;
and then, if it be a difficult thing for Foreigners to settle themselves in
that Country, it will be unpeopled by degrees, or at least never so full of
Inhabitants as it should be. There is a famous Island in the North, the
Politics whereof fail in that respect. Hence it is that it has but one half of
the Inhabitants it might have, if it be compared with a Commonwealth not far
from it, or with the fruitful parts of Germany. And therefore it has been
observed, that in time of War it cannot make so great a Resistance, in
proportion to its extent, as that Commonwealth can.

There is also in Europe a vast Peninsula, most happily situated between two
great Seas, which is infinitely more destitute of Inhabitants, Industry, and
the means of defending itself, when attacked; because it lies under the same
Circumstances as the Island I just now spoke of, and besides there are some
other Causes of its being unpeopled. One of the chief is, that there is but one
Religion allowed in it. There is besides, a tyrannical Tribunal, which, under
pretense of Religion, may destroy the most innocent Persons. This keeps many
People from going to it, who might render it the most flourishing Kingdom in
the World, if they were permitted to settle and live safely there, as long as
they obey the Civil Laws. Another Reason of it is, that it is full of Priests,
Monks and Nuns, who consume a great part of the Revenues of the Country, and do
not contribute to make it flourish by their Industry, or by Propagation;
because, under pretense of Religion, they make a Vow of Idleness and Celibacy.
Indeed they pretend that the State is very much obliged to them, because they
instruct the People in Religion, and are more assiduous than others in
imploring the Blessing of God, who never fails to hear their Prayers. But some
People very much doubt whether Heaven be very full of that sort of Men, and
whether they bring God's Blessing upon that Monarchy; at least we have not seen
it yet. It cannot be doubted but what they boast of, may be done as well in the
State of Marriage, and that they weaken their Country by not Marrying. Those,
who live under their Domination, are forced to feign to believe, that by
unpeopling a Kingdom, and living idly, they do, it great Service; they are, I
say, forced to it upon pain of being thrust into a Dungeon, and ending their
Life by a cruel Death. So well do those Men understand the true Interest of
their Country, and the Principles of a good Policy!

The Romans had quite contrary Maxims, which produced admirable Effects. They
were so far from being afraid that their City should be filled with Strangers,
that from the very beginning they endeavored to draw in as many People as they
could, and made them Citizens of Rome, as well as the most ancient Inhabitants.
I shall set down here the Words of Dionysius Halicarnassus, who tells us by
what means Romulus increased the City he had built: Lib. II. page 88.
Knowing, says he, that many Cities of Italy were ill governed by some Tyrants
or by a few Men, who had made themselves Masters of them; he resolved to draw
in and receive into his City all those, who had been expelled from other
Cities; whatever Misfortune had happened to them, provided they were Freemen;
to increase thereby the Power of the Romans, and lessen that of their
Neighbors. Afterward he tells us how Romulus made a Place of Refuge, and
endeavored to retain those who fled to it, by making them Citizens of Rome,
and giving them some Land to live upon; and then he adds that Romulus had
another Maxim of State, Which the Grecians especially, as he thought, should
have observed, as being the best of all Maxims, which proved one of the surest
Foundations of the Roman Liberty, and did not a little contribute to the
Settlement of the Empire. He forbad Killing all the Inhabitants of the Towns
which they took, or making them Slaves, or turning their Seats into Meadows. He
would have their Lands to be divided among those, who would go and settle
themselves in them, and that Roman Colonies should be sent thither. He also
bestowed upon some Cities the Privileges of the Roman Citizens. With such
Maxims and the like, of a little City he made a great one, as it appeared
afterward. For those, who went with him to live in Rome, were not above three
Thousand Foot, and three Hundred Horse; whereas when he died, he left forty Six
Thousand Foot and about one Thousand Horse. Dionysius shows that the next
Kings, and the Commonwealth followed the same Maxims, whereby Rome grew so
populous, that no City in the World exceeded it in the number of Inhabitants.
If I should compare, says he, the Customs of the Grecians with these, I could
not praise the Lacedaemonians, Thebans, and Athenians, though famous for Wisdom;
who to preserve their Nobility, without any mixture, have but very seldom
bestowed on Strangers the Privileges of their Cities. I will not mention those,
who expelled Foreigners. The Lacedaemonians having been defeated in the Battle
of Leuctra, in which they lost seventeen Hundred Men, could never recover that
Loss, and were shamefully deprived of their Authority. The Thebans and
Athenians having been overcome by the Macedonians in one Battle at Cheronea,
were deprived of their Pre-eminence among the Grecians, and the Liberty of
their Country. But the Romans cumbered with Wars in Spain and Italy, busied in
regaining Sicily and Sardinia, enjoying not a full Peace whith the Macedonians
and Grecians; when the Carthaginians endeavored at the same time to be the
uppermost, the greatest part of Italy having joined with them, and sent for
Hanibal; the Romans, I say, though exposed to so many Dangers, not only sunk
under so many Misfortunes, but grew stronger than before, by the number of
their Troops, which were sufficient to resist all their Enemies; and not at
all, as some fancy, by the help of Fortune. Had they had no other Help, they
had been quite ruined only by the Defeat of Cannae, where out of six Thousand
Horse, they saved but three Hundred and Sixty, and out of Eighty Thousand Foot,
whom they had raised for that Expedition, there remained after the Battle but
three Thousand, and a few more.

It has been always an easy thing, and is so to this Day for Foreigners to
settle themselves in the United Provinces, especially in Holland, and the City
of Amsterdam, provided they obey the Laws of the Country; which has made the
Country so Populous, that there is none like it in all Europe. Whereas had they
scrupled to receive those, who fled thither, it would be a deserted Country,
and consequently ruined and subject to the Inquisition; for they had never been
able to resist the Spaniards, without a great number of People. But they who
founded that Commonwealth, seeing that many People faithful to the Government,
under which they lived, were persecuted for their Religion in several parts of
Europe, resolved to receive all those, who would retire into their Country,
provided they would obey the Civil-Laws. Whereby the States so Peopled their
Country, and keep it still so full of Inhabitants, that the long Wars, they
have had by Sea and Land, from the beginning of their Commonwealth, and their
continual Navigations in the East and West Indies, do not at all exhaust 'em.

Again, the better to increase the number of the Inhabitants, and lest Poverty
should force the Common People to retire into other Countries, they take an
extraordinary care of the Poor, for whom there is so much Money spent every
Year in the Province of Holland, that several crowned Heads in Europe have not
so great a Revenue. From whence arises a prodigious number of Tradesmen of all
sorts, Seamen, and People of all Professions, who are necessary in a Country.
From thence also arises the extraordinary Industry of its Inhabitants, such as
is to be seen no where else.

That Policy, which is so agreeable to Reason and Revelation, is so Wise and
Admirable, as that it is an Unjust and Impious thing to look upon a Man as an
Enemy, whatever his Country or Opinions may be; if he will obey the same Civil
Laws, and use his Industry to promote the Good of the State. Nevertheless
several great Nations of Europe, which think themselves to be more Polite than
the Hollanders, have not been able yet to apprehend a thing so clear, and
grounded upon the most certain Principles of Humanity and Christian Religion.
They are so far from allowing Foreigners to Settle among them, that they even
drive away their Countrymen, either under pretense of Religion, or by taking
no care of the Poor. They are far from admiring the Humanity and Christian
Charity of their Neighbors. On the contrary, they have so strange a Notion of
Morality and Religion, that to take pity of one's Neighbor, and do to him as
one would be done by, is looked upon by them as want of Religion and Virtue.
But this is not a fit place to enlarge upon that Subject. After what has been
said, it is no difficult thing to see why some States in Europe fall to Decay,
and why on the contrary others are so flourishing.

The second thing, which I have mentioned as necessary for the Preservation of
a State, and to make it flourish, is that it must have great Revenues, without
oppressing the People. Which may be done, when a Country is very full of
Inhabitants, and no Body exempted from Taxes; because then, though every Body
pays but little, there will arise large Sums by reason of the great multitude
of People. Again, this may be done, when there is great Industry in a Country;
because the Imposts upon exported and imported Commodities may bring in a great
deal of Money. As to the Lands, they ought to be taxed in proportion to what
they yield, and they yield little, when the Country wants Inhabitants, and
there is but little Industry in it; because then there is but a small quantity
of the Products of the Earth consumed either at home or abroad.

These are the chief Springs of the Revenues that a State can have. There is no
need I should enlarge on it, because it is a thing which every Body knows. For
the same reason I shall not prove how necessary it is that a State should have
considerable Revenues, to be in a condition of defending itself against a
Foreign Invasion. No Man can doubt of it, especially in this Age. I shall only
observe some Faults, which they commit in several States against this undoubted
Principle.

The Inhabitants of several Countries may be divided into three Classes. The
first is the Clergy, or in general all Churchmen: The second is the Nobility,
and those who enjoy the same Privileges with them, by reason of their
Employments: And the third is the rest of the People, who live by their
Industry, without having any particular Privilege. When the Clergy and Nobility
are but few, or have no Privileges, they cannot be looked upon as a
considerable part of the State, that is to say, so as to increase or impair
much the Public Revenues. But when either of them are very Numerous, and enjoy
great Immunities, as in Spain, Italy, and elsewhere; they make a considerable
part of the Inhabitants, by reason of their great Number and Riches.

It cannot be denied but that a great number of Secular and Regular Churchmen,
who use no Industry to make their Country Flourish, and enjoy great Revenues
without paying any Taxes, must needs be chargeable to the Public; since they
considerably lessen the Revenues of the State, and hinder it from being Peopled
with Men, who would increase them, and besides have no Industry to bring in
Foreign Money. So that the more the number of such Men increases in a State,
the lesser will its Revenues be. Besides, it wants People to defend it in an
open War; for the Secular Priests and Monks are not bound to defend the Lands
which they enjoy; not to mention the Nuns, who, by reason of their Sex, are
exempted from it. Their Business is to Eat their Revenues, and not to fight for
them; whereas, did those Revenues belong to Laymen, they would think
themselves obliged to defend 'em at the hazard of their Lives. Thus the great
number of such Men, who think not themselves obliged to help the State with
their Money, Industry, or personal Assistance, is a manifest Cause of its
Decay. It Is without doubt for this reason that we have seen, for several Years,
ten Thousand Germans, ill Disciplined, and ill Paid, exact Contributions of
five or six Princes, who could easily have raised Forty Thousand Monks. It was
also undoubtedly one of the great Causes of the Ruin of the Eastern Empire,
which might have cut to pieces the Sarazens and Turks, had it been able to keep
on foot half as many Soldiers as there were Monks and Nuns, not to mention
other Churchmen. All that can be said in behalf of Churchmen, is, That they
consume several Commodities, on which Imposts are laid, and so raise the
Public Farms; but many Monks consume but little of that sort of Commodities,
and Laymen do the same, besides what they pay in particular; so that
Churchmen cannot at all be compared with them, in that respect.

A great number of Nobility, and other Men, who have privileged Employments,
does also very much lessen the Revenues of a State; and they want Industry,
whereby those Revenues might be increased. For the Nobility, and those who
enjoy the same Privileges with them, contribute but little toward the Public
Charges, and have no Industry, whereby they may bring in Foreign Money. They
know how to get Money out of the Inhabitants, whose Industry they very often
Ruin. So that the more Nobility and Privileged Employments there are in a
State, the Weaker it grows; and those Princes, who increase the number of them
for Money, though they seem to get much by it at first, yet lose much thereby
afterward. Several People believe that the only reason why the Empire of
Germany has been somewhat perplexed in many Wars, which required great Charges,
especially in the War, which ended in 1697. is the great number of Men there is
in that Empire, who contribute nothing toward the Charges of the War but their
Personal Assistance. It Is also thought that Spain is in a great measure so weak
as it is, because of the multitude of Noblemen, who together with the Clergy,
enjoy the best Lands and Employments in the Kingdom, and contribute very little
toward the Charges of the War, in proportion to their Revenues. I am not well
enough acquainted with those things, to be positive; but it is certain that so
many Principalities and Kingdoms, of which Germany and Spain are made up, have
only, for several Years in the late War, caused a mere Diversion of part of the
French Troops on the Rhine, and in Catalonia.

It Is said in behalf of the Nobility, that it is necessary in time of Peace and
in time of War, for the Government of the State, and Conduct of the Armies;
because Men of Quality have commonly greater Souls than others, and are more
respected by the People. I will not answer, That very often Men of Quality have
no greater Souls than several other Men, or that they may have such Faults as
will make them unfit to procure the Public Good; but granting that the
Nobility is useful to what they say, I maintain that when it is too numerous,
it proves Chargeable to the State, unless it be allowed to Trade. For those,
who have no Share in the Government, no Employment in the Armies, and no
Industry, do but eat the Revenues of the Country, without being serviceable to
it. Nay, they are very prejudicial to it, because the shameful Idleness,
wherein they often live, without so much as vouchsafing to learn any thing that
may improve their Minds, inclines them to all manner of Excess; and by degrees
they corrupt the People, who are apt to imitate them. And then one may truly
say what the Spanish Nobility said of the Militia, in Ximenes's time, That when
Tradesmen leave their Trade, and set up for Gentlemen, there is an end of Arts
and Trade, and consequently a State is infallibly lost.

From whence it may be concluded, that wherever the Dignities are in the
Hands of the Clergy and Nobility, and wherever they enjoy the Riches of the
Country, it follows that the rest of the People are necessarily oppressed by
those two Parties; that they grow weary of their Condition, and that such as
have good Parts, and Money, endeavor to purchase Nobility, or to be promoted
to Church-Dignities. In the mean time the Arts and Industry, whereby a State
flourishes, are neglected, the Public Revenues grow less, and the State
weaker. After what has been said, can any one wonder, if the Countries, where
such a Disorder is to be seen, are so weak, that they are not able to make the
necessary Expenses for their Defense and Preservation? They are full of useless
Persons, who are not able to serve their Country, and nevertheless enjoy all
the Conveniences it can afford, and trample on those, who can serve it, and use
all their Industry toward it. That great number of Men, who do nothing, under
pretense of Nobility or Church-Dignities, grow Vicious, and Debauch a great
many People, who, were it not for such an ill Example, would be useful to the
Society.

Too great Exactions do also very much contribute to the lessening of the
Public Revenues, though at first View they seem to increase 'em. The Reason of
it is, that Trade is thereby soon destroyed, and so that Source of the Public
Revenues comes to fail either in part, or in whole. For when there is nothing
to be got by Trading, People grow weary of it, and Trade as little as they can.
Being by degrees destitute of Money, or having no considerable Sum of it, they
can make no great Enterprise; so that Trade is by steps confined to what is
altogether necessary for Humane Life, and yields but little to the Prince.

This is what one Hesiod. Op. and dies. v. 37.
of the most ancient Poets, who lived above two Thousand Years ago, teaches us,
speaking of his Brother, who had bribed the Judges, who were then styled Kings,
that he might have a greater Share in his paternal Estate: We have formerly,
says he, divided our Inheritance; but you took away from me several things,
which did not belong to you, by bestowing many Gifts on the Kings, who are
greedy of 'em. Blind Men, who know not that one half is better that the whole.
He means that it were better for Kings to be content with one half of what they
exacted from the People, than to extort from them whatever they had, and so
incapacitate them to contribute any more to the Supply of their Wants.

Therefore the Proposals of the public Farmers, or those who invent new
Imposts, and promise to bring great Sums into the Public Treasury, if they are
permitted to raise new Taxes, ought to be so much the more suspected, the
greater the Sums are that they promise; because they cannot raise them, without
entirely ruining that Trade, on which they raise it. The same may be said of
all exorbitant Taxes, which yield much for the present, but afterward
altogether exhaust those from whom they are exacted. Let us hear Cicero
discoursing on this Subject: Verr. III. ^. 119.
If a Farmer, says he, should pay 20000 Sesterces yearly for an Estate in Land,
which yielded but 10000, and should get by it 100000 l. after he had cut and
sold the Woods, and other Goods and Cattle; the Owner of it would for the
present be very glad, whilst he knew nothing of the Loss he had sustained, and
would extremely rejoice to have a Farmer, who should so much improve his Land.
But if he came to know that his Farmer had sold and alienated that, which made
his Estate yield so much as it used to do yearly, he would cause him to be
Hanged, and cry out that he had wronged him. So the Roman People, when they
hear that Verres has raised the Farm of the Tithes in Sicily, more than
Sacerdos, to whom he succeeded, and whose Conduct is unblamable, might be apt
to think that they have found a Man, who has well improved the Revenues; which
accrue to us from Arable-Lands. But when they come to know that he has sold
away all the Utensils of Plough-men, and whatever they had to pay the Taxes;
that out of Covetousness he has deprived Posterity of all Hope, ransacked and
plundered the Arable-Lands, and got a great deal by it; they will easily
apprehend, that Verres has very much wronged them, and think he deserves to be
put to Death. Si quis villicus, etc.

If Princes and their Ministers would think of this, they might apprehend that
by extorting exorbitant Sums from their Subjects, they make 'em unable not only
to pay as much afterward, but also to pay moderate Taxes. Then Industry ceases
together with that which keeps it up; that is to say, when there is not Money
enough among Trading-men, and the Riches of the State are kept too long in the
Hands of the Prince. Then the Subjects are disheartened; for who would rather
work for another than for himself? In a word, all those thing produce an
extreme Poverty, such as that of the Indians, who are Slaves to their Kings,
and had rather be in want of all things, than enrich them by their Labor,
without getting any thing by it.

A great Minister of State having been told by the famous Bernier, who
published his Journey to Indostan, that the People were reduced to an extreme
Poverty, all over the East Indies, asked him what was the reason of it, since
the Europeans sent thither great Sums of Money every Year, to buy some of their
Commodities. That Traveller answered him, That it was an easy thing to
apprehend the Reason of it; which is, that there is no Property in that
Country, all things belonging to the Prince, so that the People had nothing of
their own. That Minister of State was not very well pleased with that Answer,
which gave him to understand, that if they should continue to say that all
things belong to the King, in the Country he lived in, a flourishing Kingdom
would by degrees be reduced to the same Weakness and Poverty.

It Is reported that another Traveller, not less known than the other, (I mean
John Baptist Tavernier) having sold the Jewels he had brought from the Indies,
told a great Prince, That he designed to buy a Lordship in Switzerland; And
that that Prince having asked him why he would not buy one in his Kingdom; the
Traveller, who was no polite Man, answered: Because I desire that my Lordship
may be my own. A clownish Answer indeed, but which plainly showed Tavernier's
meaning: viz. That whoever will enjoy the Fruits of his Labor, ought to retire
from a Country, where the Taxes are unlimited.

What can one think therefore of a Country, where all endeavors are used to
leave as little Money as can be in the Hands of those, to whom it belongs?
Where they seem to be afraid that the next Generation should find something to
live upon? All that one can think of it, is, that it is a beginning of Decay;
which numerous Armies, and great Preparations of War cannot conceal from those,
who know what can make a State flourish, and what can weaken it.

There is a famous Commonwealth in Europe, where the Taxes are very great, if
compared with what they pay in other Countries; and yet moderate enough, if the
State of that Commonwealth be well considered. First, It Is a Country, where
the greatest part of every one's Estate ^ies in Money, so that the great
quantity of Money they have, lessens its Value. Secondly, No Body pays a Real,
or Personal Tax but those who are able to do it, the common People paying
nothing in particular; whereas in other Countries they are over-burthen'd with
Taxes. It Is true that the most necessary things for Humane Life are dear
enough, but Workmen have the better Pay. And therefore whatever Complaints be
made by those, who have much ado to live in it; if they be compared with them,
that pay the Tailles, as it is practiced in other Countries, it will be found
that they live much more happily than their Neighbors, as those, who have
traveled thither, know very well. Thirdly, Trading Men are not much burdened,
and it may be said that those, who contribute most to increase the Public
Revenues by Trade, are most favored. Trade is looked upon in that
Commonwealth as the chief thing, which makes every thing plentiful in it, and
they have regard to the Hazard which Merchants run in their Commerce, for which
Reason they are but little burdened.

It must be confessed that those, that cannot Trade, and who live upon their
Estates, are very much burdened in time of War; they lose one half of the
Revenues due to them from the State, or Towns: But it is an unavoidable
Inconveniency. For a War cannot be sustained without Money, and Money cannot be
had but where it is to be found. All that can be wished by those who contribute
so much to the Charges of the War, is that it be never undertaken, but when it
is absolutely necessary for the Preservation of the State, that the Public
Money be well Husbanded, and that a Peace be made, as soon as it can be, with
Safety and Honor. That Commonwealth never fails to do it, and if at any time
there is any Fault committed in this respect, they are such Faults as are
committed wherever there are Men; and are not Steps deliberately made by the
Supreme Power in order to impoverish the Subjects of the State, as it is
practiced in several Kingdoms. Besides, it is a great Comfort for the Subjects
of that Commonwealth, when they pay great Contributions, that they are sure
that no War is ever undertaken by the Commonwealth, but for the Preservation
of their Liberty, for the sake of which every Body ought freely to part with
his Money. How many Princes are there, who do not make War for the good of
their Subjects, but only to satisfy their Ambition; and whose Victories and
Conquests make their People greater Slaves and more unhappy than before? Which
puts me in mind of a remarkable Answer of a Roman Senator, who at a time when
the State was engaged in a dangerous War, having used his endeavors to get a
Covetous and Interested Man, though his Enemy, to be elected Consul, because he
was very well skilled in Military-Affairs, rather than any other, who were not
able to command the Armies of the Republic, answered those, who were surprised
at it: A Gell. Lib. IV. c. 8.
That they had no reason to wonder, if he had rather be Plundered than Sold:
Nihil est quod miremini, si malui compilari quam venire.

The third thing, which is absolutely necessary, to make a State Flourish, is
that its Members, and those who govern it, ought to agree among themselves, and
entirely mind the Public Good. If in a kingly Government, when the King can
undertake nothing of Moment, nor make any alteration in the Laws, without the
consent of the States, it happens that the King aims at an Arbitrary Power, and
that the States on the contrary make it their Business to preserve their Laws
and Liberties; such a Division will necessarily unable them to Defend
themselves Abroad, and make good Laws at Home. The King is wholly taken up with
the Thoughts of surprising and subduing the States, if he can do it; and the
States being busied in defending their Liberty against Craft and Violence,
cannot mind things of less Moment. In the mean time, a thousand Disorders are
committed at Home, and no care is taken to prevent the Evils, which threaten
them Abroad. Such a Spectacle has been seen Fourscore Years and more in
England, where Kings and Parliaments were so taken up with their public and
private Divisions, that they thought of nothing else. In the mean time, a
neighboring Kingdom did whatever it pleased, and put itself in a Capacity to
molest all its Neighbors. Nay, it was almost ready to Invade a Commonwealth,
whose Forces joined with its own, would have served to put in Fetters not only
the Parliament, but also the King of England. During that interval of time,
they might have enacted many Laws, which England very much wants, as may be
seen by the Experience of its Neighbors, especially the United Provinces.

In a Commonwealth made up of equal Members, a good Union in procuring the
common Good, is of very great use to make it Flourish, and Dissension is the
most dangerous thing in the World. We have seen it, in these very Provinces,
when in the Year 1672. they were like to be altogether ruined. Introd. ad Hist.
Cap. VI. n. 21.
Samuel Pufendorf, who was a very Great Man, has in vain enquired for some
other Reasons of the extraordinary Progress the Enemies made in so short a time
against that Commonwealth. There were no other but Dissension, which hindered
it from making the necessary Preparations against the Invasion of its Enemies.

No Body doubts that Concord will make a State Flourish, and that Discord is
very dangerous to it; but care must be taken to have a right Notion of the
Meaning of those Words. A Concord useful to a Monarchical or Aristocratical
Government, is such as aims at the general Good of those, who live under it. If
in a Monarchical State, wherein the Power of the Monarch is limited by the
Laws, the chief Members of the State should of their own accord, or by force
agree to submit all the Laws to the Prince's Will, without having any regard to
the Good of the State, such an Union would not be at all advantageous to it. It
would change a Society of free Persons, into a Company of unhappy Slaves. The
Readiness of the Chinese to obey their King blindly, does but confirm his
Tyranny, and increase their Misery. For those, who depend on the Will of one
Man, subject to a thousand Passions, whose Fancies can be restrained by no Law,
can be sure of nothing. Such a Man has some Favorites, who have other
Favorites under them, and suffer themselves to be Bribed; and such a Form of
Government is but a Subordination of Tyrants, every one of whom endeavors to
get something by the Slavery of the People.

But it is said, That the general Obedience of the Chinese, serves to maintain
the Peace in their Country; and that they enjoy thereby all the Advantages
which a good Union can procure: They mean all the Advantages, which can be
enjoyed in Slavery. But there is not one Freeman but had rather see more
frequent Disorders, than to undergo a perpetual Slavery. Besides, it is false
that there are no Civil Wars under such a Form a Government. The most enslaved
People will be at last weary of an excessive Tyranny, and, at the first
opportunity, will show that the Love of Liberty is not quite stifled in their
Hearts. Such a thing has happened several times among the Chinese and Turks.
Few People being concerned in keeping up Arbitrary Power in a certain Family,
or a certain Person, and the greatest part having reason to complain of it; few
will oppose a Change in the Government, and other* believe that if they get
nothing, they will lose but little by it.

The same ought to be said of an Aristocratical Government. The Union of those,
who Govern such a State, would be of no use, unless it procured the Observation
of the Laws, and the general Good of the Commonwealth. This we may learn from
the History of the Thirty Tyrants of Athens, and the Decemviri of Rome. The
Union of those Men served only to oppress the People, and make 'em miserable;
because their chief Design was to satisfy their Passions, without having any
regard to the Public Good.

Concord may be also considered with respect to the People, who, when the
Government is so settled, they may quietly enjoy the Fruits or their Labor, by
obeying the Laws of their Country, (which no Member of the Society can alter,
or transgress at his pleasure) ought to think themselves happy, and to obey
unanimously the Orders of the Supreme Power. To keep the Multitude in so good
an Union, it is necessary not only that they be the better for it, but also that
they should know their own Happiness. Without which, there will always be some
restless Men, who having lost all they had by Debauchery and Idleness, would
attempt to recover it by some Disturbance. Such Men will easily persuade a
People, who think they live unhappily, to rise up against their Sovereign, on
the first occasion. On the contrary, when the People are generally persuaded
that they cannot better their Condition by a Change, and that they should
hazard losing much by it, it is a very difficult thing to seduce them. I could
make several Observations on this Subject; but it is not my design to write a
general Treatise of Politics.

The Union of those, who govern a State, and of the People, ought to aim at the
Public Good; from whence it follows, that whatever Union has not such an Aim,
is prejudicial to it. It should rather be called a Conspiracy than an Union;
since the Name of a Virtue cannot be reasonably given to a thing, which
prejudices or destroys the Society. What has been said of the Civil, may be
said of the Ecclesiastical Society, which can only Flourish by the great number
of its Members, and by Learning (for Learning is in that Society what Riches
are in the other) and Concord. Not to speak now of the Number and Learning of
such a Society; I shall only observe that the Union of those, who govern it,
ought not to be a tyrannical Conspiracy, which destroys it. Such is, for
Example, the Union of the Inquisitors in Spain and Italy, who perfectly agree
among themselves, but to do what? To hinder Laymen, as they call 'em, and
Churchmen, (who might discover some Errors introduced into Religion out of
Ignorance, or Abuses crept into the Discipline, through Ambition,) from
proposing at any time a Reformation; and consequently to keep every Body in a
profound Ignorance, or an unlawful Dissimulation and Hypocrisy. It were much
better for the Church, if there were many Disputes rather than a perpetual
Tyranny, which hinders Men from being instructed in the Christian Religion, and
convinced of the Truth of it, by good Reasons.

I shall say no more on this Subject, because I intend only to treat of the
Decay of the Civil Society in several States: But I must answer an Objection.
It Is said, That it is absolutely necessary to suppress Diversity of Opinions in
matters of Religion; because under pretense of Religion the State is divided
into several Factions, which are so incensed against one another, that they
often break into an open War, and use one another most barbarously. And it is
usual on this occasion to heap up Examples of Disorders and Civil Wars, which
happened in several States, under pretense of Religion.

But what will follow from thence? Nothing but that as soon as a Religion,
whatever it be, is established in a Country, no Alteration ought to be allowed
in it, for fear it should cause some Disturbance. But such a Principle will
justify all the Proceedings of the Heathens, Jews, and Mahometans against the
Christian Religion; which they have persecuted, to preserve the Public Peace
in the Countries, wherein their Religion was the strongest. Besides, it is false
that the Toleration of several Religions causes any Disturbance: On the
contrary, Persecution necessarily produces all the Disturbances, which follow
from the diversity of Opinions. Were all those, who obey the Civil Laws,
tolerated, and were Men persuaded that Humanity, not to mention Religion,
requires of 'em that they should bear with one another, they would live most
happily in the World, though they were of different Opinions. But when Men are
persuaded that the greatest number has the right of deciding what People are to
believe, and of persecuting all those, who will not submit to their Judgment;
when the strongest Party begins to use ill the Weaker, till it he forced at
least to dissemble its Belief; then Disturbances begin, and Persecutors destroy
the Civil Society, under pretense of Defending Religion. In a word, they, who
only desire to be tolerated, commit no Disorder; and none, but those who
Persecute them, Disturb the State.

But Churchmen, say they, stir up the People to use one another Ill; and Great
Men often take hold of such an Opportunity, to raise dangerous Disturbances.
But that very thing shows that it is not Toleration, but the want of it, which
disturbs the State. Were Men persuaded, as of a Maxim essential to Religion and
Policy, that they ought to bear with one another, as long as they observe all
the Duties of the Civil Society; the Discourses of Churchmen, or the Cabals of
Great Persons would not be able to disturb the Peace of the State, under
pretense of Religion.

But it is not out of Love for the peace of the State, or out of a design to do
it Good, that Churchmen have opposed Toleration, and established the contrary
Opinion as a Religious Doctrine: No, they have done it out of a desire of
Domineering, of not being contradicted, and of increasing their Revenues, which
grow more considerable in proportion to the number of those who submit to their
Decisions. If Princes encroach never so little on their pretended Privileges,
they will endanger the Peace and Tranquillity of the State, rather than abate
any thing. If the State enjoys a profound Peace, notwithstanding the diversity
of Opinions; they don't scruple to disturb it, that they may oppress such as
they do not like.

If was not for any Sedition that Ferdinand and Isabella expelled the Jews out
of Spain in 1492. The Jews had no Authority in the State, and were contented to
enjoy the liberty of Trading quietly: They were not accused of any illegal
Practices against the Government. The zealous Inquisitors expelled them, to
have an occasion of Enriching themselves with the Spoils of a great many
Families, and not to do the State a good Service. The ill Designs of the Moors
might also have been very easily prevented, in the same Kingdom, after they had
been subdued, without making Spain a desert Country, by driving them out of it.
I could add more considerable and later Examples of People ill used, not for
having committed any Disorder, but by the Suggestion and Conspiracy of
Churchmen; whose Divisions, in matters of Religion, have never been so
prejudicial to any State, as the fatal Union of the greater Number to oppress
the lesser.

One may easily conclude from what has been said, that the States, the Laws
whereof tend to increase the number of the People, and make them quietly enjoy
the Fruits of their Labor, by requiring of them no more than they are able to
pay; and where they, that command, and they that obey, make the Public Good
their chief End, or do nothing at least, but what contributes to it; one may, I
say, easily conclude that States, which go upon such Principles, must needs be
Flourishing; and on the contrary, that they, which have opposite Maxims, must
necessarily fall to Decay. Therefore any State, which expels Loyal and Faithful
Subjects, and lessens the Number of them by any means, whatever they be; any
State, wherein they are oppressed with Tailles and Imposts, whereby they are so
impoverished as not to be able to exercise their Industry: Lastly, any State,
wherein they are not unanimous in procuring the Public Good, contains in
itself some Principles, which will insensibly destroy it, unless such an Evil
be timely prevented. But the Remedy necessary for the Cure of such a Disease
can be proposed only by Men, who have nobler Thoughts than the Vulgar. For the
common sort of People mind only their private Good, and are no farther
concerned in what happens in the State, than as some few Persons, whom they
favor, get or lose by it for the present, without caring for others, or for
the time to come.

CHAP. VI. A Vindication of Providence from the Objection of the Manichees.
MR. BAIL has displaid, in several places of his Dictionary, the Objections of
the Manichees against the Unity of one Holy and Bountiful God, and even
furnished them with some Arguments, to attack the several Systems of the
Christians. He thinks that when they argue against us, they are much stronger
than we, and that the best way for all the Sects of Christianity is to be
silent, and to believe what the Scripture says, without troubling themselves
whether what it teaches, agrees with the Light of Reason, or no. I am not of
his Opinion, and were I at leisure, I would undertake to show at large that he
is mistaken, when he says that they have so great an Advantage over all
Christians, whoever they be, I shall only set down here some Principles, which
may be made use of, to bring the Manichees from their Error concerning the Ill
Principle, which they join with the Good one; but I must first of all make two
Observations.

The first is, That by answering the Objections of the Manichees, I do not
design to wrong Mr. Bail, whom I do not at all suspect to favor their
Opinions. I am persuaded that he has taken a philosophical Liberty of Arguing
pro and con, in many cases, only to exercise those who understand the Matters
he treats of, and not to favor those, whose Arguments he alleges. The
Objections he makes are such as may be made in an Auditory of Divinity and
Philosophy; wherein the greater an Objection is, the more Honor there is in
resolving it. He may with reason require of his Readers that they should do him
that Justice, and it cannot be denied him. For my part, I am very willing to
grant his Request; but I think I may likewise be allowed the liberty of
Answering his Objections, requiring that no odious Application of my Answers,
be made to the Author himself. The second thing I shall observe, is, That as
Mr. Bail thought he might afford the Manichees such Arms as he pleased; I may
also be allowed to ward off their Blows, as I shall think fit. He thought it
was a great Mortification for Humane Reason not to be able to defend
Providence, against one of the most ridiculous Sects that ever were; but I
think that one of the least approved Sects among Christians, is able to answer
all the Arguments of the Manichees. As he pretends not to defend the System of
those Heretics, or approve of the Arguments which he furnishes them with; I
ought to have the same Liberty with respect to Origin, in whose Name, if I may
so say, I shall undertake to answer the Manichees, I declare I will neither
defend nor approve all that he said, nor all that one of his Disciples is going
to say. I am not at all concerned in his Reputation, or Doctrine; and every
Body may think of 'em as they please. The present Question is not to satisfy
any Body on this Subject, but only to stop the Mouth of the Manichees, by
introducing an Origenest disputing with them. If such a Man can silence a
Manichee, what may not one expect from those, who should argue much better than
Origen's Disciples? But I leave it to the Judgment of Divines and Philosophers.
I think that an Origenist, having read all the Objections of the Manichees,
might argue thus:
The Manichees pretend they can prove that we must acknowledge an Ill
Principle, that is to say, a mischievous One, and an Enemy to Virtue, by reason
of two things which we observe in the World. The one is Physical Evil, to which
Men are subject; such as are Diseases, Pains, all the Inconveniences of Humane
Life; the other is Moral Evil, that is to say, Vice, and whatever is consequent
to it. The Manichees are very careful to set forth all the Moral and Physical
Evils, which happen to Men; and then they say, that if the Principle, which
governs the World, is the Author of those Evils, he is neither a benign Being,
nor a Lover of Virtue; and that if he permits them, though he sees and can hinder
'em, he is altogether unconcerned for our Miseries, and our good Actions. They
add, that it is manifest, that Goodness is not a Property of that Being, since
he has decreed to condemn the greatest part of Men to everlasting Punishments,
or at least that he hinders 'em not from running headlong into those dreadful
Torments; though he is not ignorant of it, and can easily prevent so terrible a
Misery.

Our Origenist would go on and say, What the Manichees say concerning the Moral
and Physical Evils, which happen among Men, cannot be denied; nor can it be
doubted but that if he, who governs them, were the Author of their Vices, he
would be an Enemy to Virtue in general, and to Justice in particular, if he
should punish them for Faults which himself caused them to commit.

But it is not true that Men necessarily commit Faults, which God punishes.
Necessity is inconsistent with what we call a punishable Fault, as well as with
an Action capable of Reward. Either of 'em must have been done freely, that is,
so as one might not have done it, to deserve Reward or Punishment. It is a
Maxim acknowledged by all the Lawgivers in the World, which no Body can
reasonably oppose. Therefore God only permits Men to transgress his Laws, when
he has given 'em whatever is necessary to observe them.

If he does not hinder it, though he sees it, and is able to keep us to our Duty;
it is because he has made us Free, that there might be room for Virtue and Vice,
Blame and Praise, Rewards and Punishments. Every one may be convinced of it by
his own Experience, and his inward sense of the Faculty he has of doing or not
doing good or bad Actions, which deserve to be praised or blamed. This all
Lawgivers and Magistrates suppose, as an undeniable Principle; sine they
reward or punish Men, according as they obey or break the Laws.

Our Origenist would go on still, and say: I confess that there arises a great
Inconvenience from thence, viz. That Men can make an ill use of the Power they
have of obeying or disobeying the Divine Laws; and God could not be ignorant of
it, even though he had not foreseen it, since all Men disobey his Laws. This is
the reason why he does not stop the Current of Physical Evils, which overflow
the World. Sinners do not deserve that God should interpose after a
Supernatural manner, to free them from those Evils, and they cannot complain of
'em.

But, why, say the Manichees, has God created Men liable to Sin, sine he could
not be ignorant of the Evils, which would follow from it? I answer, That Men
cannot complain of God upon that account, for two Reasons. The first is, That
he does not require of Men, that they should be without Sin; which would be
unjust, as being above their Nature. The second is, That God damns no Body
merely for having sinned, but for having not repented. If he has made 'em
frail, he only requires of 'em what the frailty of their Nature is capable of.

Besides it was not necessary that God should prevent or stop Moral and
Physical Evils, which are the Effects or Punishments of Men's Vices; to be
accounted a benign Being, and a Lover of Virtue. That we may be convinced of
it, let us examine 'em singly: But we must raise ourselves above the Notions of
the Vulgar concerning the Duration and Greatness of the Evils, which happen
either during the whole Life of each particular Man, or all the time God will
be pleased, that this Earth shall continue. To give an acount of the Conduct of
an infinite Being, as much as it is possible for us to do, we must, as it were,
forget that we are limited, and place ourselves, if I may be allowed to say so,
in the room of him, who is Infinite. Or else we shall not be able to defend his
Cause, or give any good account of what he does. God does not act by the
limited and weak Notions of Men, which are the Rules of their Conduct; which
made him say by a Prophet, That his Ways are not our Ways, nor his Thoughts our
Thoughts.

The physical Evils we suffer, seem to us to be intolerably long, if they last
as long as we live, or only some Years. We complain and impatiently cry out
that God delays too long to help us; especially if those Evils are very
violent. But if we put together all the Evils, which have happened, and shall
happen to Mankind, whilst this Earth subsists; our weak Imagination is troubled
and terrified, and we are apt to think that he, who governs the World, has
scarce any care of us, and is nothing less than a bountiful Being. But if the
Almighty should all of a sudden raise our Minds to a State of Perfection,
whereby we might have a clear view of the Duration of the Earth, such as it is
when compared with Eternity, and see the moment it begun, and the moment it
will cease to be; that length of time, which frightens us, would disappear, and
we would say that there is an infinitely less proportion between It and
Eternity, than there is between one Minute and a Hundred Millions of Years.
Then the Evils, which now extort so bitter Complaints from us, and seem to us
to be so dreadful, would not move us in the least, because of their short
duration. Among Men, if a Child be sick, they who have him under Cure, do but
laugh at him, when he complains of the Bitterness of a Remedy which they give
him; because they know that in a very short time he will be cured by it. There
is an infinite greater disproportion between God and the most understanding
Men, than there is between 'em and the most simple Children. So that we cannot
reasonably wonder, that God should look upon the Miseries we suffer, as almost
nothing; since he only has a complete Idea of a Eternity, and looks upon the
beginning and end of our Sufferings as being infinitely nearer than the
beginning and end of one Minute.

We ought to reason after the same manner a concerning Vices and vicious
Actions, which last not long with respect to God. If a Clock-maker should make
a Pendulum, which being once wound up, would go right for a Year together,
abating two or three Seconds, which would not be equal, when it begins to go;
would any one say that such a Clock-maker is no exact and skilful Artist? In
like manner, if one Day rectifies for all Eternity the Disorders which the ill
use of Men's Liberty has been the cause of; will any Body wonder that God made
'em not to cease during the moment Men lived on the Earth?

Our Origenist would go on still, and say: But I perceive that the Manichees
will object to me the everlasting Punishments, with which God threatens
impenitent Sinners in the Scripture, that is to say, the greatest part of Men.
I don't deny but that Christ threatens the Wicked with an Eternal Fire, and I
will not insist on the Ambiguity of those words; but how do the Manichees know
that the supreme Lawgiver of the World has not the Right of remitting the
Punishments, wherewith he threatens the Wicked, when he shall think fit? When
a Sovereign Prince condemns any one to a perpetual Imprisonment, he always
expresses himself after an absolute manner; but he does not tie his hands, so
as not to be able to remit Punishment of those, whom he has condemned.

When God promises something to his Creatures, his Supreme Goodness and
Faithfulness oblige him to make it good; and notwithstanding the infinite
Distance there is between him and us, we might justly complain that we were
deceived, if he did not perform his Promise. But if, after he has threatened
free Creatures, to keep 'em in awe, and begun to punish them, without giving
'em any Hopes of seeing an end of their Punishments; he thinks they have
suffered enough, and makes 'em afterward eternally Happy; who can complain of
him? Is there any thing in it that is unworthy of the Divine Goodness, and is
not such a Notion very agreeable to the Idea we have of an infinite Mercy,
which consequently is not to end with the short duration of Men's Lives, to give
way to an eternal Severity?

There is no need our Origenist should speak any longer on this Subject. What
he has said, is sufficient to stop the Mouth of the Manichees; and I do not
design to show that his Opinion is a plausible one, by enlarging upon it, and
confirming it with such Arguments, as in all likelihood Origin used to confirm
his Opinion. I have had no other Design than to show that the Manichees would
have no cause to triumph over Humane Reason, if they should have to do with
such Men as could but defend themselves as well as Origin, whose Opinion is
notwithstanding rejected by every Body. After all, there is no Comparison to be
made between the Opinions of the Origenists, as I have fairly represented 'em,
and Manicheism, or the Doctrine of the Two Principles. The latter is altogether
inconsistent with the Christian Religion, one Essential Article whereof is to
acknowledge but one God Creator of all Men; whereas Origen's Opinion may be
consistent with the Belief of all the Essential Articles of Religion. That
Great Man was never called a Heretic for it, whilst he lived; and it would be
very hard to declare him Damned, after his Death, merely because of that single
Opinion. Besides, since the Manichees must be confuted by Reason rather than
Revelation, the greatest part whereof they rejected; it must be confessed that
Origen's Method, being not contrary to Reason, may be made used of in such a
Case as this. If any one at this day could not be reclaimed any other way, as
it might happen; it would not be amiss to argue with him according to this
Method; since it is past doubt it were better to be an Origenist, than a Deist,
an Atheist or a Manichee. For my part, I undertook this small Essay, only to
take off a little of the Manichees Presumption, and excite Divines to treat of
this Matter, which would require a whole Volume, if it were particularly
examined.

CHAP. VII. Men easily believe what their Passions suggest to them.
MEN are apt to Believe what they Desire; and the weakest Reasons, which
persuade 'em, appear to 'em like Demonstrations. After they have thus deceived
themselves, the decisive way wherewith they discourse of what they Believe,
serves to deceive others; or at least they fancy they have persuaded them with
Reasons, the weakness whereof would be palpable, if they were free from
Passion. Quae volumus, and credimus libenter, and quae sentimus ipsi, reliquos
sentire putamus. They are Caesar's words in this Commentaries, Book II. Chap.
27. We willingly Believe, says he, what we Desire, and easily persuade
ourselves that others are of the same Mind.

We find in the Perroniana, That Cardinal Sforza, who did not believe the Power
of the Pope, no more than several other things, told Cardinal du Perron that it
was an easy thing to prove it at Rome. The reason of it is, that they, who
have a mind to get Preferments at Rome, must either believe the Pope's Power,
or pretend to believe it. The Ground of this Thought is not new, nor the manner
of expressing it. Socrates said in like manner, as Aristotle Rhet. Lib. II. c.
9.
relates it, That it was no difficult thing to Praise the Athenians at Athens.

The reason of it was, that the Athenians, out of Self-love, were so well
pleased with their own Praises, that they admired the worse Reasonings, when
they tended to prove something, which was glorious to their City. They
applauded the worse Orators, provided the Praises of the Athenians were the
Subject of their Discourses.

They, who only reason out of Passion and Interest, should think sometimes of
this, and ask themselves, whether those, who have contrary Passions and
Interests, would like their Reasons? and then perhaps they would perceive that
Self-love imposes on them. For certainly no Man has a greater right than
another to establish this Rule for himself, That what favors him is true, and
what is disadvantageous to him, is false. If the Europeans pretend to make use
of it, they must not take it ill, if the Asiaticks will do the same; or if they
disapprove of it in the Asiaticks, they ought to make use of the same Rules,
which they will have the Asiaticks to submit to, and must admit of whatever can
be proved by those Rules. Such are the Rules of Logic, which cannot be
neglected, in any part of the World, without reasoning ill.

But it is as difficult to follow those Principles of Reason, when some
Passions, or a long Custom oppose them, as it is easy to acknowledge the Truth
of 'em, when they are proposed in general. The Chinese, for Example, would
readily approve of those Rules, and consequently they should acknowledge all
the Truths, which can be proved by them; as this, for Example, that Polygamy is
unlawful. Yet it is impossible to convince 'em of it, and it is the greatest
Obstacle to their Conversion which the Missionaries meet with. Nouv. Mem. de la
Chine. Vol. II. Let. 4.
The Mandarins, who are forbidden to use most Pleasures, which the People are
allowed, live, as it were, in a kind of Seraglio, to make up that loss, wherein
they spend their time, when they are free from Business. Though they have but one
lawful Wife, yet they are allowed to take as many Concubines as they can
maintain, and the Children born of 'em are looked upon as Children of the
lawful Wife, and bred up with equal care with them. To be admitted to Baptism,
they must promise to the Missionaries that they will part with all their
Concubines, and be contented with one lawful Wife. They often promise to the
Missionaries every thing else; but their Passions and Customs are too much set
against this Point; they cannot believe that God requires of Men that they
should have but one Wife, though the conformity of this Doctrine with Reason may
be more easily shown, than of several others, which the Chinese approve of,
without any Reluctance.

When we propose to the Mandarins, says a Missionary, the other Difficulties of
our Religion, they will dispute, and endeavor to overcome them, and despair
not of doing themselves Violence; but this last Point discourages them
presently, and takes away from them the thought of Converting themselves. Then
he alleges the Example of a Chinese, who would have been Baptized, but was
quite out of conceit with it, by reason of that Article.

The difficulty of acknowledging the Truth increases still among the Chinese,
by reason of the Laws, which authorize that ill Custom, and so perplex several
of 'em, who would turn Christians, that they know not what to do. They, who
turn Christians, are permitted to take to Wife one of their Concubines, if the
lawful Wife will not embrace Chistianity; but the Laws forbid the Chinese to
do it, and they are not allowed to Divorce their Wives, but in very few
particular Cases. Besides, the Relations of the Wife thus Divorced by her
Husband, would not fail to Revenge themselves, and force him in Law to take her
again.

The Conversion of Women is more difficult still. A Concubine, for Example,
acknowledges the Truth of the Christian Religion, and is very sensible of the
miserable condition she is in. She desires to be freed from it, and admitted to
Baptism. She is told that the first thing, which her Faith requires of her, is,
to part with her pretended Husband. She gives her Consent to it, and even
desires it with all Heart; but she says: I belong to a Mandarin, who bought me.
If I leave his House, the Law impowers him to apprehend, and punish me as his
Slave. If by chance I escape him, whither can I go to be safe? My Parents, who
have Sold me, durst not take me into their House, and I cannot fail to fall
into the Hands of another Man, who will draw me into the same State of Life,
from which I desire to be freed. I must therefore stay in the House, where I
am; but how can I resist a brutish Man, who only minds his Passion, which he
may justify by the Laws, and Example of the whole Empire? It Is in vain for me
to represent to him the Holiness of Christianity, which I desire to embrace; my
Entreaties, my Tears, and even my Resistance, and all my Endeavors are not
able to move him.

It happens also sometimes that an Idolater, being weary of his Christian Wife,
will accuse her unjustly, and with much Money get a Permission to Sell her to
another Man. Nay sometimes he will Sell her without any other Formality, and
retire into another Province. How can this Woman, being in the Hands of an
Adulterer, whom the Laws authorize, avoid Sin, and persevere in the Faith?

I thought fit to set down that Passage at large, because supposing that a Man,
in the same Circumstances, should be inclined to live, as he did till he heard
of the Gospel; the difficulty of getting out of that Trouble, together with the
long Habit he has contracted, determines him to believe that the Gospel is
false; not by any Reasons, but because if it were true, he must presently
Condemn himself, and change his Inclinations and manner of Life, whatever
Difficulty and Danger there may be in it. The Jews, in our Savior's time, were
almost in the same Circumstances, by reason of Divorces, and Polygamy. They,
who having divorced their Wives, had Married several times, or had many Wives
at one time, and besides were inclined to that sort of Life, were apt to
believe that the Doctrine of Christ was false, by reason of their Inclinations,
and the difficulty of Changing their Lives. It Is for this Reason, at least in
part, that Christ and his Apostles told the Jews, as well as the Gentiles, That
to become his Disciples, they must be born again, become new Men, and forsake
their nearest Relations, when they could no longer live with them, according to
the Precepts of the Gospel: And this was without doubt one of the great Reasons
of the Obstinacy of the Jews. It was a hard thing for them, not only to
renounce their Inclinations, which prompted them to change their Wives, and to
have many at one time; but also to confess that they had lived in Adultery, and
that several of their Children were Illegitimate. Their Children could also
hardly endure to be called Children of Adulterers, and to see their Fathers
forsake their Mothers. Which caused very great Divisions in the Families of the
Jews; and perhaps Christ alludes partly to those Disorders, when he says, That
he Luke XII. 51.
is not come to give Peace on Earth, but rather Division, and when he describes
the nearest Relations so cruelly divided: From henceforth there shall be five
in one House divided, three against two, and two against three. The Father
shall be divided against the Son, and the Son against the Father; the Mother
against the Daughter, and the Daughter against the Mother; the Mother-in-law
against her Daughter-in-law, and the Daughter-in-law against her Mother-in-law.
They, who thought of those ill Consequences, and had no great Piety, could not
resolve to embrace a Doctrine, which the most honest Men in the Jewish Nation
could not receive, without defaming themselves, and falling out with their
nearest Kindred. Such a Passion and many other, hindered them from perceiving
the Beauty and Truth of the Gospel, which presently shines to the Eyes of
those, who are not prepossest with the like Passions.

It would be no difficult thing to make an application of that Truth to many
Christians, who live in gross Errors still, notwithstanding all the Light of
our Age. But it is better that every Body should do it himself, provided he
takes care not to be in the same Case with those he censures.

CHAP. VIII. Of Praises and Censures.
THERE is nothing more Equivocal than Praises and Censures; and no Esteem or
Contempt can scarce be grounded on either of them. To mention but one sort of
Praises; the Divines of the same Party praise one another, out of so many ill
Motives, that one can lay no Stress upon it. They do it commonly out of a great
Conceit of their own Notions, and only because of the Resemblance of their
Opinions. In such a case, what can one infer from such Praises, but that they,
who Praise one another, are of the same Party, and maintain the same Truths or
the same Errors? Men will often Praise a Book out of Flattery, to please the
Author of it, who is in a great Station, has great Revenues, a great Authority,
and some other Qualities, which have no Relation with his Book. But such
Praises would soon cease, if that Man should lose his Employments, his
Authority, his Revenues, etc. Some will Praise a Book, because they understand
not the Matter it treats of, and admire what they do not apprehend. Others do
it out of Complaisance, without having any Reason for it, but that they see
others do it. It Is therefore to no purpose to talk of Approbations of Books, or
other like Praises, and cry up a Man's Reputation, which is only grounded on
such deceitful Praises.

However it must be confessed that, in some Cases, Praises may be of some Weight,
viz. when Men of Parts Praise and Esteem those that are of a contrary Party;
especially when it is not their Interest to do so, but on the contrary, they
expose themselves by doing it. A Roman Catholic Divine is in such a case, when
he Praises a Protestant Writer. It may be said then of those, who are so
praised, That none but honest* Men Praise them; as Aristotle, said in an Elegy
he composed in the Praise of Plato, that he had erected an Altar to that
Philosopher, Whom ill Men were not allowed to Praise.

(...),
(...).
Few Praises of that Nature are better than whole Volumes of Approbations of
Men of the same Party, or who can be suspected of Ignorance and Passion.

The contrary ought to be said of Disadvantageous Judgments, or Censures.

When Men inveigh against others, who are of different Opinions, and of a
contrary Party, what can one conclude from it? Nothing, but that they have
different Opinions, and are of a different Party. Men blame out of Envy, or
through some other Passion, what they would Praise, if their Passions should
cease. They inveigh, for Example, against those; who are of another Party, to
set up for Zealots, and to get some Reputation; and because they may safely
give up themselves to the most shameful Anger, under pretense of Zeal, and vent
a thousand Calumnies, without being punished for it; they deliberately take
part in Quarrels, wherein they neither observe the Rules of Christian Charity,
nor Natural Equity. Then the Censures they pass upon their Neighbors, show
only, that they Envy and Hate 'em, and have a mind to raise themselves by
wounding their Reputation: And if Men could see the Hearts of other Men, as
they can hear and read their Words, they would often see in the Souls of those,
who speak or write so angrily, a secret Esteem for those of whom they speak
Ill, which Envy and Hatred endeavor in vain to Stifle. When some Men blame
others out of Ignorance, or to imitate those who do the like, as Ignorant and
Unjust Men commonly do; what can one conclude from it, but that Dogs never bark
alone, where there are other Animals of the same kind? What can one say
therefore of those, who, to wrong another Man, take care to collect all the
Slanders, and reviling Words of those who have abused him? If any one, to let
the Public Know what they ought to think of Samuel Maresius, heretofore
Professor of Divinity at Groeningen, should gather all that Gisbertus Voetius
said to defame him; and on the contrary, to wrong the Memory of Voetius, should
make a Collection of all that. Maresius wrote against him; one might* with
reason believe that he makes sport with the Public, or designs to impose on
simple Men. This has been nevertheless practiced of late by a Divine of my
Acquaintance against a Friend of mine. He has collected some silly things,
which some passionate Divines have writ against him, as if one could rely upon
the Judgment of Ignorant and Unjust Men! It would be an easy thing to beat him
at his own Weapon, and publish what some Men as Orthodox as himself, have said
against his Opinions.

But Censures ought not to be minded, except when it is a Man's Interest to
forbear Censuring. When Cardinal Baronius speaks Ill of some Popes, his Opinion
deserves without doubt some Consideration. When Melanchton gives but an Ill
Character of some Lutherans of his time, one may reasonably think that they
gave occasion to speak Ill of 'em.

The same Passions, with which we are moved now, reigned likewise formerly, as
all those, who have carefully read the Church History, are convinced. We must
therefore weigh in the same Scales the Praises and Censures of past Ages with
those of our time, and give 'em no more Weight than Equity requires, and a
severe Examination will allow. If this were done, as it ought to be, how many
Church-Histories are there, which would deserve to be thrown into the Fire? The
best would serve only for Chronological Tables, to rank Facts according to the
order of Time.

There is another thing to be observed concerning Praises and Censures: or, if
you will, Good and Hard Words, viz. The Style of the time, wherein the Authors
of 'em lived.

They, who lived, for Example, when the Republic of Rome was still
flourishing, or in the Reign of Julius Caesar, were wont to Praise those of the
prevailing Party, and to Blame the Unfortunate, as it has been the constant
practice of Men; but they were much more reserved than those, who lived in the
Third Century, under the Reign of the last Heathen Emperors, or in the Fourth,
under the Reign of the Christian Emperors. In Julius Caesar and even Augustus
his time, the greatest Flatterers could not have been endured, if they had said
what the Emperors said of themselves in their Laws and Edicts. They, who know
the Character of the Age of Augustus need but look on both Codes, to find a
great many places in them, which would have been thought intolerable at that
time. That, which is most strange, is that the Christian Emperors followed such
an ill Custom, even in such Laws as concerned Religion, wherein one would think
they should have expressed themselves with more Modesty. For Example, here is a
Law of Arcadius, Honorius, and Theodosius Junior, which was published in the
Year 404. Let all the Officers of the Palace have warning, that they ought to
abstain from going to tumultuous Assemblies; and let those, who, out of a
SACRILEGIOUS Mind, dare oppose the Authority of OUR DIVINITY, be deprived of
their Employments, and let their Estates be confiscated. Cuncta Officia
moneantur tumultuosis se conventiculis abstinere, and qui SACRILEGO animo
auctoritatem NOSTRI NVMINIS ausifuerint expugnare, privati cingulo bonorum
proscriptione mulctentur. Cod. Theodos. Lib. XVI. Tit. IV. L. 4. The Letters
they write are styled Sacred Letters, Ibid. T. V. L. 20.
Sacrae Literae. When the Sons speak of their Father, they call him their
Father of Divine Memory, and their Divine Father, Ibid. L. 20. and 26.
Divae recordationis, and divus Genitor. They call their own Laws Oracles and
Heavenly Oracles, Ibid. L. 51.
even when they recall 'em. Honorius speaking of an Edict, whereby he granted
Liberty of Conscience to the Donatists in Africa, expresses himself thus in his
Orders, which we find in the Vid. and Cod. Theodos. Gothofredi. T. VI. p. 300.
Conference of Carthage: We are not ignorant of the Contents of a HEAVENLY
ORACLE, which the Donatists, by a false Interpretation, pretend to favor their
Errors, and which we recalled heretofore, though it mildly exhorted them to
Repentance. Nec sane latet conscientiam nostram s^rmo COELESTIS ORACVLI, quem
errori (...) posse proficere scaeva Donatistarum interpretatio pro^^^^tur, qui
quamvis depravatos animos ad correctionem mitius invitaret, aboleri eum tamen
etiam ante assimus.

When Princes spoke thus of themselves, what would not their flattering
Subjects say? They would give 'em the Title of your Perpetuity, and your
Eternity, Perennitas and Aeternitas vestra, as we may see in Symmachus's
Letters directed to several Emperors. St. Athanasius had reason to laugh at the
Arian Bishops, who bestowed that Title on the Emperor Constans: De Synedis p.
718. T. I. Ed. Paris. an. School.
They, says he, who deny that the Son is Eternal, call him (the Emperor)
eternal King. But the Emperors themselves did not scruple afterward to assume
that Title of Honor, as it appears by a Cod. Theod. L. XV. T. I. L. 31.
Law of Theodosius the Great, which begins thus: If any Judge, having finished
a public Work, inscribes his Name on it, rather than that of OUR PERPETUITY,
let him be accounted guilty of High Treason. Si qui Judices perfecto operi suum
potius nomen quam NOSTRAE PERENNIT ATIS scripserint, Majestatis teneantur
obnoxii. Instead of those Words, Tribonian inferted Lib. VIII. T. XII. L. 10
these into the Code, without mentioning OUR DIVINITY, sine NVMINIS NOSTRI
mentione.

Churchmen followed the same Custom; for the Bishops were not called merely by
their Names, but with the addition of most Holy, most Pious, most Acceptable to
God, most Happy, our most Holy Father, and other such Titles, which the Acts of
the Councils are full of, especially when they mentioned the Bishops of Great
Cities.

I doubt not but that they knew very well that those Titles of Honor were not
to be understood in their full Sense: However they were not bestowed without
Flattery, nor accepted without Vanity.

The Censures and Invectives of that time were no less excessive. Such is the
Character of the Spirit of Flattery: It inspires Men not only with a thousand
mean things toward their Superiors, but also with strange and violent Passions
against those they are angry with. This one may see in the XVI. Book of the
Theodosian Code, Tit. V. concerning Heretics, to whom the Emperors. or their
Secretaries give all sort of ill Language. And lest it should be thought that
they speak only of the Manichees or other like Heretics, whose Doctrine was
inconsistent with Morality; Arcadius and Honorius defined what Heresy is, and
denoted those whom they called Heretics. Cod. Theod. Lib. XVI. Tit. V. L. 28.
They, who shall be found to recede never so little from the Sense of the
Catholic Church, are comprehended under the Name of Heretics, and liable to
the Laws, which have been enacted against them. Haereticorum vocabulo
continentur, and latis adversus eos sanctionibus debent succumbere, qui vel
levi argumento a judicio Catholicae Religionis, and tramite detecti fuerint
deviare. One needs only read the V. Title of the XVI. Book of the Theodosian
Code against the Heretics, to see that as it was then the Custom to bestow
excessive Praise, so they excessively blamed those they did not love. The
Heretics are called there not only Men fond of erroneous Opinions, and
obstinate; but also Distracted, Mad, Profane, Perfidious, Detestable, and
Sacrilegious Men, who have wickedly conspired against the Deity, etc. Jacobus
Gothofredus has collected all those reviling Words, and placed them before the
Title I have mentioned.

Though it be as clear as Noon Daylight, that the Praises and Censures of that
time are most of them strained and excessive; yet several People, who read the
Writings of that Age, take no notice of it; and the ancient Customs having been
changed in these latter Ages, they fancy that all those, who are styled Saints
in those ancient Writings, (which was only a Title of Honor bestowed upon all
Bishops and Priests,) are really Saints, in such a Sense as that Word is now
understood; that is to say, that they enjoy the Glory of Heaven, and may be
safely prayed to, as the Church of Rome holds, as being Mediators between God
and Men. From whence it follows that their Writings ought to be infinitely more
esteemed than those of the Modern, though the latter are composed with greater
accuracy, and according to all the Rules of Art. For who durst believe that
such Men reasoned ill, and wrote carelessly? They also conclude from it, that
Men, who are prayed to, could be guilty of no dangerous Error, and that their
Lives ought to be the Pattern of ours. Thus they Canonize them together with
their Errors and Vices, to which they were as subject as those, who live now.
An Order, that has one of those Saints for its Patron, is always very zealous
in the Defense of his Opinions and manner of Life.

And because those great Saints condemned and persecuted as much as they could
those, who receded from their Opinions; they, who admire their Writings,
revile, in their imitation, and persecute those, who differ from them. This
will always be, as long as the Praises and Censures of the Ancient are approved
of without any examination; instead of comparing them with the unchangeable
Rule of Reason and the Gospel.

CHAP. IX. That it is a very difficult thing to Judge without Passion.
EVERY Body says, That an Author, who writes with Passion, is not to be
trusted; and it cannot be denied but that it is a very true Maxim, and very
useful to those, who follow It. But to know whether an Author writes with
Passion, or no, one ought to free one self from Passion. Otherwise a Man will
deceive himself move than he can be deceived by the most interested Author;
because every Body mistrusts himself less, than others. He, that will free
himself from his Passions, must know that he is subject to them; for he cannot
get rid of a Habit, which he thinks he has not contracted. But what must one
do, to know it? Men deceive themselves every Day, and believe they keep within
the Bounds of Moderation and Equity. I confess that when we are actually
agitated with a Passion, we are not capable of judging well of ourselves; but
there is scarce any Passion but what has some Intervals. Then the general Light
of Reason and Equity, which we have acquired by Study and Experience, shines in
our Minds; because they cease to be filled with Fumes of Passions. We must then
improve that Time, take a sound Resolution, and form such Maxims as we will
always observe: as Physicians make use of the Intervals that are between Fits,
to cure those who are sick of a Fever. If they don't prevent new Fits, they
will at least lessen the Violence of them. In like manner, some Reflections
made, whilst the Mind is calm, do often prevent violent Passions, or at least
lessen them in a great measure. He, who often makes such Reflections, will
sooner perceive the Effects of 'em: as the effects of Remedies are better
known, when they have been reiterated. But there is this difference between a
Fever and our Passions, that we often recover of the former, without using any
Remedies; whereas we cannot get rid of our Passions, without reflecting on
then, and reiterating our Reflections.

If a Man therefore never Reflects he is past recovery. In some cases every
thing contributes to keep up our Passions, and hinder us from Reflecting on the
State we are in. This may be observed in what is called Zeal for Religion, in
the Sects that are most remote from Truth. That Zeal is nothing else but a
vehement Desire of setting up One's Opinions by any means. The Divines of those
false Religions cry it up as a Virtue, without which one cannot be acceptable
to God, and look upon Peace and Toleration as a detestable Vice. Every Body
hears this Doctrine from his tender Years, reads it in all their Books, and
sees it practiced by the most esteemed Persons. The Zealots get a great
Reputation in their Party, and obtain all the Rewards; but the Admirers of
peaceable Equity get nothing by it but Trouble and Contempt. Ask therefore no
more, how it comes to pass that so marry People ire deceived and imposed upon.

You will say that you easily apprehend that it it is now very difficult to
preserve one's self from the Illusions of Passions; but that you cannot
conceive how rational Men could establish Doctrines so contrary to Truth. I
answer, That Men in Authority, who sincerely believed some false Doctrines,
might have enacted some Laws, and introduced some Customs, as were fit to
Authorize a false as well as a true Doctrine; and then it proved a difficult
thing to go against the Stream. Some Impostors and Politicians might also have
had a hand in it, so that at last the Assertors of a false Doctrine proved so
fond of it, that it was a very hard matter to overcome their Prejudices. Thus
the most ridiculous Opinions of the Heathens and Mahometans were introduced at
first, and afterward kept up by such means as I have mentioned. Those Nations
blindly believe whatever their Writers and Priests tell 'em; without being
aware that those Men, getting their Livelihood by those erroneous Doctrines,
will not fail to maintain a Party, under whose Ruins they would infallibly
sink. Would to God they were the only Men, whose Interest it is to maintain
Errors, and oppress the Truth! Would to God that none but they were deceived by
their own and other Men's Passions! But it is a general Evil, which in all
likelihood will last as long as there are Men in this World. However we must
endeavor to oppose it, lest it should excessively increase.

CHAP. X. Of Mr. Le Clec 's Works.
NO Body can give a better Account or the Works and Studies of Mr. Le Clerc
than I: And since it is necessary that the Public should be informed of it,
because of those, who wrote against him, I Will say what I know of it. Humane
Learning, Philosophy and Divinity, with their Dependences, have been his chief
Studies; and he has equally applied himself to them from his younger Years, so
as one of those Sciences succeeded the other, by turns, according to the
Circumstances he was in. He does the same still, and it is likely he will continue
to do so the rest of his Life: I cannot tell whether he has well succeeded, or
no, in the Works he has published concerning those three Sciences: You know the
reason of it. But I can tell you, with all the Sincerity I am capable of, that
I am persuaded he searched Truth with great Application, without having any
other Design but to find it. First, in what concerns the Christian Religion,
and then about several Points which concern Divinity, Philosophy,
Church History and Humane Learning. As for the Christian Religion, I know, not
only by what he has written concerning it, but also by what he has discoursed,
on several Occasions, that he is fully persuaded of the Truth of it; not out of
Custom, or Weakness, or because one may sometimes get something by feigning to
be persuaded of it, as it seems many do, but out of Reason and upon
Examination. Few Men have more meditated on the Christian Religion than he has
done; and perhaps there is not one Divine, who has a greater Notion of God and
Christianity than he has. He cannot abide that weak or doubtful Arguments should
be used in their Defense, out of Policy, because they work on the Minds of the
People, and Ignorant Men. He thinks that Men thereby equal Divine Revelation
with false Religions, which are kept up by such a Method, for want of a better:
Whereas no other Arguments ought to be made use of, for the Proof of the
Christian Religion, but such as are proper to it, and wholly distinguish it
from Falsehood, which cannot be defended with the same Arms. He affirms, That
whoever doubts of the truth of Christianity, has not a true Notion of it, or
cannot Reason well, or desires to indulge his Passions.

But to see the Christian Religion in its due Light, he thinks it ought to be
considered as it was in its beginning, without mixing any Human Doctrine, or any
Explication of unintelligible Things with it. Those Explications and Human
Doctrins are, as he thinks, the cause of most Disputes and Errors; not to
mention a thousand other Evils, which they have occasioned. Wherefore he speaks
of 'em with as much Contempt as he admires what God has revealed to us by
Christ and his Apostles.

Mr. Vander Waeyen, a Cocceian Divine, will notwithstanding deprive him of the
Title of a Divine, in two Libels he wrote against him. But he troubles himself
so little with it, that on the contrary he would be very sorry to be accounted
a great Divine by such a Man as that Professor of Franeker. Mr. L. C. professes
himself to be a Christian, and does nothing that contradicts his Profession;
but he would not be a Divine of Mr. Vander Waeyen's, Stamp, and he is not the
only Man of that Opinion. There are very few Reformed Divines, but despise that
sort of Divinity. Mr. Spanheim, Professor in the University of Leyden, with
whom the Professor of Franeker is not at all to be compared, has spoken his
Mind plainly enough on this Matter; and Mr. Vander Waeyen's Indignation against
him has not prejudiced his Reputation in the least. Mr. L. C. beseeches God,
That he would teach Mr. Vander Waeyen what the Title of a Divine requires of
them, who bear it, and will not dishonor it.

Though he had early studied the Philosophy of Descartes, he follows only his
general Principles, which he admires; and thinks that the only reason why
Descartes did not keep to them, when he came to Particulars, is, That he made
too much haste, desiring to publish a complete System before he died. I Will tell
you more of it, when I come to Discourse of Mr. L. C s. Philosophical Works.
The general design of 'em is to form the Minds of Young Men, and open them a
Way to the search of Truth, even in the most important Things. For the Author
is of Opinion, That the true Method of Philosophizing is of very great use to
establish the Truth of the Christian Religion, and show the excellency and
necessity of its Precepts. He thinks that a Man must not part with his Reason,
or stifle its Light, to perceive the Beauty of Christianity; Such a Method
seems to him to be the infallible way of establishing all manner of Errors. On
the contrary, the better a Man Reasons, the more he will be convinced of the
Truth of the Christian Religion.

The Study of Languages and Human Learning has taken up part of his Life, and
is still his greatest Diversion. He is persuaded that it is of great use for
the understanding of Holy Scripture, as it appears by his Works. He also
believes, That that sort of Study is very useful to improve Men's Minds, and
moderate their Passions; if at the same time the Study of Philosophy be joined
with it; for they must never be divided. A Man enables himself thereby to make
his own what he finds in Ancient Authors, that deserves it; without being in
danger of admiring their Faults, as it is commonly done by such Critics as
only cultivate their Memory. That Reading enables one not only to express his
Thoughts agreeably and elegantly, but also more clearly and distinctly;
provided it be attenedd with good Logical Rules, which must never be neglected,
and which the Critics are most times Strangers to.

Mr. L. C. is of Opinion, That if the three Sciences, I have mentioned, were
joined together; the Knowledge, which depends on them, would very much
increase, and consequently Virtue and Honesty would not be so scarce as they
are; for he maintains that Ignorance is the Mother of Vice, and that true
Learning is the Fountain of the most solid Virtue. If Divines, I say, were also
good Philosophers, there would arise a great Advantage from it; they would lay
aside all pitiful and childish Arguments, which their Books are full of, and
which they often vent as Articles of Faith, whereby they do a great prejudice
to Religion. They would not betray it, without being aware of it, by saying
that Men must renounce the most certain Knowledge of their Reason, to embrace
if. They would propose their Thoughts in a much clearer and better Order, and
convince the Minds of their Readers or Hearers after such a manner as would
influence their Lives. The whole Body of Divinity would be reduced into Maxims,
or necessary Consequences drawn from them, and the necessity thereof would soon
appear, in order to live Happily in this present World, and be acceptable to
Him, who placed Men on Earth for a short time; to make 'em Happy after Death,
if they will observe his Laws, which are very beneficial to them during this
Life.

If Divines understanding Revelation, as they should, and making a good use of
Reason, were besides so Skilled in Human Learning, as to be able to read all
sorts of Ecclesiastical and Profane Authors in the Original Languages; so many
Materials joined together, and rectified by the invariable Rules of Revelation
and Reason, and beautified with all the solid Ornaments of a true Eloquence; so
many Materials, I say, would have a great influence on the Hearts and Minds of
Men. Solid Thoughts being attended with the Order and Light, which Philosophy
affords, and set off with all the Ornaments, which Reason allows of, would
insinuate themselves into the Minds of the most Obstinate Men, and Charm those,
who have a good Judgment and an upright Heart.

I will not say, That we see now the quite contrary, because Things, which
should be inseparable, are now divided: This I leave to the Judgment of those,
who are skilled in those Sciences. Mr. L. C. believes, That the Famous Hugo
Grotius, whose Writings are above Envy, joined together the three Sciences, I
have mentioned. For, if he did not fully understand the Art of thinking well,
because the Philosophy of his Time was still full of Darkness; he supplied that
defect in great measure by the strength of his Reason. If he showed so much
Sense and Judgment, without the help of Art; what would he not have done, if he
had been thoroughly acquainted, as we have been since, with the Art of
Reasoning, and ranging one's Thoughts in a good Order? Suppose there were now
in Holland, many such Men as Grotius, or more Learned than he was, (a thing not
impossible, if Men studied as they should) how great an influence would their
Learning have, not only in the United Provinces, but also over all Europe! Then
indeed we might hope for such a general Reformation of all Sciences, as would
be worthy of Him, who has given us Knowledge, to make a good use of it.

Mr. L. C. has intimated several times, That so noble an Idea has often Charmed
him, and afforded him a thousand agreeable Reveries. If the World never sees
any thing answerable to it; they at least, who are Skilled in those Things, may
innocently busy themselves about Thoughts, which fill the Mind with Admiration
for God, and the Christian Religion, and inspire the desire of knowing and
teaching Truth, without Anger and Animosity against those, who are ignorant of
it.

If Philosophers were also Divines, and well versed in Human Learning, how
solid and sublime would their Thoughts appear! How useful should we find their
Principles! As they would take out of Revelation what is wanting to Reason; so
they would by degrees dispose the Minds of those, who learn Philosophy, to take
the right side in Matters of Religion, and would show 'em, on all occasions,
the Excellency of the Light of Reason. And as the Philosophy of the Schools,
which succeeded the wretched Rhetoric of the foregoing Ages, made an end of
corrupting Men's Minds, and disfiguring Religion; so a sound Philosophy would
kindle again the Light of Reason, which was extinguished only to introduce a
thousand Errors, and would dispose Men to perceive all the Beauties of the
Gospel. If the Discourses of Philosophers were full of useful Examples, taken
out of Ecclesiastical and Profane Authors, to which the Rules of the Art of
Reasoning should be applied; such a Method of teaching would make one apprehend
the use of Philosophy, which is otherwise altogether confined within the Walls
of an Auditory, and so becomes Contemptible.

I confess, That most Philosophical Matters are not very susceptible of
Ornaments; but it is certain, that if they can be expressed in proper Terms, and
such as agree with the use of the Language they are expressed in, as much as
possible, they become thereby much clearer and more pleasant to every Body, and
consequently more useful; because Men are more attentive to what they
understand and like, than to such Things as can hardly be understood, and have
I know not what, that displeases, though they are good in themselves. This has
been observed in France, since they began there to Philosophize in French. Some
Books full of the most abstruse Philosophical Enquiries, have been read by many
People with Delight and Profit; because they are well written, and are free
from the barbarous Terms of the Schools. One might have seen the happy Effects
of it, if the Inhabitants of that Country were not unwilling to be undeceived.

To come now to the Study of Languages and Human Learning, it is certain, That
if those, who apply themselves to it, would Study Philosophy and Divinity at
the same time, they would be much more useful to the Public. That Study
concerns Things of the greatest Moment, since the knowledge of the Scripture
and Ecclesiastical History depends as much on it, as on the knowledge of the
Things themselves. A great many new Discoveries might be made still, in those
Sciences, which would raise and enlighten one's Mind, and inspire it with a
greater respect for the Divine Revelation. Instead of which, most of our
Critics grow Old in the Study of Grammatical Trifles, which are of very little
use, and wherein one may be mistaken, without any danger. If they were also
Skilled in Philosophy, they would judge much better of the Ancients than they
do, and give us a more exact Notion of them, whereby we might be enabled to
imitate them in what is good, and avoid what is not so. They would order their
Thoughts so as to avoid Error, and enlighten the Minds of their Readers. For
want of such a Method, they oftener admire the Faults of the Ancients, than
what deserves their Admiration; because they seldom have any certain
Criteriums, whereby they may distinguish True from False, and what deserves to
be esteemed from what does not. When they have a mind to Communicate their
Thoughts; it proves often a confused heap of indigested Learning, which can
hardly be reduced into any Order, and is full of False Reasonings. This is
partly the reason why that sort of Study is so much despised, and why so many
People fancy that it is almost inconsistent with good Sense and Reason.

Mr. Vander Waeyen, who in all likelihood never troubled himself much with
Philosophy and Human Learning, having first of all applied himself to the
common Divinity of the Reformed, and then to that of Cocceius, seems to be
angry, because others Study the Sciences I have been speaking of, and calls Mr.
L. C. as it were out of Contempt, Critico-Philosophus, though he Complements him
sometimes. Indeed it is much more easy to say any thing that comes into one's
Mind, concerning the Sense of the Prophecies; as when they boldly affirm that
the Reformed are meant by Juda, and the Lutherans by Ephraim in the Prophets;
than to prove every thing exactly by Critical and Philosophical Arguments. If
Mr. Vander Waeyen is very well contented to be ignorant of those Sciences, no
Body can help it; but he must not take it ill, if others value them.

If the use that is made of the knowledge of ancient Authors, may be often
justly blamed; one might find out several ways of setting up again that
Science, by a better Method, as I have already said here and elsewhere. But
it is more proper here to Discourse of Mr. L. C's. Works in particular, after I
have laid down his general Notions of the Method of Studying, and of the use of
the Sciences he applies himself to.

Of the Quaestiones Sacrae.
BEING arrived in Holland in the Year 1683. he published the Year following a
Book, Entitled, Davidis and Stephani Clerici Quaestiones Sacrae, which are
Critical Discourses on some Subjects taken for the most part out of the
Scripture. He added to them some Notes of his own, wherein he scruples not to
contradict his Uncle and Father, when he thinks they are mistaken; being of
Opinion that Truth is to be preferred to the strictest Ties of Blood. He
published that Book not only to honor the Memory of his Uncle and Father, who
had a great Skill in the Eastern Languages and Human Learning, and whose Lives
he prefixed to that Book; but also to serve the Public, which can never be
done, but by telling the Truth. He did not think it inconsistent with the
Respect he owed to the Memory of two Men so nearly related to him, if he showed
that they were fallible like other Men. Notwithstanding, most of his Remarks do
only clear or confirm what is contained in those Dissertations. Another Volume
of those two Brothers was published in 1682. and printed by Wetstein, in
Octavo. But Mr. L. C. added nothing of his own to it, but a Preface. It
contains some Speeches on several Subjects, and a Computus Ecclesiasticus of
David le Clerc, with some Poetical Pieces of the same, and some Dissertations
of Stephen le Clerc upon some Places of several Profane Authors.

Of his Entretiens de Theology.
TOWARD the end of the same Year 1684. Mr. L. C. published a Book of a Friend
of his, Entitled, Entretiens sur diverses matieres de Theology, in Twelves,
and because it was too small a Book, he added a second Part to it, made up of
five Dialogues. The three First treat of the Extent of our Metaphysical
Knowledge, and its use in Religion, and contain several Examples, whereby it
clearly appears, That Metaphysicians have often obscured Divinity, and started
a thousand Difficulties, by reasoning about Things, of which they had no Ideas.
The Authors thinks that we must not extend the use of the Faculties, we have
received of God, beyond the Bounds he has prescribed to them, unless we will
fall into infinite Errors; and believes, that as our Senses teach us no more of
Bodies, than what is necessary for the Preservation of our Lives; so the Light
of Reason is of no farther use to us, than to make us obey the Laws of God, and
to lead us to the Supreme Felicity. So that God having bestowed Knowledge on us
only to that intent, when we will launch out beyond the Bounds of that
Knowledge, and what necessarily depends on it; we run the hazard of wandering,
and falling into many Doubts, which we cannot resolve, as the Author shows at
large.

The Fourth Dialogue contains an Examination, of several Places of Scripture,
which Metaphysicians make an ill use of. Most of those Passages are taken out
of the Writings of the Author of The Search after Truth; but there are several
Things, which are common to him and other Metaphysicians.

The Design of those Four Dialogues is to show, that in Matters of Religion, we
must keep to Revelation, and not fancy that we have complete and adequate Ideas
of the Things contained in it, and that we may draw infinite Consequences from
them. If Divines had kept themselves within those Bounds, without adding any
Thing to the Doctrins contained in the Scripture, and inventing New Terms, as
if they were more convenient than those which the Holy Writers made use of;
perhaps the World had not seen the Fourth Part of the Heresies, which have been
broached from the Apostles to this time; and the Christian Theology would be
much more Beautiful, and more conducing to Piety.

The Fifth Dialogue contains an Explication of the IX, X, and XI Chapters of
the Epistle to the Romans, taken chiefly out of the Paraphrase of Dr. Hammond;
who is now better known in Foreign Countries, since Mr. L. C. published his
Works in Latin, as I shall say hereafter. Those Dialogues are the First Book
that he published in French, and one may see in it the Three Sciences, I have
discoursed of, Divinity, Philosophy, and Critical Learning, concurring to
inspire the Reader with Pious and Reasonable Opinions concerning Religion and
Morality. For he utterly dissents from those, who cry down Reason, that they
may vent, without being contradicted, a thousand Things which really reflect on
God and Religion. One may see what he says about it, toward the End of the
Third Dialogue. Reason and Revelation never quarrel with one another; and if we
see the contrary in School Divinity, it is because what they call Reason, or
Revelation, is often a mere Phantom, substituted in their room; as those, who
can consult the Scripture, and who reason closely, will easily perceive.

Of the Sentimens sur l'Histoire Critique, etc.
IN the Year 1685. Mr. L. C. published another French Book in Octavo, Entitled,
Sentimens de quelques Theologiens de Hollande sur l'Histoire Critique du Vieux
Testament composee par R. Simon. That Book is writ by way of Letters, wherein
Mr. L. C. sets down the Opinions of several Persons concerning the Critical
History of the Old Testament by Father Simon, and gives an Account of the
Conversations of some Friends discoursing with great Freedom of Father Simon's
Book, and some Subjects relating to it. When we discourse with some Persons,
whom we do not mistrust, we believe that we may boldly say what we think,
especially if we propose our Thoughts as mere Conjectures; because we pretend
not to maintain them, as our settled Opinion, and scruple not to give them up,
when after a more serious Consideration, those Conjectures appear not to us
probable enough, to be defended. This has been done by Mr. L. C. in that Book,
wherein he has advanced some Conjectures of his own and of his Friends, without
ever pretending to maintain them but as Conjectures, which are not destitute of
Probability, and not as his settled Opinion, as if he believed they could be
clearly proved.

A Digression concerning Conjectures
IT is certain that there are several degrees of Likelihood and Certainty in
Men's Opinions. It be confessed that the Things we believe are not equally clear,
whatever the ancient Stoic Philosophers might say to the contrary, who
believed that their Wise Man never conjectured, and that whatever he believed
could be demonstrated. Neither yet is every thing uncertain, as the Academians
held; and there is an infinite number of Things, which can be demonstrated, or
rendered very likely; as Mr. L. C. has shown at large, in the second Part of his
Logic. We ought to speak more or less affirmatively, according to the several
degrees of Likelihood or Certainty. As it would be ridiculous to speak
doubtfully of a clear Mathematical Proposition; so it would not be less absurd
to propose a Conjecture as a Demonstration. Men have always been allowed to
Conjecture, and say what seemed to them to be probable; but upon condition that
they should remember that their Conjectures were not certain Truths. Reason
therefore teaches a Man to act differently, when any Body writes against a
Conjecture, which he has published, or when he perceives that they write
against a clear Truth out of Malice, or Obstinacy: If any one shows that a
Conjecture may be false, the Author of that Conjecture must not take it ill;
because a Conjecture is an Opinion wherein one may be mistaken. And if after a
more careful Examination, he thinks that his Conjecture is less probable than
it seemed to be at first, he ought to look upon it with greater Indifferency,
and even give it up, if he finds out something better. A Man must never be
positive in Things, which cannot at all be demonstrated, so as to embrace, or
defend as certain what is only probable.

This Mr. L. C. thought he might very well do, with respect to the Conjecture,
which is to be found in the VI. Letter of the Sentiments, concerning the
Compiler of the Pentateuch, who, as he thought, might have been an Honest
Israelite, who collected all the Writings of Moses, and added to them some
other Facts, taken out of some ancient and creditable Books, for the use of the
Samaritans, about the time of the Captivity. As he always called that Opinion a
Conjecture; so he never defended it but as such, and thought not himself
obliged to maintain it as a thing he was sure of, against those who opposed it.
Nay, he showed some Years after, as I shall say in its due place, that though
there are some Passages in the Pentateuch, which are later than Moses; yet that
can be no reason against his being the Author of it.

He was so much the more willing to give up that Conjecture, because it is one
of those Complex Conjectures, if I may so speak, wherein too many uncertain
Things are supposed; every one of which being possibly false, it follows from
thence that such a Conjecture is not probable enough, to serve as a Principle
for the Explication of the Pentateuch. For the more doubtful Things there are
in a Conjecture, the more uncertain it is, and the more danger there is in
supposing it, to draw Consequences from it. It Is with Conjectures as it is with
Accounts made up of several Sums. If you make an uncertain Supposition
concerning the value of one of those Sums, in case you mistake, you mistake but
in one particular; but the more uncertain Suppositions you make, the more
doubtful will the Account be, and liable to more Errors. What must a Man
therefore do in such a Case? He must Conjecture as little as he can, and draw
few Consequences from what he has Conjectured, that he may be mistaken as
little as may be, if he is in an Error. If Learned Men had always done this, we
might have had a more real and solid knowledge of many Things than we have, and
could better distinguish what is certain from what is uncertain; whereas when
Conjectures are confounded with certainties, we think we know many Things which
we really know not. For Example, Joseph Scaliger, who was a very Learned Man,
mixed so many Conjectures, in his Book de Emendations Temporum, with what he
might have undeniably proved, and drew so many Consequences from them, that a
great part of his Chronology is become thereby very suspicious, if not false,
as the famous Dionysius Petavius pretends. I know a Man of great Learning, who
has published several Learned Books about Ecclesiastical History, and the
Opinions of the ancient Christians; but he is so full of Conjectures, some of
which are grounded upon ethers, that his Arguments are seldom cogent, and
convince few judicious and attentive Readers.

It Is much better to say nothing of doubtful Things, or at least to draw no
Consequences from them, and run the hazard of appearing less knowing, than to
vent too many Uncertainties. But it is a common Fault among Men of Parts: After
they have wearied themselves in searching after fugitive Truth, they make to
themselves a Phantom of their own Conjectures, which they substitute in its
place, lest they should seem to have altogether lost their time. Then to
maintain that Phantom, they make other Conjectures, especially when they are
hard put to it; and so by degrees instead of solid Truths, they vent only
Dreams to those that hear them. When they think they have much contributed to
the discovery of Truths unknown before their time, they often remove them
farther from Men's sight; like Turnus in Virgil's Aeneids, who, the more he
followed Aeneas's Spectrum, the farther he went from the place, where the
Enemies stood.

I think one might make a very useful Treatise concerning the Art of
Conjecturing, which would be reduced into Maxims, the chief whereof are the
following: 1. Every Conjecture must be probable: 2. It ought to be as simple as
possible: 3. No Consequences must be drawn from it: 4. One must speak of it
doubtfully, as of a thing not certain: 5. No Body should think himself obliged
in Honor to defend it, nor scruple to give it up: 6. He, who thinks himself
obliged to maintain it, must not have recourse to new Suppositions.
The usefulness of those Maxims might be shown by very good Reasons, and
several Examples taken out of the Writings of Philosophers and Critics, who
have neglected them, and have therefore committed great Errors, and maintained
the most uncertain Things in the World, with such a Heat and Confidence as is
only to be used in the defense of a certain Truth.

Several People stand in need of these Remarks, to learn to be less positive
about Things they are not certain of, and not to wonder if any one yields up a
Conjecture, which he never took for a certain Truth. They, who have little
thought of the several degrees of Probability, are wont to speak of every thing
with an equal assurance, and maintain with Obstinacy whatever they say, without
distinguishing what can be maintained from that which cannot. But this ought
not to be the practice of those, who can reason well, and who love the Truth,
to which they must consequently sacrifice all their Conjectures.

Of the Treatise concerning the Inspiration of the Sacred Writers.
THE XI. and XII. Letters of the Sentiments, etc. contain a small Treatise
concerning the Inspiration of the Sacred Writers, which Mr. L. C. published not
as if he approved of it, but with great caution, and only to engage Learned Men
to write on that Subject. He said so positively in several places. And it is for
this reason that several Divines have examined that Subject in Latin, French
and English. Mr. L. C. thinks himself concerned in their Answers, though he might
have complained that some of 'em observed no Rules of Equity, or Sincerity, not
only with respect to the Doctrine contained in the Treatise concerning the
Inspiration, etc. but also in reference to himself.

F.Simon, who was warmly attackt in the Sentiments, etc. answered them with all
the Passion and Animosity, that could be expected from a Man, who could allege
no good Reasons; and he used all the injurious and unbecoming Words that he
could think of, on such an occasion. He would also persuade the World that Dr.
Allix, heretofore Minister at Charenton, and Mr. Aubert de Verse, who is now
(in 1699.) at Paris, and has a Pension from the Clergy of France, were the
Authors of that Book, and that Mr. Aubert, in particular had written the
Treatise concerning the Inspiration of the Sacred Authors.

A short time after, (in 1686.) Mr. L. C. published a Defense of the
Sentiments, etc. and thoroughly confuted F. Simon's Chimerical Discoveries,
which have been laughed at since by every Body; declaring to him, That he would
answer him no more, though he should write never so many Books, because he
thought the Public was so well acquainted with their Dispute, as to be able to
judge of it, without being troubled any longer with F. Simon's ill Reasonings
and Disingenuity. Indeed, when a Man has said all that is necessary, in order
to clear and defend Truth, he needs go no farther; the Public being not much
concerned in the Reputation and personal Interests of private Men. 'Twas in
vain for F. Simon to cry out louder than he did before, according to the custom
of those, who maintain a bad Cause; Mr. L. C. despised alike his hard Words,
and his repeated Arguments. In his Defense, he says, That what F. Simon
published concerning Dr. Allix, and Mr. Aubert, is a great Untruth. They know
very well that it is false, and will not ascribe to themselves another Man's
Work. They have both written some Books, whereby one may easily know that they
have had no hand in the Sentiments, etc. nor in the Treatise concerning the
Inspiration, etc. Whatever one may think of their Books, they have done nothing
like this, either as to the Style, the Method, or the Matter. I do not say this
to wrong them, or to praise any body, but to confute F. Simon the more
effectually. They, who have read the other Works of Mr. L. C. will easily
believe that he needs not borrow any thing of either of 'em, and that the
Author of the Treatise concerning the Inspiration, etc. is quite another Person
than those Gentlemen. They would perhaps have done well to declare themselves,
that they have had no hand in that Book; but since they have not done it, I
hope they will not take it ill, if I do it. If they believe that their
Reputation would be wronged, by ascribing to them in part a Book, wherein they
have no hand; they would be glad that I have said so here. But if their Silence
should arise from some other Cause, which I will not dive into; they cannot
complain that the Public should be informed of the truth of a Fact, which
might wrong Mr. L. C. who has as little need of them, as they have of him.

Of the Judgment which some Divines have made of the Sentiments, etc.
In the Year 1688. Matthias Honcamp, Canon of Mentz, published in Latin a Book,
Entitled, An Examination of the Critical History of the Old Testament, and of
the Sentiments, etc. Mr. L. C. answered him in the X. Vol. of the Bibliotheque
Vniverselle; where he gives an ill Character of the Principles and Method of
that Author, who perhaps deserved to be treated more sharply.

In 1690. Mr. Maius, Professor at Giessen, published four Dissertations on the
Holy Scripture, wherein he undertook to refute F. Simon, and the Author of the
Sentiments, etc. The latter replied something in the XIX. Vol. of the
Bibliotheque Vniverselle, where he shows That Mr. Maius ascribes to him some
Opinions, which he has not, and that his Arguments are very weak and
insignificant. But because he writes chiefly against the Treatise concerning
the Inspiration, etc. Mr. L. C. did not think himself obliged to Dispute about
it, either with Mr. Maius, or any body else. He could only have wished that
that Author had been able to treat that Subject well, and refute his Antagonist
with good Reasons, and not with hard Words, and Arguments, which prove nothing.
Equity required also that he should ascribe nothing to Mr. L. C. but what he
acknowledges, and publish no Romance about the Authors of the Sentiments, etc.
and the Treatise concerning the Inspiration, etc. as he has done, by bringing
again Mr. Aubert upon the Stage. This he may be sure of, That Mr. L. C. has a
greater and nobler Notion of the Divine Revelation, than he himself seems to
have, as well as of Christian Charity, and even natural Equity, which he has
very little observed in his Refutation. He has also published some other
Dissertations, digested according to the Order of Common-Places, wherein he
likewise writes against Mr. L. C. after such a manner as will only impose upon
some Young Students of Divinity in the Universities of Germany, but will not
please those, who know what Charity and Equity require, and are not Strangers
to the Rules of Reasoning well. Mr. L. C. might also complain that Mr. Maius
took the pains to transcribe out of his Works the best Things he says
concerning the Rolls of the ancient Hebrews, against Dr. Isaac Vossius, and F.
Simon, and concerning the Scribes, against the latter. He should at least have
been just to Him, of whose Labor he thought he could make a good use; by
ascribing to him only so much as he owns, and drawing no odious Consequence
against him. I thought my self obliged to say thus much, not to revenge Mr. L.
C. for the wrong that Professor designed to do to his Reputation; which must
needs be very inconsiderable, and only in Places, where he would be ashamed to
be very much Esteemed, knowing what sort of Men are Esteemed there; but to show
that he is with good Reason, very little concerned for what some German Divines
have written against him. It Is their Duty to reflect on their own Conduct,
whereof they are not to give an account to some Divines of Wittemberg, but to a
Judge, who has taught us other Rules of Equity, by which we are to be judged by
him. Mr. L. C. beseeches that Supreme Judge that he would be pleased to change
their angry and passionate Temper, and the Darkness wherewith they are
surrounded, into a Spirit of Charity and Peace, and a Light, which may bring
them again into the right Way.

Mr. Witsius, Professor at Vtrecht, and since at Leyden, has written against
several Places of the Sentiments, in his Miscellanea Sacra, printed in the Year
1691. and Mr. L. C. acquainted the Public why he would not answer him, in one
of the monthly Accounts of the Histoire des Ouvrages des savans of that Year,
where one may see what he thought fit to publish. Having since printed a
Dissertation, wherein he shows that Moses is the Author of the Pentateuch, and
Mr. Witsius's Book having been Reprinted; the latter congratulated Mr. L. C. in
a Preface, upon his not receeding from the common Opinion. Because Mr. Witsius
has behaved himself, on this occasion, with the Moderation and Equity, which a
Divine ought to show toward those, whom he refutes; Mr. L. C. spoke no more of
it. They, who will be allowed to Refute others, must not take it ill, if others
Refute them. As for the rest, wherein he dissents from Mr. Witsius, he leaves
it to the Judgment of those, who shall read their Writings, and will be able to
examine the Reasons on both sides. They are so clear, that whoever is only
concerned for the Truth, may rightly judge of 'em.

There was no need that Mr. Vander Waeyen, who is not at all to be compared
with the Professor of Leyden, for Learning, or Wit, should assault him again,
with mere hard Words, without alleging any Reason, and without having any
regard to what had been written on this Subject. All that can be observed in
his Prefaces to the Books of Stephen Rittangelius, which he has lately
published, wherein he writes against Mr. L. C. and in his Dissertation
concerning the Logos mentioned by St. John, written against the same, which I
shall speak of hereafter, is that he has a vehement desire of Defaming Mr. L.
C. and making him odious to every Body: A desire very contrary to the Spirit of
Christianity, which allows a Man to write against such Opinions as he thinks to
be false, but will have him to spare those, who entertain them. In order to it,
a Man must only make use of Reasons, to Refute the Doctrines, which he believes
to be Erroneous; and must forbear imputing to others such Designs, as they no
where intimate; and lay aside whatever will make 'em odious, and not prove the
falsity of their Opinions. I am sorry that I am obliged to read a Lecture of
Moderation to an old Divine; but he is to blame, for behaving himself as if he
was ignorant of those Principles of Christian Morality. For my part, I don't
apprehend the Reason of Mr. Vander Waeyen's Zeal, or to speak more plainly, of
his excessive Anger against Mr. L. C. who never mentioned him in his Writings,
that I know of, nor had any Quarrel with him. If he has some Opinions, which
that Divine does not approve of, let him Refute them in a civil way, and
without falsifying, or dissembling any thing. Since he exceeds Mr. L. C. in
Reasons, Learning, number of Disciples, Authority, etc. what is he afraid of?
Is he afraid that those, who admire Cocceius, should like Mr. L. C.'s Writings
better than Mr. Vander Waeyen's Doctrine? If he is not afraid of it, why does
he endeavor to stir up the World against a Man, who is not at all to be
feared? It were much better for him to show a greater Moderation; for People
are apt to think that angry Men are destitute of good Reasons; because they,
who know their Strength in this respect, are not wont to be angry with those,
whose Errors they may confound by the force of their Arguments. They are more
apt to laugh at, or pity the Fooleries of those, who oppose Truth, than to be
angry with Opinions, which they know will never prevail, as long as they are
destitute of Reason and Humane Helps. But let us see what Mr. Vander Waeyen
says in particular of the Sentiments, etc.

In his Preface to Rittangelius's Book, entitled Libra veritatis, to show that
he and some others of his Party are not the only Men angry with Mr. L. C.'s
Works, he quotes Mr. Maius and Mr. Etzard, two Lutherans, who are used to
inveigh against all those, who dissent from them, and whom no Body durst
compare in any respect with them, that have asserted the same Opinions which
they write against; I mean Grotius and Erasmu^, who had more Sense, Learning,
Piety and Virtue than all the German Professors together, and whose Writings on
the Bible are admired by every Body. Besides, were I willing to make use of Mr.
Vander Waeyen's Method, I could easily beat him at his own Weapon; for he knows
very well what Censures have been past upon him by some Reformed Divines, with
whom he has had many Quarrels. One Letter of Mr. Spanheim, Professor at Leyden,
would afford me more Matter than I should want. But I need not take that
course, to defend Mr. L. C. who, for the Reasons I have mentioned, when I was
discoursing of Praises and Censures, ought not to trouble himself much with
what some Lutherans think of him. He is of opinion, that one needs only read
their Writings and his, to condemn them, and that there is no necessity for him
to answer 'em. The more they will inveigh against him, and give him hard Words,
the less he will be persuaded to leave off his Studies, to answer their
wretched Books.

Mr. Vander Waeyen cannot say, that I speak so, because I am not well pleased
with them; seeing he himself would not vouchsafe to hear 'em Discourse
concerning the Vbiquity of Christ's Humane Nature, or his corporeal Presence in
the Sacrament. Would he take it well, if I should cite them against him, about
absolute Predestination? He would undoubtedly answer, That their Authority is
of no weight, and he would be in the right. Let him therefore use no Method of
rendering his Neighbors odious, which he would not that others should use
against him.

Mr. Vander Waeyen has, nevertheless, pitched upon two Lutherans, among Mr. L.
C.'s Adversaries, whom he believes upon their Word, adding of his own what he
thinks fit; as if a Man needed only speak to persuade others. Page 3. Diss. de
vocabulo (...).
He says, for instance, That some of the Letters, of which the Sentiments, etc.
are made up, bear the name of one De Verse; but it is altogether false. There
is not one, that bears any Name, and the Author of the Treatise concerning the
Inspiration, etc. (who is not Mr. Aubert de Verse, as I have already said) is
denoted by the Letter N. which has no Relation with his Name. Ead. page
Neither is it true that Mr. L. C. owns himself to be the Author of that
Treatise, though he scruples not to say, That he is the Author of the Letters, in
which it is inserted. Some few Lines after, he falsely accuses Mr. L. C. of
having said that the Pentateuch was possibly compiled by a Priest of Bethlehem:
whereas he said Bethel, not Bethlehem. Mr. Vander Waeyen adds, as it were by a
Parenthesis, that that Priest was certainly an Idolater, as if he knew it by a
Revelation; and without intimating that the Author of that Conjecture was
persuaded of the contrary, as he plainly says in the beginning of the VII.
Letter of his Defense of the Sentiments, p. 167. Lastly, he says, That Mr. L.
C. did not scruple to affirm that the Works, which go under the name of Moses,
and other inspired Authors, were written by that Priest. But there are two
Falsifications in those Words. It is not true that Mr. L. C. ascribed any thing
to that Priest, besides the care of collecting the Writings of Moses, and some
more ancient Histories, of which the Pentateuch is made up; and it is also
false that he said that those Books were written, Scripta esse, by that Man, as
if he had been the Author of 'em: He only said that he was possibly the
Compiler of the Pentateuch.

Thus the Reader may see, how faithfully Mr. Vander Waeyen relates Mr. L. C.'s
Conjecture about the Compiler of the Pentateuch, that he may brand it with the
Name of Impiety and Profaneness; without intimating any where that the Author
of the Sentiments, etc. said over and over again, when he published that
Conjecture, that the Pentateuch contains nothing but what was approved of by
the Priests of Jerusalem, and all the Jews who worshipped the true God. It Is an
easy thing to represent a harmless Conjecture as an impious and profane
Opinion, by suppressing part of it at pleasure. Mr. Vander Waeyen should know
that Mr. L. C. is not fond of that Conjecture, as I have already said, and as
it appears by his Latin Dissertation concerning Moses being the Author of the
Pentateuch. Equity required that he should say something of it, in imitation of
Mr. Witsius, of whom he should have learned that every Body, and especially a
Divine, ought to be a Lover of Sincerity. That Professor of Leyden has been
generally praised, upon that account; but the Professor of Franeker is not like
to increase his Reputation, by taking a contrary course.

If he could be cured of his Prejudices, and judge without Anger of the
Opinions of a Man, whom he has offended, though he never was injured by him; one
should only Appeal from himself to himself, and desire him to read again the
Books, against which he has so much exclaimed. He would then easily perceive
that he has transgressed the Laws of Charity and Justice after a strange
manner, and is bound to beg God's Pardon for it: I heartily pray God that he
would forgive him. He would also learn to forbear writing Romances about other
Men, as he has done in the very beginning of his Dissertation; not considering
that being evidently convinced of gross Fictions concerning the Opinions he
ascribes to Mr. L. C. few People would believe him upon his Word.

Of the Bibliotheque Universelle.
To return to Mr. L. C.'s Works, he undertook in 1686. to write a Journal, in
imitation of those, which were published in several parts of Europe. He
entitled it, as every Body knows, Bibliotheque Vniverselle, and endeavored to
do chiefly Two Things, which are wanting in other Journals. The one is, to give
larger and more exact Extracts of considerable Books, than were to be found in
other Journals. And Secondly, to insert into it several Pieces of his own, such
as are a Project of the Fabulous History, in the I. Vol. an Explication of the
Fable of Adonis, in the III; and of the Fable of Ceres, in the VI; an Essay
concerning the Poetry of the Hebrews, in the IX; the Life of Eusebius Bishop of
Caesarea, in the X; the Lives of St. Cyprian and Prudentius, in the XII, and
the Life of. St. Gregory Nazianzen, in the XVIII; the Memoirs concerning the
History of Jansenism, in the XIV, etc.

He wrote the VIII first Volumes, together with Mr. de la Crose, who followed
his Advices till the VIII. But in the IX, he undertook to give his Judgment
concerning some Books, and Mr. L. C. approved not of his Extracts; so that he
was obliged to distinguish his own Extracts from those of Mr. de la Crose, that
he might not, be answerable for them. Mr. de la Crose put also his and Mr. L.
C.'s Name to the IV Volume, without his Knowledge, and against his Will; for he
always designed that his Journal should be Anonymous, as the Leipsick and the
Paris Journals. But his Name having been published in one of the Volumes, he
was obliged to publish it in the following. Afterward Mr. L. C. wrote the X
Volume alone, and Mr. de la Crose the XI. as may be seen by the Prefaces. The
remaining Volumes, to the XIX inclusively, were written by Mr. L. C. excepting
the XIII.

It was necessary to come to these Particulars, not only to show that Mr. L. C.
spends his time better than those, who lose theirs in writing Libels; but
because some Persons have unawares ascribed to him one Volume, in which he had
no Hand. The first who committed that Fault, is Mr. Meibom, in his Additions to
a Book of Valentinus Henricus Voglerus, entitled, Introductio Vniversalis in
Notitiam cujuscunque generis bonorum Scriptorum, etc. In his Additions to the
29 Page, wherein he speaks of Journals, he complains of the Judgment, which, he
says, Mr. L. C. made of his Collection of Writers of the German History, in the
X Vol. of the Bibliotheque Vniverselle. It Is true that Mr. L. C. is the Author
of that Volume, but there is not one Word in it about Mr. Meibom's Collection,
which he never so much as perused. Mr. Meibom meant the XI Vol. where there is
a long Extract of his Collection; but that Volume having been written by Mr. de
la Crose, as it appears by the Dedicatory Epistle; it was not just to ascribe
it to Mr. L. C. who had no Hand in it. Mr. Meibom has formerly been told of it,
in a civil and obliging manner, in the 2d part of the XXII Vol. of the
Bibliotheque Vniverselle, Art. V. and again lately in the Nouvelles de la
Republiques des Lettres, May 1699. because it does not appear that he has
retracted, and others have of late committed the same Unjustice after him. It Is
his Duty to acknowledge his fault; if he does not do it, one may with reason
believe that he took delight in committing that Injustice, and look upon him as
a Man, who commits such Faults a purpose, and the Public may be acquainted
with it upon occasion. Had he only ascribed that Volume to Mr. L. C. without
complaining of him; one might think it is a slip of Memory, and overlook it:
But Mr. L. C. cannot be silent about it, because Mr. Meibom complains of him,
though he has no ground for it.

Next to Mr. Meibom, the Journalists of Leipsick have committed the same fault,
at the end of their Acta, etc. June 1691. Mr. Juncker has also translated the
Fault in his Treatise of Journals, published at Leipsick, about the same time.
And here I cannot but take notice of a thing, which the Journalists of Leipsick
affect to do, with respect to Mr. L. C. and several others. If an angry Author
uses any injurious or disobliging Words against him, they never fail to observe
it; as if the design of a Journal was to preserve the Memory of injurious
Words, which those, who have used them, are often ashamed of. However, if those
Gentlemen intend thereby to cry down Books full of injurious Words, and create
a dislike of 'em, they do well to take notice of such Passages. But if they do
it, because they are well pleased with them, or think they are essential to the
Subject, or because they are moved with the same Passion; they can never be too
much blamed for it. They may, when they please, inform the Public about it;
lest they should give occasion to entertain an ill Opinion of 'em.

Dr. Cave, Canon of if Windsor, was without doubt very well pleased with a
Passage of Mr. Meibom against Mr. L. C. since he has lately inserted it in his
Dissertation concerning Eusebius, supposing that Mr. L. C. had censured the
Collection of the Authors Rerum Germanicarum, in the X Vol. of his
Bibliotheque. Herein Dr. Cave has committed two Faults; one of which consists
in approving of Mr. Meibom's Injustice; and the other, in designing to wrong
Mr. L. C.'s Reputation, by publishing a Passage of that Author; who, if he is
an honest Man, will make him Satisfaction very soon, in the Journal of
Leipsick, or somewhere else.

Another Author has committed the same Fault: I mean the Author of the Remarks
on the Confession of Sancy, which have been lately printed at Amsterdam. One
may see those Remarks on the II Chapter. It cannot be said that all the of
Volumes the Bibliotheque wore ascribed to Mr. L. C. because Mr. de la Crose was
not so well known as he; since the Name of the latter is to be seen in all the
Volumes in which he had a Hand (except in the Three First, which are Anonymous)
and at the end of the Dedicatory Epistle of the XI Volume in question. He, that
will censure any one, must take care not to mistake one Man for another, lest
the Innocent should suffer for the Guilty.

Among those, who have injustly complained of the Bibliotheque, I must also
reckon Mr. Poiret a Follower of Antoinette Bourignon; who being exasperated
with a little Jest In the V. Vol. of the Biblioth.
upon his Divine O Economy, did very much inveigh against Mr. L.C. not only in
an opposite Extract, which he caused to be inserted in the Republique des
Lettres in 1687. but also some Years after, in along Letter, full of Bitterness
and Malice, which he published in 1692. at the end of his Book de Eruditione
Solida, etc. without giving notice of it to the Bookseller, who was very sorry,
for it. Mr. L. C. did not think himself obliged to answer it, because Mr. Poiret
is so well known to be a Chimerical Man, that what he says of any one, can do
him no wrong. The only thing that Mr. L. C. might be blamed for, on this
occasion, is to have been contented with a slight Jest upon a Book, which
deserved a very sharp Censure; because it ridicules Religion, from the
beginning to the end, by changing it into a mere Fanaticism. Mr. Poiret fancies
that all the Fooleries of Mystical Men, and all the Chimeras he is pleased to
add to them, must pass for Oracles; whereas he should be ashamed to make it his
Business to seduce the Simple with his ridiculous spiritual Notions. None is
imposed upon by the Fanatical Outside of Mystical Men, but those, that are
disposed to deceive themselves, and to mistake Chimeras for Religion, instead
of Morality and good Works, which are grounded on the hope of another Life,
which the Gospel teaches us. As for those, who know how necessary it is to love
one's Neighbor, they will not be imposed upon by Mr. Poiret's Extatical
Devotion, which is not inconsistent with the greatest Malice. His taking care
to make an Apology for St. Augustine, is a great Instance of his want of
Sincerity: For, though he is far from being of that Father's Opinion concerning
absolute Predestination and irresistible Grace, yet he will justify him, to
make Mr. L. C. odious, if he can. Such is again the Sense he puts upon St.
Augustin's Epistle to Vincentius: He maintains that St. Augustine did not say in
that Letter that it is lawful to Persecute; as if no Body could read the Works
of that Father but he. If Mr. Poiret does not care for Critical Learning, which
he seems to despise, he should not meddle with what he understands not. He Will
judge this is too hard a Censure, but he justly deserves it, and he must not
think that Mr. L. C. will enter into the Lists with him. He has a mind to pick
Quarrels, to make, if it were possible, some noise in the World, and so put
People upon buying his Books, which no Body reads. But Mr. L. C. will not give
him occasion to write many Books. If any Body has any time to lose, let him
read Mr. Poiret's Letter, and compare it with Mr. L. C.'s Opinions; for he is
resolved to make no other Reply to Mr. Poiret.

Of Mr. L.C.'s Philosophical Works.
WHILST Mr. L. C. was writing his Bibliotheque, he translated into Latin the
last Books of Thomas Stanley's Philosophical History, which contain the History
of the Eastern Philosophy, whereof he had published an Extract in the VII Vol.
of the Bibliotheque, which pleased several People. That Book was printed in
1690.

Mr. L. C. having left off the laborious Work of the Bibliotheque Vniverselle,
applied himself to his Commentary on the Pentateuch, as I shall say hereafter;
and in the mean time published his Logic, his Ontology, and his Pneumatology,
which were reprinted in 1697. He dedicated his Logic to the late Mr. Boil;
but the Person, who was to present him with a Copy, could not do it, because
Mr. Boil died in the mean time. This is the reason why Mr. L. C. in his second
Edition, dedicated it to Mr. Lock, to whom he had also dedicated his Ontology
and Pneumatology. The second Edition is incomparably better than the first;
especially for the Style, which the Author has very much corrected. There is at
the end of his Logic a Dissertation de Argumento Theologico ex Invidia ducto,
which angry and passionate Divines should read over and over, to make 'em leave
off the Custom of using base and shameful Artifices, to make those odious, who
will not blindly submit to their Decisions.

To complete his Course of Philosophy, he wrote, shortly after, a Natural
Philosophy, which he published in 1695. and was reprinted two Years after, in
two Vol. in Octavo. So that all his Philosophical Works are contained in four
Vol.

Whilst I am on this Subject, it will not be an unseasonable Digression, if I
undertake to justify Mr. L. C.'s Method of proving the Immortality of the Soul.
Being of Opinion that its Essence is unknown to us, he thinks that its
Immortality cannot be proved by any Arguments taken from its Nature, and that
we must use such Proofs as the Divine Goodness affords us, which has created
Men, to make 'em eternally happy. Some think that the Certainty of the
Immortality of the Soul is thereby lessened; as if weak Arguments were to pass
for good Reasons, because we are concerned in them; and as if we had but
doubtful Proofs of the Divine Goodness. Had we no other Proofs of it, but those
which the Revelation afford us, methinks they were sufficient to satisfy them,
that are convinced of the Truth of the Revelation. A Learned Bishop in England
Mr. Locke's Reply to the Bishop of Worcester's Answer to his Second Letter, p.
418. and seq.
having objected to a Gentleman of great Parts, that he lessened the Certainty
of the Proofs, which persuade us that the Soul is immortal, by saying that its
Immateriality cannot be demonstrated; he returned him an Answer, which I shall
make use of against those, who have censured Mr. L.C.'s Pneumatology. This your
Accusation, says Mr. Lock, of my lessening the credibility of the Immortality
of the Soul, and the Resurrection of the Body, is founded on this, That the
Immateriality of the Soul cannot he demonstrated from natural Reason. Which
Argument of your Lordship's bottoms on this, That Divine Revelation abates of
its credibility in all those Articles it proposes proportionably as Humane
Reason fails to support the Testimony of God. -- Does God promise any thing to
Mankind to be believed? It is very fit and credible to be believed, if Reason
can demonstrate it to be true. But if Humane Reason comes short in the Case,
and cannot make it out, its credibility is thereby lessened: Which is in effect
to say, That the Veracity of God is not a firm and sure Foundation of Faith to
rely upon, without the concurrent Testimony of Reason, i. e. with reverence be
it spoken, God is not to be believed on his own Word, unless what he reveals be
in it self credible, and might be believed without him. -- What I have above
observed, is so visibly contained in your Lordship's Argument, that when I met
with it in your Answer to my first Letter, it seemed so strange from a Man of
your Lordship's Character, and in a Dispute in Defense of the Doctrine of the
Trinity, that I could hardly persuade my self, but it was a Slip of your Pen.

Your Lordship says, You do not question whether God can give Immortality to a
material Substance; but you say it takes off very much from the evidence of
Immortality, if it depends only upon God's giving that which of its own nature
it is not capable of.

To which I reply, any one's not being able to demonstrate the Soul to be
Immaterial takes off not very much, nor at all from the evidence of its
Immortality, if God has revealed that it shall be Immortal; because the
Veracity of God is a Demonstration of the Truth of what he has revealed, and
the want of another Demonstration of a Proposition, that is demonstratively
true, takes not off from the Evidence of it. For where there is a clear
Demonstration, there is as much Evidence as any Truth can have, that is not
self-evident. -- The whole of your Lordship's Discourse here, is to prove, That
the Soul cannot be Material because then the Evidence of its being Immortal
would be very much lessened. Which is to say, That it is not as credible upon
Divine Revelation, that a Material Substance should be Immortal, as an
Immaterial; or, which is all one, That God is not equally to be believed, when
he declares that a Material Substance shall be Immortal, as when he declares
that an Immaterial shall be so, because the Immortality of a Material Substance
cannot be demonstrated from Natural Reason.

Let us try this Rule of your Lordship's a little farther. God has revealed,
That the Bodies Men shall have after the Resurrection, as well as their Souls,
shall live to Eternity. Does your Lordship believe the eternal Life of the one
of these, more than of the other, because you think you can prove it of one of
them by natural Reason, and of the other not? Or can any one, who admits of
Divine Revelation in the Case, doubt of one of them more than the other? Or
think this Proposition less credible, the Bodies of Men after the Resurrection,
shall live for ever; than this, That the Souls of Men shall, after the
Resurrection, live for ever? For that he must do, if be thinks either of them
is less credible than the other. If this be so, Reason is to be consulted, how
far God is to be believed, and the credit of Divine Testimony, must receive its
force from the Evidence of Reason: which is evidently to take away the
Credibility of Divine Revelation, in all Supernatural Truths, wherein the
Evidence of Reason fails.

Those, who have found Fault with what Mr. L. C. said concerning the
Immortality of them Soul, need only consider those judicious Remarks, to be
convinced that their Censures were very ill grounded. But to return to Mr. L.
C.'s Philosophical Works; those, who read 'em, may easily perceive, That
besides the general Design of that sort of Books, the Author endeavors to make
the Study of Philosophy profitable, by applying its Principles to the most
sublime Doctrins of Theology; as far as they have a Connection one with another.
He shows, in a thousand places, the Origin of several Errors of
School Divinity, which sprung from a false Philosophy; and sometimes vice
versa, the Errors, which a false Theology introduced into Philosophy; for those
two Sciences have often corrupted one another. Elsewhere he lays down a sure
Foundation, to convince one's self of the Truth of the Christian Religion. He
proves, in his Pneumatology, the Existence of a God, and all his Attributes, as
much as it can be done by the mere Light of Reason. Whereby one may observe
what are the Foundations of Natural Religion, on which the Christian is built.

Mr. L. C. expersses, in his Philosophical Works, a great Esteem for Descartos,
whose general Principles he follows; but he often departs from his particular
Conjectures, which he confutes with Reasons and Experiments. He often declares,
in his Pneumatology and Natural, Philosophy, that he proposes only some
Conjectures, which might prove false, and he frequently says that a Man must
suspend his Judgment. He carefully distinguishes every where what is
demonstrable, from that which is uncertain. Those, who have a great respect for
Truth in general, and love a Philosophical Sincerity, are obliged to use such a
Method; and they, that are so disposed, are better convinced than others, of
the narrowness of their Knowledge, think more modestly of themselves, and can
more easily bear to be contradicted. On the contrary, those, who distinguish
not what is doubtful from what is certain, fancy they know much more than they
do; and being proud of their pretended Knowledge, they maintain, with the same
assurance, the most uncertain Things, and those which they are most sure of.
From thence arise a great many hot Disputes about Things, which no body knows,
and wherein they are perhaps mistaken on both sides: From thence also arise all
the Evils, which attend long Disputes. Those, who are used to distinguish their
Conjectures from what they are able to prove, may more easily attain to a solid
and certain knowledge of Truth, than those who believe they know what they know
not, and so give over the search of that which they think they have already
found. They substitute an imaginary Knowledge in the room of a real one, and so
rest satisfied with Phantoms, instead of real Things; and as they boldly take
up Things, that have but a slight probability; so they are afraid, on the
contrary, to be deceived by Demonstrations, and shun them as carefully as they
ought to shun Falsehood. But those, who believe not that they know what they
know not, and are not conceited of their own Merits, will be ready to embrace
Truth, which way soever it comes.

That, which I most wonder at, is, That some Men are so Conceited, that they
speak, as if they were persuaded that Truth depends not so much on Things
themselves, as on the manner of defending it. One would think they believe,
That if they stoutly maintain an Opinion, it acquires thereby a greater degree
of certainty, and at last happens to be true. Should we grant, say they, That
such a Thing is true, we must then give up our Principles. It Is therefore
better to argue against it, without troubling our Selves whether it be true or
not, and never to give ground; like the Man, who being no longer able to reply
to what was objected against his Opinion, cried out with great Anger: If what I
say be not true, it should be true.

Of Morery's Dictionary.
BUT to return to Mr. L. C.'s Studies; at the very same time that his
Philosophical Works were Composed, Printed for the first time, and Reprinted,
he was taken up with the tedious Revision of a Book, which gave him a great
deal of trouble. Some Booksellers of Holland having a mind to Print Morery's
Dictionary, proposed to him in 1689. to Revise it; which he undertook to do,
supposing, That because that Dictionary had been Printed five times in France,
it wanted but few Corrections: But having gone about that Work, he soon
perceived that he had had a better Opinion of Mr. Morery than he deserved. He
perceived too late that the Revision of that Dictionary would be a laborious
Work, of no great Honor, and less Profit: But he was obliged to go through, when
he had begun. One may see what he said about it, in the XIV. Vol. of the
Bibliotheque Vniverselle, and in the Preface before the Holland Editions. He
has, in three several Revisions, corrected a prodigious number of Faults,
especially in the Articles, which concern ancient History; and after a frequent
Perusing, and a long Examination, he found that Mr. Morery was a Man of so
little Learning and Exactness, that one cannot rely on any thing that he says.
He, that would thoroughly examine his Dictionary, should have almost all the
Books, which he made use of; and it would take up as much time as would be
sufficient to make a New one. So that Mr. L. C. was forced to pass over a great
many Things, for want of Books and Time. Besides, to speak the Truth, there are
a great many Articles in that Dictionary, which deserve not to be corrected by
a Man, who can spend his Time better. Of what use would it be to make a
laborious Enquiry concerning so many wretched Authors, whom Morery mentions?
He, that began that Work, should have been Exact, since he undertook it.
Nevertheless, there has been Three Editions of that Dictionary in Holland, from
the Year 1690. to the Year School. and about Seven Thousand Copies have been
Sold: Perhaps so large a Book did never Sell so well before. Indeed, it is
necessary to a great many People, who cannot have Libraries, nor read the
Original Authors, and are contented with a general Knowledge of Things. The
last Edition of Holland is much more Exact than the other, but it is not true,
That the Public can now rely upon it, as the Booksellers have inserted in the
Advertisement of this VIII. Edition, without Mr. L. C's. Knowledge. It Is true,
That it is more accurate than the former; but he, that will know something
exactly, must necessarily have recourse to the Original Authors. I hear (in
1699.) that there is a new Edition of it coming out at Paris, and I doubt not
but that they have corrected several Faults in the Articles, which concern the
Modern Authors; because they have at Paris all the Books necessary for it, the
Tenth Part of which cannot be had in Holland, because those Books Sell not very
well there.

Of Mr. L. C.'s Commentary on the Pentateuch.
Mr. L. C. having applied himself chiefly to the Study of the Holy Scripture,
designed a great while ago to write a Commentary on the Old Testament; but
being not Master of his Time, and Studies, he could not do it, before he left
off writing the Bibliotheque Vniverselle. To give a Specimen of his Design, he
published in 1690. in one Sheet in Quarto the Prophet Obadiah, translated by
him, with a Paraphrase and a Critical Commentary. He imparted that Specimen to
his Friends, and sent it every where, to know what the Public thought of such
an Undertaking; and having their Approbation, he willingly undertook that Work,
which, though very great and laborious, did not frighten him, because he always
took great delight in that Study. Besides, he was persuaded, that, If he should
succeed in his Design, it would prove very useful to the Public.

He published therefore his Commentary on Genesis, in 1693. with a Paraphrase,
and Critical Notes, as he had done the Prophet Obadiah. And because he designed
his Book for the use of all those, who apply themselves to the Study of the
Holy Scripture, of what Sect or Party soever they be; he abstained from all
manner of Controversy, and enquired only into the Literal Sense, without
drawing any Theological Consequences from it, which might offend any Christian
Society. He searched Truth as impartially as if he had been the first, who
undertook such a Work. He agrees, in most Things, with the most Learned
Interpreters; but he thinks he has made many new Discoveries, concerning Things
themselves, and the manner of proving Things themselves, and the manner of
proving them. That Commentary was very acceptable to the Public, as it
appeared, in that not only it Sold well, but was likewise approved of by many
Learned Men.

But because there are always some Men, who being not able to Compose any Thing
of their own, think notwithstanding that they are good Judges of other Men's
Works; the Envy and Malice of some Divines soon broke out against him. Had he
made a pitiful Rapsody out of the several Interpreters, who wrote before him,
they would perhaps have approved, or said nothing of him. But whoever
endeavors to teach 'em something new, and do better than others, cannot fail
to undergo their Censure. A Divine of that Temper took care to Incense against
him Dr. Kidder, Bishop of Bath and Wells, who published some English Notes on
the Pentateuch, in the Year 1694. That Learned Man, being deceived by a Person,
whom he did not mistrust, spoke somewhat unkindly of Mr. L. C. because he
believed that some Places of the Pentateuch were not written by Moses; tho
Monsieur Huet, and Mr. Witsius, and several others scrupled not to acknowledge
the like Additions, which indeed are manifest. But Mr. L. C. having complained
to the Bishop in a Letter, he received a more obliging Answer from him, as he
has already said in his Preface before Exodus. He perceived by that Answer that
some Men, who have Reason to speak well of him, and dislike not his Opinions,
had given that Prelate an ill Character of him.

Mr. Edzard Professor of Philosophy at Wittemberg, an University from which no
good can be expected, whilst the Spirit of Calovius reigns in it, wrote a very
sharp Dissertation against Mr. L. C.'s Explication of the Prophecy concerning
the Schilo, which he published without being positive in it, because it is an
obscure Passage.

But the German Doctor, to whom every thing seems to be easy, made a confused
Collection of most trivial things, and reviling Words, which are peculiar to
himself; without caring to reason well, or understand the Author, whom he
critizes on purpose to make him odious, as if he should favor the Jews. He
fancies that by bawling like a Porter against Mr. L. C. he will make People
believe that White is Black, and that by often saying that what is obscure is
clear, it will be so in effect. Let any one read Mr. L. C.'s Explication of the
Schilo, and compare it with the Book of that Lutheran Doctor, and then give his
Judgment upon the matter. Mr. L. C. is not afraid that the Arguments of Mr.
Edzard, and the blind Zeal by which he is acted, should do him any Prejudice;
and he will not leave off his Studies to answer him. Otherwise all the Students
of the Universities of Germany would enter into the Lists with him, after they
have transcribed a pitiful common Place, or a wretched Commentary, and set it
off with reviling Words. If those, who despise Grotius, and admire Calovius, do
not like Mr. L. C.'s Works; he has no more reason to wonder at it than they
have, when they see that he praises Grotius in his Writings, and never
expresses any esteem for Calovius and his Imitators. Qui Bavium non odit, amet
tua carmina Maevi. It was necessary that the German Students should be informed
of this, lest they should think that it is in their Power to disturb, when they
please, Mr. L. C.'s rest with their Libels, and to get some Reputation by
putting him upon answering them.

Mr. Vander Waeyen had likewise a mind to signalize himself, by writing against
Mr. L. C.'s Commentary on Genesis, in some Theological Disputes held in the
University of Franeker. But Mr. L. C. would not answer that Divine, because his
way of Disputing showed that he had no love for Truth. For Instance, he wondered
that Mr. L. C. should say, That the three Men, mentioned Genesis xviii. who
appeared to Abraham, were three Angels; though Mr. L. C. followed therein St.
Augustin's Opinion, whom he quoted in his Note on that Chapter of Genesis. Nay,
he charges Mr. L. C. with want of Sincerity; which is a very absurd Accusation,
and unbecoming an honest Man. For none can be suspected of want of Sincerity,
but they who maintain a ridiculous Opinion, especially when they get something
by it: Whereas in this case no other Opinion can reasonably be maintained; and
Mr. Vander Waeyen knew very well that Mr. L. C. did not do this to Court any
Body.

Mr. Vander Waeyen falls upon him again, in his Dissertation concerning the
Logos, and in the very beginning finds fault with some Passages of Mr. L. C.'s
Commentary on the other Books of Moses. But because he does it only by the by,
and to render him odious; the best answer Mr. L. C. can make, is, to desire the
Reader to read attentively those Passages in the Original, if he designs to be
a Judge between Mr. Vander Waeyen and Mr. L. C. A just and judicious Reader
will easily see which of 'em is in the wrong.

Mr. Vander Waeyen here and elsewhere charges Mr. L. C. with favoring the
Socinians, whom he no more thought on, when he wrote his Commentary, than if
there had never been any such Men in the World. If the Socinians speak truth in
some things, and another Man does the same after them, is it a Crime, and does
it follow from thence that such a Man believes, in all Respects, as they do?
What would Mr. Vander Waeyen say, if he knew that Mr. L. C. has been very
little conversant with the Writings of the Socinians, that he seldom consults
them; and never read any thing of 'em concerning Types; which is the thing
wherein he accuses him of favoring the Socinians? He could not at least charge
him with imitating them. But it is now the constant Practice of some Protestant
Divines to call Socinianism all the Opinions they have a mind to traduce; as in
Spain and Italy they call Calvinism or Lutheranism the Opinions, with which
they charge those, whom they hate. This is Argumentum Theologicum ex invidia
ductum, to give an odious Name to a thing, that it may be Condemned without any
Examination. Mr. L. C. is no Socinian; but he is not bound to make a Confession
of his Faith, as often as some Divines will be pleased to give him hard Words,
and pick a Quarrel with him about things of no moment, as Mr. Vander Waeyen has
done.

Of his Notes on the beginning of St. John's Gospel.
WHILST Mr. L. C.'s Commentary on the four last Books of Moses was a Printing,
in the beginning of the Year 1695. he had See the Preface of the Edit. in 8.
occasion to publish his Thoughts concerning the beginning of St. John's
Gospel; and he did it so much the more willingly, because some ill Men were
pleased to confound Mr. Clark, an English Man, who favored the Socinians; some
of whom wrote in English concerning St. John's Gospel, so as to make one
believe that they doubted of its Authority. This Mr. Clark published, a Book
entitled Anti-Nicaenismus, in 1694. and died soon after. If to what I have
said you add the Preface of the Notes on the beginning of St. John's Gospel,
you may know why Mr. L. C. published that little Book at that time.

Mr. Benoit a Minister at Delft thought sit to write against it, in a
Dissertation printed at Rotterdam in 1696. Mr. L. C. did not answer it, and
will not do it for the same Reason, which hindered him from answering several
others; viz. because he believed that the Reader was able to judge of that
Dispute, by comparing those two Books, without the help of a Reply. I don't
know whether Mr. Benoit took it ill; for he desired that his Book should make a
noise in the World. However he thought fit to reflect upon Mr. L. C. a great
while after, in the Libels he wrote against Mr. Jaquelot and Mr. Le Vassor,
though Mr. L. C. was not concerned in that Quarrel. Mr. Benoit was in hopes that
Mr. L. C. would presently take up the Cudgel, and that his Book, which no Body
would buy, would by that means sell the better. But he was mistaken, and Mr. L.
C. was as little moved with his Libels as he was with his Dissertation, and
would make no Reply out of Prudence, and Contempt for such Disputes. The first
Reason he had for it, is that it is needless to write Books, in order to explain
what every Body understands. It Is true that Mr. Benoit speaks, as if he
understood it not; but let him read again the Passage he wrote against, and
then he may answer himself. Mr. L. C.'s second Reason for not answering him is,
that the Indignation which most French Refugees have expressed against his
Libels, and the Satisfaction he has been obliged to make, after he had
endeavored to stir up the People against two of his Brethren, have so humbled
him, that there is no need any Body else should do it. Instead of writing
against those, who don't meddle with him, he should answer the Complaints of
several of his Countrymen, who openly charge him with want of Sincerity in his
History, which many People look upon as a Book fitter to Defame than Honor the
Party. His crying down People as Heretics will not put an end to their
Complaints: On the contrary, he will perhaps force some great Persons to
publish what they heard him say some Years ago: They remember very well that he
professed himself at that time to be a moderate Man.

The next Year 1697. Mr. Vander Waeyen published his Dissertation concerning
the Logos, which I have already mentioned, and that it might sell the better,
added to it a Book of Stephen Rittangelius, who had been a Jew, and turned
Christian; wherein he endeavors to prove, that the Chaldee Paraphrasts meant
by the Word of God the same thing that St. John did. For my part, I don't
believe it, and in my Opinion Rittangelius has very ill confuted his Adversary;
but this is not the Question in hand. Mr. Vander Waeyen being not contented to
confute Mr. L. C. omits nothing to make him odious. He had a great while before
acquainted the World that he was about a Dissertation, wherein he would prove
that Mr. L. C. had not faithfully cited Philo. Mr. Van Limborch, Mr. L. C.'s
Colleague, hearing of it, undertook to compare all the Passages of Philo quoted
by Mr. L. C. in his Notes on the beginning of St. John's Gospel; and finding
that he had truly cited them, he told some Body of it, who acquainted Mr.
Vander Waeyen with it. Whereupon Mr. Vander Waeyen inveighed so furiously
against him, as to accuse him of a base Calumny. Mr. L. C. was at that time so,
busy about a Book, which is lately come out, and of which I shall speak
hereafter, that he could not answer Mr. Vander Waeyen; but Mr. Van Limborch did
it with great moderation, and so as to stop the mouth of any other Man but him.
A Cocceian Divine, who, for several Years, has been used to Quarrel, does not
easily blush, though he be clearly convinced; or at least his inward Shame is not
to be seen in his Writings. But there is one thing in them, which is very
visible, viz. a great Confusion, whereby it plainly appears that he knows not
what he says, though he makes as great a bustle as he can. This one may observe
in Mr. Vander Waeyen's Reply, entitled, Responsionis Limborgianae Discussio,
which, from the beginning to the end, is an exact Picture of an Angry Man. As
for the matter of it, it is a confused heap of usesless Quotations, and pitiful
Arguments, without any Connection, and Order, and sometimes the Reader is at a
loss to find any sense in it. His Dissertation concerning the Logos is no
better; but because he took a little more time to compose it, he seems to be
more sedate, whereas he is quite out of his Senses in the other. When a Man
takes such a course, the Dispute is at an end; for to what purpose should any
one answer him? Were he convinced of Calumny a hundred times one after another,
he would go on still, without minding what the Public will think of it. For
Instance, Mr. Vander Waeyen having accused Mr. Van Limborch of want of
Sincerity, and having been convinced of it himself, as clearly as that two and
two make four, says notwithstanding with his wonted Boldness, Discus. p. 48.
that the Remostrants show a greater moderation to I know not whom, than to the
Reformed; as if the Books of the former were not full of Protestations, whereby
it appears that they are ready to live in the same Communion with the Reformed,
provided their Opinions be tolerated. But whilst they require from the
Remonstrants that they suppress or renounce their Opinions, when at the same
time they canonize and preach up such Doctrines as the Remonstrants believe to
be erroneous; how can the latter reunite themselves with a good Conscience? A
reunion, whereby a Man suppresses what he thinks to be true, to give place to
what he believes to be false, (if there was nothing else,) is unworthy of a
pious Man; and there is not one honest Man, among the Reformed, who would
approve of such a Reunion with the Lutherans. Mr. Vander Waeyen cannot be
ignorant of the Sentiments of the Remonstrants on this Matter, since they are
known even to Children in the United Provinces. What signifies it to dispute
with a Man, who is positive and confident about the most uncertain things, and
scruples not to deny what is as clear as Noonday? Besides the Public is not
at all concerned in personal Disputes, and will not read Books that contain
nothing else.

Mr. L. C. should therefore lose his time, if he took the Pains to confute the
Calumnies and injurious Words of that Professor of Franeker; especially if it
be considered that he has expressed in his Works a greater respect for Divine
Revelation in general, and the Christian Religion in particular, than his
Adversary. It Is in vain for Mr. Vander Wacyen to call Impious and Profane,
some Passages of the Treatise concerning the Inspiration of the Sacred Writers.
The Public knows very well that Mr. L. C. does not own himself to be the
Author of that Treatise, and that there is scarce any thing in it but what was
said before by Grotius, whose Works have been so often reprinted, and who is
looked upon as the most excellent Interpeter of the New Testament. Mr. Vander
Waeyen should have written against him, and he would without doubt have done
it, were it not that the mere Name of Grotius will weigh down all the malice of
his Adversaries.

But Mr. L. C. will do well to publish a Latin Book, wherein he will examine some
Questions, which Mr. Vander Waeyen has only entangled: For instance, Whether
Philo took out of Moses what he says concerning the Logos; Whether the
Platonicks meant the Word by it; Whether Plato took out of the Old Testament
that he says concerning the three Principles, etc. He may show by the by that
Mr. Vander Waeyen has but slightly studied that Matter, and that it had been
more for his Honor not to meddle with it. He may also easily prove that he
cited Philo with great Sincerity and Exactness; and that his Adversary shows no
Sincerity in what he says on that point. But the Professor of Franeker must not
be too impatient. He ought to be contented, now that he has fully vented his
Spleen against Mr. L. C.

As for Mr. Van Limborch, he has so perfectly confuted Mr. Vander Waeyen's
Objections, and so well satisfied the Public in that matter, that it would be
needless to do it again after him. The things; which the latter has collected
against the Remonstrants, are so inconsiderable, and confused, and show so much
Anger, that every Body may be sensible of it. Mr. Vander Waeyen's Accusations
are so unjudicious, and he is so well known by reason of his Quarrels and
passionate Carriage toward other Reformed Divines, that he can do them no
prejudice. He has increased the Reputation of those, against whom he wrote, at
the cost of his own. I Will Instance upon Mr. Spanheim: See Frid. Spanbemii Ep.
ad Amicum, Ed. Vltrajecti 1684. page 71. and seq.
Mr. Vander Waeyen was so ridiculous as to teach him how to confound the
Degrees of Longitude and Latitude, and to laugh at him, because he had said
that the New World reaches above 180. Degrees. He could not forbear saying,
with a magisterial Air, That Mr. Spanheim spoke very ignorantly,
ignorantissimegrave;, and that Geographers reckon only 180. Degrees from one
Pole to the other, as if Mr. Spanhiem had meant Degrees of Latitude. Mr. Vander
Waeyen's Dissertation being printed and published, the late Mr. Anselaar, a
Minister at Amsterdam, gave him notice of his Blunder; but it was too late. Mr.
Spanheim and several others had already got some Copies of it; and that Passage
was only mended in those, which remained in the Bookseller's Hands. Mr. Van
Limborch hinted by the by at that gross Mistake, to oblige Mr. Vander Waeyen to
be more modest and reserved in censuring others. Vid. Discus. p. 68.
But he feigns to know nothing of it; whereas he should make a good use of such
a warning, to leave off insulting so proudly those, who are not of his Mind.

We may learn from thence, that Boldness and Confidence in speaking prove not
that a Man is sure of what he says. Mr. Vander Waeyen affords us an instance of
it; for he has committed a childish Fault, at the very same time that he was
insulting and laughing at Mr. Spanheim, without any reason for it. It Is a piece
of Craft, which has been practiced a thousand times; and though the Fallacy lacy
of it has been detected as many times, yet the common People are still deceived
by it, Juvenal. Sat. XIII. v. 109.
And a great boldness in defending a bad Cause, is looked upon by many as a
sign, that a Man trusts the goodness of his Cause:

Nam cum magna malae superest audacia causae,
Creditur a multis fiducia.
Mr. Van Limborch must not trouble himself with what the Professor of Franeker
thinks of his Works. A Man, who is well pleased with precarious Explications of
Prophecies, and fills his Head with so many Chimaeras, cannot but dislike good
and methodical Explications of the Holy Scripture, and such as are grouded on
the clear sense of the Words, and Grammatical Rules. But all those, who are
acquainted with the Principles of the Reformers, and know that, in matters of
Religion, every thing must be proved by the Scripture, literally expounded,
without any mixture of Humane Doctrines, will always set a great value on Mr.
Van Limborch's Books, whatever Allegorical Divines may think of 'em.

However I believe, as well as Mr. Vander Waeyen, that Knowledge shall be
increased among Christians; but it will not be by substituting in the room of
Reason and Critical Rules, the wandering Fancy of those, who expound the Holy
Scripture, as they do the Chiming of Bells. God on the contrary will make use
of Reason and Critical Learning, (which are now cultivated more than ever) to
produce that Change. The Divines of the Church of England are much esteemed,
because they Reason better, and make better use of the Knowledge of Languages,
than others do in many other Countries. It Is true that Mr. Vander Waeyen has no
Kindness for them, because they cannot abide the Cocceian Explications of Holy
Scripture, but approve of those of Grotius, and other like Interpreters. But
how can they help it? They must, as well as so many other Reformed Divines,
patiently bear the misfortune of not pleasing him.

Of the Treatise concerning the Causes of Unbelief.
NEXT to the Commentary on the Pentateuch, Mr. L. C. published his French
Treatise concerning the Causes of Unbelief, wherein he examines the Motives and
general Reasons, which induce Unbelievers to reject the Christian Religion. He
published it in 1696. and promised to translate it into Latin, and to add some
Notes, in confirmation of what he says. He is so persuaded that the better a
Man reasons, the better he may be convinced of the Truth of the Christian
Religion, and the Beauty of its Morality, that he constantly says in that Book
that Men fall into Unbelief for want of reasoning well. Nay, B. 2. Chapter VI. n.
IV.
he affirms that whoever says we must renounce Reason to believe Religion,
betrays it; for as soon as we lay aside the Light of Reason, we can apprehend
nothing in Revelation, and are not able to understand the Proofs it is grounded
upon, which suppose that we can reason. He thinks that those, who have cried
down Reason, designed to deceive the People, and make 'em believe any thing.

But on the other side, Mr. L. C. believes not that we ought to have clear and
complete Ideas of all the Doctrins contained in Revelation, and perfectly
understand whatever it says. He is far from thinking so. He believes, as well
as all those who are not deprived of Common Sense, that there are a great many
Things in God and his Revelation, which we do not at all comprehend, and which
we very imperfectly unlerstand. But such an Obscurity ought not to be
confounded with Contradiction, which cannot consist with Truth. Neither must we
pretend to know more than what has been revealed to us, but must be content
with that, adding nothing to it. There are some Mysteries in Things that
concern God, which we shall never be able to dive into, and which,
nevertheless, we are sure of by Revelation, and sometimes too by Reason, as Mr.
L. C. has shown in his Pneumatology. For Instance, the Apostles speak of the
Messiah, not only as of a Man, but also as they use to speak of God the Father,
and ascribe to him the Creation of the World; whereby it appears that they did
not look on him as a mere Man, but as being so closely united to the Divinity,
that what God did a long time before he was born, may be ascribed to him. But
no Man can define the manner of that Union, and form to himself a clear Idea of
it. What must we do therefore in such a case? We must be content with the
general and confused Idea, which the Scripture gives of that Matter, and not go
about to explain what we understand not, or impose on others the necessity of
believing our private Explications. See P. 2. Chapter VII n. VI.
Reason teaches us that God created the World out of nothing, but no Man can
know the manner of it.

There are a great many other Things, which are true Mysteries, and have been
always acknowledged to be such by Mr. L. C. both in Natural and Revealed
Religion; so that he is far from thinking that there are none at all, as Mr.
Vander Waeyen unjustly lays to his Charge. It Is true that he is no great
Admirer of the Mystical Explications of Prophecies; which the Cocceians give
us; but if it be a Crime, all the other Reformed Divines will be guilty of it.
If any one likes them, let him enjoy the great Knowledge he thinks to have; but
he must not be angry with those, who think they ought rather to meditate the
clear Precepts of the Gospel, and endeavor to imprint the love of them in
themselves and others.

All those, who attentively read that Treatise of Mr. L. C. will perceive not
only that Unbelievers cannot be convinced by any other Reasons, but also that
the Author of it is fully persuaded of the Truth of the Religion he defends,
not out of Credulity or Interest, but by good and clear Reasons, and such as no
reasonable Man can oppose. This is the use he made of his Philosophical and
Theological Studies, as all those, who have read his Works, may observe in a
thousand Places.

Dr. Cave is the only Man, that I know of, who has publicly censured the
Treatise concerning the Causes of Unbelief. He was so bold as to say, in his
Dissertation concerning Eusebius, That Mr. L. C. shows himself to be ill
affected to Christian Divines. If these Words, a Christian Divine, signify in
Dr. Cave's Dictionary, a Vicious Man, who looks upon his Profession as a good
way to enrich himself, to live a voluptuous Life, and domineer over the
Consciences of other Men; it is past doubt that such a Christian Divine is not
acceptable to Mr. L. C. who has sharply censured those Christian Divines, who
dishonor Religion by their scandalous Lives. But if Dr. Cave means by a
Christian Divine, a good Man, who lives according to the Religion of Christ and
his Apostles; it is, a base Calumny in him to say that Mr. L. C. is ill affected
to a such Divines. One may see the VI Chap. of the 2d Part of his Treatise
concerning the Causes of Unbelief, wherein he gives a description of those
Churchmen, who, by reason of their vicious Lives, contribute to confirm
Unbelievers in their Obstinacy. There is not one honest Man, but will say as
much as he; none but Atheists will confound the Vices of Churchmen with the
Maxims of the Christian Religion; and none but Debauchees can desire that Vice
should be tolerated for the sake of a Profession, which they dishonor.

If Mr. L. C. had said that all Churchmen are debauched, and live a scandalous
Life, it were a Calumny; but when he says that there are but too many, who do
so, what does he say but what every Body knows, and which all good Men lament
every where? Those, who complain of the Faults of Clergymen, are really their
Friends, since they endeavor to reclaim them; they are also Friends to
Christianity, and would do it great Service, if their Complaints were able to
produce a happy change in the Lives of Vicious Churchmen. On the contrary,
those, who cannot abide that such Men should be censured, and who omit nothing
to palliate, and consequently to perpetuate their Faults, which the People
imitate or abhor, and which give occasion to Unbelievers to reject the
Christian Religion, those, I say, are truly Enemies to Christian Divines and
Religion, and only Friends to Church-Preferments and Ecclesiastical Authority.

I could easily show that Mr. L. C. has not said the fourth part of what was
said by St. Gregory Nazianzen and Isidorus Pelusiota on this Subject; yet no
Body was ever offended at it. But Dr. Cave will understand better a Latin Book,
wherein Mr. L. C. will make hip sensible how much he is to blame for having
used him as he has done, upon this account.

Mr. L. C. is persuaded that those, who will carefully examine his Treatise
concerning the Causes of Unbelief, will be convinced that the Study of true
Philosophy is of great use, to reclaim Unbelievers, and vindicate Religion from
all the Objections that can be raised against it, provided it be attended with
the Study of the Holy Scripture. Indeed, those, who cannot reason well, nor
expound Scripture according to good Critical Rules, do but expose Religion to
the Raileries of Unbelievers, when they undertake to defend it; and it is their
Fault, if Unbelievers think they have better Reasons than Christian Divines.

Of his Ars Critica.
IN the beginning of the Year 1697. Mr. L.C. published his Ars Critica in 2 Vol.
which was soon after reprinted in England. I shall say nothing of it, because
the Journalists have lately published some Extracts of it; besides it is a Work
well known by reason of its Subject. I shall only observe that it contains a
Specimen of what might be done, if the Study of Philosophy and Divinity was
attended with the Study of Humane Learning. The Philosophical Turn, which the
Author has given to several Things relating to Humane Learning, and the useful
Examples he has quoted out of Sacred and Profane Writers, show the Connection
of those Sciences, and how much they help one another. Mr. L. C. expresses as
much Sincerity and Fairness in this Work, as in all his other Books: He
dissembles no Truth, because, in the Judgment of some, it may be prejudicial.
He believes that Dissimulation in Matters of moment is of a most dangerous
Consequence, and that those, who practice it, have no great love for Truth, and
know not how to defend it. He cannot abide that any one should boast of having
Truth on his side, and fear at the same time that it will be destroyed by
another Truth; as if two True Propositions could be contrary to one another. In
effect, when the Unbelievers perceive that a Truth is concealed, and a Falsehood
substituted in its place; they never fail to exclaim against such a Pious
Fraud, and, so, to bring all the rest into Suspicion: It Is in vain for any one
to say, that, nevertheless, he maintains Truth; for it is plain that such a Man
does not assert it, because he loves and is clearly convinced of it, but out of
an ill Principle; since he maintains a Falsehood, which he thinks to be useful
in the Defense of Truth, with the same Confidence and much greater Heat than he
is used to maintain Truth it self. It is a scandalous Conduct, which shows the
f^ctious Humor of a Man, who only regards what is useful to him, and could
maintain Mahometism in Asia with as great a Zeal as he maintains Christianity
in Europe. Such a Man knows not what Truth and Falsehood are, since he believes
that the one stands in need of the other; and he dishonours Truth, by acting as
if he were afraid it should destroy it self. Such are the Proceedings of some
Ignorant Zealots, who wrangle, as much as they can, about some various Readings
which Mr. L. C. mentions in the 3d Part of his Ars Critica, Sect. III. c. 8.
etc. 14.

A certain English Anonymous Author, who styles himself Master of Arts in the
University of Cambridge, has maliciously censured Mr. L. C.'s Ars Critica, out
of the same Principle. But Mr. L. C. has already confuted him in a Latin
Letter, which has been translated into English, and is printed before his
Additions to Dr. Hammond's Notes on the New Testament. I shall speak no more of
that Libel, because that Letter will be shortly published in Latin.

Mr. Vander Waeyen, who endeavors to find fault with all the Books of Mr. L.
C. has likewise censured some Passages of his Ars Critica. For instance, he
blames Diss. de voc. (...) p. 164. p. 167.
him for having said that the Efficacious and Irresistible Grace taught by St.
Augustine is a Thing, of which we have no Idea, and undertakes to tell us what
it is; but he does it so odly, that what he says confirms Mr. L. C.'s Opinion.
Ille actus, they are Mr. Vander Waeyen's Words, qui conversionis primus est,
totus tantus quantus libere exseritur ab eo qui se convertit; totus ille actus
praestar divina cura, providentia, gratia ut exseratur, adhibitis iis
praedicationis, seu verbi docendi mediis, quae omnes agnoscimus. Totus ille
actus est Dei, est hominis, est mediorum effectus, qualibet earum causarum
operante suo modo and ordine. GRATIA autem dicitur tum Dei, voluntas, cujus
virtute sistitur effectus, qui effectus habet rationem boni citra demeritum
praestiti: Tum effectus ipse, qui multiplex est, etc. First, It is not true,
That when St. Augustine spoke of the inward and irresistible help, which he
thought God bestowed on Men for their Conversion, he meant thereby the effect
of Grace, or Conversion it self. Secondly, I will freely own, That Mr. L. C. is
to blame for saying that the Word Grace is very obscure; if any one, that
understands Philosophy or Divinity, will sincerely affirm that he clearly
apprehends Mr. Vander Waeyen's meaning in the Words, which I have just now
quoted.
For my part I have no Idea of an Action, which irresistibly forces a Man to
Will, and yet leaves him at liberty not to Will.

But our Cocceian Divine accuses Mr. L. C. of acknowledging an irresistible
Grace in that place of his Ars Critica, Part 2. 1. C. 4. n. 11.
wherein he shows what is meant by these Words, to open the Heart. Mr. L. C.
maintains, That there is no Emphasis in them, and that when it is said, Act.
xvi. 14. That the Lord opened the Heart of Lydia, that she attended unto the
Things, that were spoken of Paul, the meaning of it is only, That it came to
pass by God's Providence, that Lydia heard attentively St. Paul, whatever means
God was pleased to use to that end. Because nothing happens in the World,
without the Divine Providence, and we are beholden to God for every Thing; St.
Luke said, That God opened the Heart of Lydia, without any Design of teaching
us thereby, that such a Grace, as St. Augustine speaks of, wrought efficaciously
at that very moment on the Mind of that Woman. One may see what Mr. L. C. said
in that place of his Ars Critica. It Is. plain he spoke there of no irresistible
Grace. Nay, to speak in a strict Sense, the Conversion of Lydia is not
mentioned in that place, but only her attention to what St. Paul said, which
proved afterward the cause of her Conversion. St. Luke says nothing of it,
because he supposes, that to be attentive to the Gospel, and to believe it, are
two Things which commonly go together. Those, who are not strongly prepossess d
against the Gospel, and have no Vices that are inconsistent with it, need only
be attentive, to acknowledge, love and obey it. The Jews themselves used such
an Expression, as Ludovicus Cappellus has observed on Luke xxiv. 45. But the
present Question is not about the Thing it self, but only about what Mr. L. C.
said in his Ars Critica.

Mr. Vander Waeyen maintains, That Mr. L. C. acknowledges in the same Book as
well as he, that the ancient Jews meant by the Word the same thing with the
Christians. Let us see what Grounds Mr. Vander Waeyen has for this Assertion.
Mr. L. C. has a Chapter in his Ars Critica, concerning the Language of Sects,
which often seem to agree, but yet denote quite different Things, though they use
the same Expressions. He gives a remarkable Instance of it, in this
Proposition, There is but One God. The ancient Jews meant by it, That there is
but one Divine Substance in Number, as all Christians understand it now. But
St. Athanasius, and other Consubstantialists, if I may so call 'em, used the
same Words in a quite different Sense; only to denote, That there was but one
Specific Divine Essence, though they acknowledged Three Equal and Coeternal
Substances. This has been proved by many Learned Men of this Age, and amongst
others by Dr. Cudworth, in his Intellectual System, which Mr. Vander Waeyen
commends, and is really a very Learned Work, though it contains a Doctrine very
different from his. This being so; Mr. L. C. says, That by reason of that
Ambiguity of Words, it may be, as Grotius thought, that those who seemed to
agree, were not of the same Opinion, and that by degrees, though they used the
same Words, they put another Signification upon them. He adds, That this might
so much the more easily happen, as to the Question concerning the Unity of God,
because the Christians of the latter Times believed that the Fathers of the
Church were of the same Opinion with the Jews, who acknowledged a Numerical
Unity of the Divine Essence. But as the Consubstantialists entertained a
different Opinion, under the cover of the same Words, which the Jews used, and
they durst not part with: So now our Divines make use of the Terms consecrated
by the Fathers, but they seem to put another Signification upon 'em. Verum uti
Homoousiani sub iisdem verbis, quibus Hebraei utebantur, aliam abscondebant
sententiam, cum non auderent ab iis discedere: Ita nostri hodie Theologi a
Patribus verba quidem consecrata retinent, sed alias iis subjicere potestates
videntur. How does it appear now, That Mr. L. C. grants that the ancient Jews
meant by the Word the same thing that St. John did? Nevertheless, Mr. Vander
Waeyen says so positively, as if no Body but himself could read a Book, whereof
above Two thousand Copies have already been Sold. Who will believe him, when he
cites Books less known, and accuses others of Disingenuity?

Our Cocceian Divine continues to find fault with Mr. L. C. in several places
of his Rapsodies; but there is no need I should lose my time in confuting him.
Let him read a Book of Episcopius, which he wrote, if I mistake not, against a
Professor of a neighboring University, and entitled Vedelius Rapsodus: It
contains very good Advice, which Mr. Vander Waeyen should follow. By what has
been said, one may judge of the remaining part of his Book, and be satisfied
that no Body can rely on what he says, and believe him upon his word. If any
one will take the pains to read his Dissertation, let him look for the Passages
which he writes against, and compare them with his Answers, and then give his
Judgment about it. I should tire the Reader's Patience, and have an ill Opinion
of him, should I show at large how many ill Reasonings, and impertinent
Quotations, and how much Disingenuity there is in those Dissertations. This has
has been clearly made out, in respect of several Points; and those, who know
the long Disputes he has had with other Reformed Divines, are well enough
acquainted with his Genius and manner of Writing.

However, I must say something still about the conclusion of his Dissertation
concerning the Logos. He says, That he has done nothing out of Hatred, or through
any ill Passion. But I cannot apprehend what might be the cause of so many
passionate and angry Expressions, Lies and Calumnies; unless it were Hatred,
and some other like Passion. Certainly these are not the Fruits of Christian
Charity, nor the Effects of any Zeal for Truth, since Zeal for Truth has
nothing to do with Lies and Calumnies.

He adds, That he did not propose to himself, as his chief Aim, to reclaim Mr.
L. C. I believe it; for it is manifest that his chief Aim is to Quarrel, and
give himself up to his prevailing Passion, and then to prejudice Mr. L. C.'s
Reputation by all the means he can think of. It Is in vain for him to deny it;
since God and Men judge of our Words by our Actions, and not of our Actions by
our Words.

However he says, That he very much wishes he might reclaim Mr. L. C. and that
he heartily prays that God would do it. But what would he reclaim Mr. L. C.
from? Would he bring him to the State that he himself is in, and of which he
should make haste to get out, by begging God's Pardon for having had so many
Quarrels with so many honest Men, without any reason for it, and for having
endeavored to blemish their Reputation by his Calumnies?

He upbraids Mr. L. C. with His Prejudices, his manner of Philosophizing, and
rejecting the true Key of Knowledge, the Mystery of the Father and Son. Let the
Public judge who of them two is more blinded with Prejudices, and whose Method
of Philosophizing is more agreeable to Piety and Reason. I don't know what he
means by the Mystery of the Father and Son, but I guess he understands by it
Cocceius's new Method of explaining the Covenant of Grace, which Mr. L. C. does
not believe, no more than the other Reformed Divines. He is very willing to
leave that Key of Knowledge to Mr. Vander Waeyen, and those who like it. Other
Christians believe, that it is a proper Instrument to bar Men from the true
Knowledge of Holy Scripture, and Mr. L. C. is of that Opinion. But if they mean
by it the Divinity of the Son, his Distinction from the Father, and the
Redemption of Mankind; Mr. L. C. is better convinced of 'em than the most
zealous Cocceians; but he cannot abide that any one should add to those
Doctrines any thing that is not contained in Scripture.

Our Professor of Franeker seems to be angry, because Mr. L. C.'s Writings are
esteemed; and he says, that the reason why they are valued, is, Because they
favor Profane Men, that is to say, those who laugh at Cocceianism; for
whoever despises it, can expect no Quarter from Mr. Vander Waeyen, as being a
profane, and an impious Man, etc. Such is the Language of those godly
conceited Divines, who place Religion in Chimerical Speculations, which they
endeavor to confound with the Doctrines revealed in the Holy Scriptures; as
it is practiced by Mr. Vander Waeyen and Mr. Poiret, who are good Friends, when
they are concerned to defend Fanaticism in general, (for as soon as a Man
abandons Reason, he must necessarily fall into Fanaticism) but will prove cruel
Enemies, when the Question shall be, Whether John Cocceius's Fanaticism is to
be preferred to that of Antoinette Bourignon, or vice versa. 'Twould be a good
sport to hear 'em discourse together, with their usual Moderation, of their
Explications of the Revelations, Purgatory, Predestination, etc Mr. Poiret
would then cease to be clarissimus, and would be obscurissimus Tenebrio, to say
no worse; and God knows what noble Epithets he would in his turn bestow on the
Doctor of Franeker.

The latter says, That Mr. L. C. is one of those Men, who reduce Religion to a
few Heads, concerning the Knowledge of God, and some practical Moral Duties, in
order to live quietly in this World. But Mr. L. C. neither lessens nor
increases the Articles of Faith; he takes 'em out of Holy Scripture, such as
they are without making any alteration in them: As for Morality, he approves of
no Remisness in it. Mr. Vander Waeyen knows it very well, and I pray God
forgive him for having so wilfully transgrest his most sacred Laws.

Of some other Books of Mr. L. C. and of his Adversaries.
NEXT to the Books I have mentioned, Mr. L. C. published a short Abridgment of
Universal History, in the Year 1697. in 8. and Dr. Hammond's Paraphrase and
Notes on the New Testament in School. in Folio, and a Harmony of the Gospels in
Greek and Latin in 1699. Those, who have seen these two last Books, and will
think of the other which I have spoken of, cannot doubt, whatever Judgment they
make of his Opinions, but that he spends his time as well as he can, and they
will grant that a Man, who is so busy in expounding Holy Scripture, and serving
the Public the best way he can think of, should deserve at least to dive
quietly. It is a shameful thing to publish new Libels every Day against a Man,
who makes no answer, and whose Opinions are now so well known, that it is in
vain for any Body to mis-represent them. Some Divines will say that they don't
look upon 'em to be Orthodox; but they know very well that none but God is a
Supreme Judge of true Orthodoxy, as to speculative Doctrines; and that all Men
being equal in this respect, they have no other Right but that of answering one
another Civilly, and with good Reasons. They should be ashamed to use Lies and
Calumnies, to defame those who don't so much as think of 'em.

But perhaps some, who are not acquainted with the way and humor of Divines,
will wonder how so many People came to inveigh against Mr. L. C. and may
suspect that it is his fault, and that he has given occasion for it. But they
will be soon undeceived, if they consider what I am going to say.

First, they ought to remember that some Divines will presently break out into
a violent Anger, if any one is not of their Mind in every thing, and scruples
not to say that some of their Arguments are not convincing. They will have the
liberty of exclaiming against the Pope, who is a greater Man than they; but
they cannot abide that others should not look upon them as Popes, that is to
say, Infallible Men. How many Censures did Erasmus and Grotius undergo, two
incomparable Men, who do more Honor to Holland than all the Cocceians will
ever do! They were obliged to write great Volumes in Folio, to make their
Apology in few Words; but they should have written twenty times more, had they
been willing to confute at large the Vander Waeyens and the Benoits of their
time. And if any one would undertake now to make their Apology in due Form, and
answer all the Impertinences and Calumnies, that have been vented against 'em,
after their Death; it would perhaps require as many Volumes as there are in the
last Edition of the Bibliotheca Patrum. Secondly, Those who might wonder at the
great number of Mr. L. C.'s Adversaries, must know that they ought to reckon
but one in every Society; for those Men are like Jays or Mag-pies, that know
but one Tune, that is, one of the same System, which they are not allowed to
examine, but must follow, to avoid their Punishments, wherewith Churchmen, who
change their Mind, are commonly threatened. Mr. Poiret is the only Man, who
being of no Society may safely vent his Chimerical Notions, and is as good as a
whole Batalion of Lutherans, against whom he has often signalized himself.
Thirdly, Mr. L. C. has written a considerable number of Books, and consequently
may be allowed to give his Judgment concerning several Subjects relating to
Critical Learning, Philosophy, and Divinity, about which Men of Letters are
wont to dispute; so that it is no wonder if many will contradict him, since
there are so many of a passionate Temper and contradicting Humor. Lastly, If
to what has been said you join Envy and Jealously, which are very common among
Men of Learning; you may easily apprehend that some of 'em are out of Humor,
because Mr. L. C's Works are not slighted. Mr. Vander Waeyen gives us to
understand, in several places of his Libels, that he has no kindness for those
who buy them, especially for the English. He bitterly complains that
Arminianism is got among the English, but the Arminians cannot complain that
Cocceianism is entertained by them. To speak the Truth, Mr. L. C. sets a
greater value upon the Judgment of that Free and Learned Nation, than upon all
the slavish and careless Divines of the rest of Europe. However he could rest
satisfied with the Testimony of his Conscience, and the certain hopes that God
will protect Truth, and those who maintain it in such a manner as is agreeable
to the Precepts of the Gospel.
Whether Mr. L. C. must leave off his Studies, to answer those, who write
against him.
Hitherto I have given an Account of Mr. L. C.'s Studies, since he came to
Holland. Some Men would divert him from them, and put him upon writing another
sort of Books. They have assaulted him sometime since, as violently as they
could: They have not been sparing of odious Terms, Lies and Calumnies, to
exasperate him, and force him to answer them. But he is not so imprudent as to
grant 'em their Desire, and lay aside the useful Subjects he is upon, to be at
the trouble of laying open their Malice and Ignorance. The Public knows well
enough what sort of Men they are. Indeed it is in vain for an Author to set up
for a zealous Man, and to vail his Anger or Malice with the most specious
Pretenses; for discerning Men will soon find out his Passion; and as for
others, it is no great Matter whether they judge right or wrong of it. It Is no
new thing to see Divines transported with Anger, and their Hatred has
occasioned a Proverb. It Is well that they are now to be feared no where, but in
Places where they are both Judges and Parties.

It was well observed by Mr. Menage, Menagiana, vol. 2. p. 236.
That Some Men are never refuted, unless they be alive; and that they are not
confider-able enough, after their death, to oblige any Body to be at that
trouble. But there are some, who deserve not to be refuted, whether they be
dead or alive: I mean those, who pick Quarrels for quarreling-sake, or to be
spoken of, and can make no solid Objections. It would be too great a Pleasure
and Honor for them, to see their Satyrs or Declamations answered. I know some
among those, that wrote against Mr. L. C. who heartily with that he would in
his turn write large Volumes against 'em. They are not afraid of good and solid
Arguments, as it appears by their way of Reasoning; and they are not ashamed to
publish the most palpable Absurdities, with the greatest confidence in the
World. But they are vexed, when an Author takes no notice of their Books, and
if they cannot quarrel abroad, they will quarrel at home with their Colleagues.

Mr. L. C. designs to write a Latin Dissertation, wherein he will examine this
Question, When a Man must answer the Calumnies of Divines? It is not less
necessary than that which was printed at the end of his Logic, De Argumento
Theologico ex Invidia ducto. Those, who endeavor to increase their Reputation
by speaking ill of him, will see what his Reasons are for not answering them.

In the mean time, he must apply himself to the Search of Truth, and publish
it, as carefully as he has done hitherto, but with the Caution which Christian
Prudence requires on such an occasion. Who can be entrusted with the care of
speaking and maintaining Truth? Not those, who don't enquire after it, because
they don't love it, and stand not in need of it, to raise themselves in the
World: Nor those, who have not the necessary Qualifications to find it out, and
to publish it: Nor those, who know it, but dare not speak it out, for fear of
exposing themselves. For, it must be confessed that in several Christian
Societies, they have not the liberty necessary to explain Holy Scripture and
Religion. There is but one Christian Society, in Holland, that can do it; and
though it be inconsiderable, it has already afforded several Great Men. In. all
others, they don't often think as they speak, nor speak as they think.

Indeed many Learned Persons on this side of the Sea and beyond it, among the
Roman Catholics and Protestants, look a great while since upon the Writers of
that small Party as the Interpreters of the Thoughts, which they themselves
dare not publish in Places where they live, and, as the Assertors of Truth and
Liberty, which are oppressed almost every where else. I will not make their
Encomium, but I shall only say that those, who are in such Circumstances, ought
to speak freely, whilst they can do it, and want not People that will hear
them. Time will come, when we shall reap the Fruits of the Seeds of Piety,
Charity, and all other Christian Virtues, which their Works spread over all
Europe; and hereafter it will be a Subject of Wonder, how Men, who so much
deserved Thanks, could be so traduced, and ill spoken of They are the only Men,
to whom we are beholden for the Moderation, which is every day more and more
entertained by the most knowing and judicious Protestants; and for a great many
general and particular Truths, which would not have been heard of yet, or been
well proved, if those Authors had been silent.

There is no need I should insist longer on this, Subject, nor say that Mr. L.
C. took care of the Edition of some Books written by other Hands. Neither is it
necessary that I should mention those, which he wrote, as it were, to divert
himself, whilst he was composing some others, which required more attention.
Such is his small French Treatise concerning the good or ill Luck of Lotteries,
which he published in 1696. when Lotteries were so much in vogue in the United
Provinces. He also took care of the Edition of the Fathers of the Apostolic
Age, in School. in 2 Vol. in Folio, and added some few Notes of his own, as it
appears by the Prefaces he prefixed to it. If those, who have more time, a
greater Genius, more Learning and Conveniences than he (as there are without
doubt a great many in England and elsewhere) would take as much Pains for the
Public as he has done; the great number of good Books, which would come out in
a few Years, would perhaps create a dislike of so many bad ones, which are
published every day. But, besides the abovementioned Reasons, they, that could
write more commodiously than others, are not commonly so inclined to it, as
those, who have less Conveniences.


