ECCLESIA GEMENS: OR, Two Discourses On the mournful State of the Church, with
a Prospect of her Dawning Glory.

Exhibited in a View of two Scriptures, representing her as a Myrtle-Grove in a
deep Bottom, and as a knot of Lillies among Thorns.

Psalm. 68.13. Though ye have lien among the Pots, yet shall ye be as the Wings
of a Dove covered with Silver, and her Feathers with yellow Gold.

LONDON, Printed for John Hancock, at the three Bibles in Pope's Head Alley in
Cornhill. 1677.

To the Holy Church of Christ lately walking in Communion with Mr. J.C. and now
with D. J.O. before whom these exercises were handled, and to whom they are now
humbly presented by

Theirs in the Fellowship of the Gospel. S. L.

1673. April. 6.
THE VISION OF THE MYRTLEGROVE.
Zach. 1.8. I saw by night, and behold a man riding upon a red Horse, and he
stood among the Myrtle-trees that were in the bottom, and behind him there were
red Horses, speckled, and white.


THIS is a Comfortable Vision to the Church in a low and dark condition: For,
upon her Humiliation by the Prophets Sermon of Repentance, v. 6. The Captain of
the Lords Hosts appears in order to deliverance.

The Captivity was in part returned, but the Temple, whose Foundation though
laid, yet the Progress of its building interrupted, lay still in a ruinous
state, and the City it self unwalled and in a mournful plight, Ps. 137.2.
and many of the people not hitherto come forth of Babylon: Their Harps hung
yet upon the willows; but now they are to be taken down to be employed in Songs
of Zion, with Myrtle Crowns of Festival Joy upon their Heads.

It suites with our estate since the return of our Fathers from Spiritual
Babylon. For as yet the pure Temple-worship mourns in the dust, and the City of
New Jerusalem lies in rubbish.

In this Prophetical Vision observe:

v. 7. The second year of Darius Hystaspes, 519 years before the Birth of our
Lord, on the 24th Day of the 11th Month Sebat, answering to part of January,
and more particularly, the Prophet saw this Vision in the Night.

By Night.] 1. To show the darkness and difficulty of the Vision. 2. That it
was a time of affliction to the Church. 3. That Christ the Captain of the
Church appeared but darkly to the Fathers of old.

Bamezulah, in profundo, which the Chald. Paraphrase turns (...) in Babylon,
Jer. 51.13.
which lay in a low Champion plain by the great River Euphrates in the Land of
Chaldea, and was noted, if I remember right, for fertility in this fragrant
Shrub of Myrtle. Com. in Plin. l. 15. c. 29.
Edessa in Mesopotamia had its name from Myrtles; and however, Parthia was
famous for it, which was a neighboring Province.

3dly. The Objects presented in the Vision which are three.

A Captain upon a red Horse (...) Equitans, or ascendens, about to get up; as
the LXX. express it, (...), ready to ascend upon his Horse, who is no other
than that same Captain which appeared to Joshuah when entering upon his Wars
against the Canaanites. Jos. 5.14.
I shall not determine with Alapide, that the [Sus Adam,] the red horse notes
his Humanity; I dare not be so bold, but rather, as a Captain getting up on his
horse of blood, in order to the slaughter of his Enemies.

Babylon: For though Babylon were taken by Cyrus before this Vision, yet there
passed 4 years after this Exhibition to the Prophet, even just at the finishing
of the Temple in the 6th. Herodot. l. 3. p. 323. Usser. annal.
of Darius, when that Golden City was woefully sacked, the Walls pulled down, and
the Gates demolished, and 3000 of her most noble Citizens staked or crucified,
and after a while Babel was totally laid in ruins by Xerxes.



By the Myrtle Grove is meant the Church of God; by the bottom, Babylon: By the
Captain, Jesus Christ the Son of God: By the Red Horse, his design of War
against Babylon: The 3 sorts of Horses behind him, first Red, noting bloody
wars against the Churches Enemies. 2d. The speckled, signifying various
Providence; sometimes the Church victorious, and othertimes in an afflicted
state under the Antiochian Princes. 3d. White Horses, representing the Church
in the end completely victorious and triumphant: All the Churches troubles
shall end in victory; and these Horses that attend upon Christ, go forth from
among the Myrtle Trees, that is, the Angels who encamp about tho Church, are
sometimes sent abroad upon expeditions against her Enemies, arming and
influencing of Nations one against another, to subdue those who have impugned
the Church, Is. 51.11.
and to execute the vengeance of the Temple.

This Vision is given by God to the Prophet on purpose to encourage his People
in going on with Temple-work, having formed the heart of Darius, to give forth
another Edict besides that of Cyrus, to finish the stately structure of his
Temple. Having thus touched upon the Scope of the Prophecy, let us descend to
some Instructions from it. There be 3 Spring-heads from whence the streams of
the observations may flow full pleasantly.

1. From the Time and Place.

2. The Myrtle Trees.

3. The Captain and his Forces.



The Church of God after begun deliverances, Obs. 1.
may continue for a season under dark, doubtful, and afflictive Providence.
Israel, after they were come out of Egypt, wandered 40 years in a howling
Wilderness, and were exercised with 7 years Wars in Canaan, before they were
settled under Vines and Fig Trees in that Land flowing with Milk and Honey.

Again, When Judah came out of Babylon, from the first of Cyrus, till Nehemiahs
coming from Shusham to build Jerusalems Walls in the 20th. 536. 454. 82.
year of Artaxerxes Longimanus, Usser. annals.
there intervened fourscore and two years: And in the later days, after the
1290 years are fully expired, there must be a flux of 45 years from the first
deliverance till the complete state of the blessed times of the Church. Dan.
12.11, 12.
I need not insert any other particular instances, it is the wise method of
Divine Providence,

Egypt, and long for the Fleshpots, the Garlic and Onions of their old state
of bondage. They smell rank and unsavory before God, that like the old
murmuring Israelites, dare to call Egypt by the Title of the Land of Canaan;
crying to Moses, Numb. 16.13.
Thou have brought us out of a Land flowing with Milk and Honey, to kill us in
the Wilderness.

Gradually to prepare his faithful people, who like Caleb and Joshua follow the
Lord fully, for those blessed and glorious Enjoyments: As the horrid Rocks and
Mountains of Pindus set off the pleasant verdure of the Thessalian Tempe: So
did the Arabian Deserts, the parching Droughts, the fiery Serpents, and the
Swords of Bashan superadd a varnishing luster to Canaan the glory of all Lands.
Ezekiel, 20.6, 15.


Deuteronomy. 7.22.
not all at once, lest the beasts of the field increase too numerous. To give
his Enemies some time and space of repentance, and to leave them without
Apology; and that the Churches hands be not too full of labor and travel. But
first Amaleck must have a blow from Joshua, Exodus 17.10.
and taste of the sharpness of his glittering Sword; then the King of Arad (a
City 4 miles south of Malliattha or Amalek according to Jerome) must bow down
their neck under his victorious foot; Numb. 21.1.
then the Pools of Heshbon must be dried up, and the Iron Bed of Og must be
drawn in triumph; and lastly, M^dian with her 5 Princes, and Balaam with his
Enchanted Altars must flame in sacrifice to Divine Vengeance, before they pass
over Jordan to conquer and enjoy the Land of Promise. Obs. 2.


In the next place we may observe, that though the Church be overshadowed with
a dark night, and sit silently upon the ground in a deep bottom, as represented
on the reverse of Vespasian's Coin weeping under a Palm Tree; yet here she is
brought to erect her countenance with a smiling and joyful aspect into the
Myrtle Grove, and Christ her Lord and Husband present with her: All dark, but
the bright Face of Christ illustrating the Face of the Prophet with a clear
Vision, and the Face of the Spouse with some radiations of joy. Though the
State of the Church be dark, yet the Vision is bright; Gods work goes on though
it be by night. Though the Church might not as yet see the Prophet, yet she
enjoys her Captain; and though his help be invisible, yet it is certain. Though
the Church think of little but continuing darkness, and a long and stormy time
of trouble, like a January night, in which Month this Vision appeared, yet
morning will come: Phosphorus, the Morning Star will shine, and the Sun will
shortly gild the Eastern Mountains with his glorious Beams. The Babylonian
Enemies think they shall always detain the captive Church in their Dungeon
bottoms, but the shining Ruler of the Day will not sail to appear in that his
glorious Epiphany, Psa. 104.20.
and chase all the wild Beasts of the Night into dismal holes and caverns. This
Vision comes by night, when the Church little dreams of deliverance. and less
discerns the approach of her Heaven-born Captain. Watchman, what, Isa. 21.12, 9,
of the night? Behold here comes a Chariot of Men, a couple of Horsemen:
Babylon is fallen, is fallen; Elam, besiege, O Media. Though the Church lie
prostrate in a deep Valley. yet it is a Valley of Vision: Though she cry out in
the Valley of Achor, Hos. 2.15.
yet God will give her both Vineyards and Myrtle Groves from thence. The Church
shall be both fruitful and fragrant in the midst of couchant Valleys at the
foot of the proud and lofty Mountains of the World. The Church never sighs out
her sorrows in so dark a night, but a new Moon may appear with a little light
and some brightning Visions of mercy. Some Prophets to comfort, some Princes
hearts awakening toward her rescue, who, like Darius, shall shortly put foot
in stirrup against her bloody enemies. Neither is there any particular Member
of the Church in so dark and blustering a Tempest, Job 35.10. Ps. 139.12.
but may find some Songs in the night. He to whom the night shines as the day
by the luster of his omniscient eye, beholds his darling Spouse in the
profoundest bottoms of tribulation, and sends his Prophets with Glorious
Visions to erect and illustrate their gloomy and dejected Spirits.



The Church of God in her lowest estate and darkest time is highly valued of
God: those admired pendulous Gardens of Semiramis in Babylon. He planted these
fragrant Shrubs: This sensible Plant, dedicated to his Love, he waters and
watches it every moment. He always beholds it and beautifies it with his
presence and walk: He shows it to his Prophets by Divine Moonlight, and sends
them to tell his Church and People, how greatly he esteems and values it.
Though the night be cloudy and stormy, and the Church hardly to be kenned by
carnal eyes were they awake; yet he whose eyes are like a flame of fire, Rev.
1.14.
Luke 2.9.
can make a sudden light to shine about his Shepherds and the Flocks of his
Church by night, and turn their Fears into exquisite Joys, and teach them to
tune their rural Pipes in consort with the Heavenly Host praising God, and so
open the eyes of these Keepers of the Vines and Myrtles, that they shall behold
the Captain of their Salvation in the midst of the Grove, with 3 Troops of
Angels for their protection and comfort; not a Tree but a Horseman assigned it
like the Palms in the Temple always interwoven with Cherubims.



Bashan. They take up but little room in the World, and do not kill the Herbage
by poisonous droppings or venomous shades. Learn of me, Mat. 11.29.
says Christ, for I am meek and lowly, and you shall find rest to your Souls.
Meekness to bear reproof, meekness to return mild and soft answers, meekness
not to murmur against afflicting Providence, are the notes of a humble Myrtle.
Of a meek Spirit like Moses, 1 Pet. 3.4.
which is with God of a great price. Meekness and quietness go hand in hand:
Meddlesome, touchy, and quarrelsome Spirits, are not led by the Spirit of God.
There grow no Thorns upon these Balsam Plants which thrive in cool Valleys at
the bottoms of lofty and barren Mountains -- and amantes frigora Myrtos. Saints
and gracious Persons are not so soon touched with direful Thunderbolts, nor
inflamed by the lightning Flashes of rage and anger.

Ps. 1.3.
No cold Winter strips them of their Holy profession. Hypocrites are Sunshine
Professors, Somer Birds, Butterflies that come forth when the Church enjoys her
May: But Gods true Myrtles are green in January, the Month of this blessed
Vision. The storm of Persecution may break their Boughs, but not destroy their
greenness; they may stand in a deep Valley, the Church may be driven into
holes, but still retains her native emerald greenness. As the Dove may be
forced into a cleft of the Rock; but mourns and retains the voice of a Dove
still. Songs 2.14.


-- Vitis Jaccho, formosae veneri Myrtus. etc. Whatever the Church yields, is
eminent. The thoughts and discourses of Saints are like the fine white Flowers
of the Myrtle, they are full of candor, and breath holiness in every Air, in
every Region. The Life of Saints smells fragrantly, Songs 5.16.
like Christ his Mouth is most sweet: He is altogether, all over lovely.

4. 4. l. 1. c. 155.
The Fruit of the Myrtle is Medicinal: It is astrictive, says Dioscorides, and
therefore good against spitting of Blood, and beneficial to the Stomach, (...);
Myrtle Wine is profitable against the bitings of the Spider Phalangium, and the
stings of Scorpions. Gracious persons are of a healing nature to such as breath
forth cruelty against the Church, and whose Stomachs are full of poison and
malignant venom: They are like the Trees of Paradise for the healing of the
Nations wherein they dwell. Rev. 22.2.
A Child of God, much more a Church of Christ should be like a College of
Physicians to a diseased World. Truly, what is this miserable forlorn World but
a mere Hospital of crazy, wounded, and leprous persons. Here lie some with
limbs broken in Satan's drudgery, others raging under intolerable pains, their
very Nerves and Bones rotten through the Sins of youth, others full of Boyls
and putrefying Sores from lust and corruption, and all poisoned with the venom
of Original Sin. O let Saints carry about the Balm of Gilead to cure the
wounded of the Daughter of their People.

Athen. Dipnos. l. 15. p. 676.
and delight in each other: How much more excellent shall be the Communion of
Saints, when instead of the Thorns shall spring the Firr Trees, and instead of
the Briar or Nettle of the Heathen, Is. 55.13.
shall arise the Myrtle for a Name to the Lord; 60.13.
an everlasting Sign to beautify the Sanctuary of his Holiness, which shall
never be cut up.

1. Learn, Us. 1.
That Myrtles may grow in Babylon, nay in Groves, in Church communion, though
in a low and secret Valley by the waters of Babylon, till they are transplanted
to Canaan. Captive Myrtles shall be Crowns of Glory in the Temple above. Saints
may for a season be, and thrive in a naughty world, in a hostile Country, and
preserved from the foot of violence: Saints may sing Psalms in Caesar's
Household, and be chiefly saluted by an holy Apostle. Phil. 4.22.
The Lilly may be sheltred by Thorns, and the myrtle environed by a sharp
Babylonian Quickset: Our Lord prays the Father not to take his Church out of
the World, Joh. 17.15. Acts 2.40.
but to defend them from the evil of it, and save them from the untoward
generation wherein they live. Were it not for his Myrtles in this Valley of
Tears, God would soon send up his Ax upon the Oaks of Bashan, and lift up his
Hammer upon Babylon. They must propagate and increase for a season, till the
time that Babylon's ripe for vengeance, and the second Solomon's Garden in Zion
measured out into Beds, Songs 6.2.
made delectable with Walks, 4.15.
and watered with Streams from Lebanon, and every way fitted by culture for the
reception of sweet-scented Myrtles, to be Plants of renown in the Glorious
State of the Church which hastens toward us. Ezekiel. 34.29.


Darius. This great Prince strengthens the former Edict of Cyrus in despite of
Samaritan hatred; Ezr. 6.1, 14.
and so do the following Princes, notwithstanding Tobiahs Alliance to the
High Priest Eliashib. Neh. 13.4.
It Is the God of Israel who melts and bends the hearts of Princes, and makes
them flexible toward his Church; that the prostrate Vine may begin to climb up
and be supported by the Elm of Magistracy. He turns their hearts to hate his
People for a season for their correction, Ps. 105.25. Ps. 106.46.
and then repents according to the multitude of his mercies, and makes them to
be pitied of all those that carried them captives. He puts it into the hearts
of the 10 Kings to fulfill his Will, and to agree, Rev. 17.17.
and give their Kingdom to the Beast, until the words of God shall be
fulfilled, and then he remembers his Holy Covenant.

3. Darius be enlarged toward the dust and rubbish of Zion, and and shall not
Zachary prophecy, and Zerubabel build, Zech. 3.5.
and Joshua minister with a fair Mitre upon his Head, and all the People shout
for joy, crying, Grace, grace, to the Glory of the 2d. Temple, which was far
greater than the former, Hag. 2.9.
because the Messenger of the Lord of Hosts brought peace into it.

They may come out with their Swords and Hatchets, their Axes and Acts of
Hostility, but shall never be able to cut up the Myrtle Grove of the Church,
that has so glorious a Captain to own it for his Garden and desend it. Is. 4.5.
Upon all the Glory shall be a desence. Genesis 3.24.
It Is like the Ancient Eden guarded by Cherubims with flaming Swords, turning
every way to keep the Path of the Trees of Life. Let Saints persist in
sertility and fragrancy, and Christ will ever make himself visible with troops
of Angels in the midst and round about his Fragrant Grove.

The Vision of the Captain and his Forces.

He that is called a Man in the Text riding on a red Horse, holds conference
with the Prophet, and the Prophet styles him his Lord, v. 9. and the Angel of
the Lord, v. 11.

Prophets and Angels hold heavenly communion, but especially the Angel of the
covenant. Now, that this Person is the Lord Jesus Christ, the same who was with
Moses in the Bush at Horeb in the Wilderness, Acts 7.38.
may appear;

Jos. 5.14.
The Captain of the Lords Hosts, brandishing his Sword before Joshua near
Jericho, was now with his Sword girt upon his Thigh, Ps. 45.3.
like a Prince of Might, ascending the Red Horse of War: He who is Head over
all Principalities and Powers to his Church. Ephesians. 1.22.


v 12. He is the great Mediator; we never observe Ordinary Angels praying to
God for the Church in the Sacred Page: Though often praising him, to teach that
none ought to interpose in that glorious Office of Christ.

But these (says the Captain, v. 10.) pointing to the 3 Troops of Holy Angels
behind him; these are they whom the Lord has sent to visit the Church in her
scattered estate through the several Provinces of the Earth under the Dominion
of Babylon.

Thus says the Lord of Hosts, I am jealous for Jerusalem and for Zion; that
is, for the City and Temple, for the Politic and Ecclesiastic Estate of his
People with great jealousy, v. 14.

Next, we are to consider him as a Rider upon a Red Horse. A Horse in Eastern
Hieroglyphics and Visions, was an Emblem of War, of Victory, and Triumph: A
Red Horse, of Blood shed in War in order to conquest; Is. 63.4.
to note that Christ goes with a Spirit of vengeance against his Churches
Adversaries, and returns with Garments dyed red from Bozrah, Is. 63.1.
all sprinkled and dashed with the Blood of the Slain. Nay, Rev. 14.20.
sometimes he rides his Horses up to the Bridles in Blood in the Valley of
Hadadrimmon.

Then come in view his Satellites, or the Generous Troops under his Imperial
Standard. Red Horses, speckled, and white, representing the Holy Angels,
multitudes of them marshalled in battel-array for various Expeditions, with the
Triumphant issue of all their Wars on behalf of the Church. That Horses and
Chariots are Symbols of Angels, may be observed from other Scriptures; as, 2
Kin. 2.11. and 6.17. and Hab. 3.8. etc. The Chariots of God are 20000, Ps.
68.17.
even thousands of Angels; and not to mention the allusions hereto in other
Authors, only that in Suidas at present.

(...): Suid. p. 1271.
The Vision of White Horses is an appearance of Angels. I shall come to an
observation.

light Horsemen for their Service. Above all, let us take notice of some
excellencies in this Captain General of the Cherubims that is now upon march
for the Salvation of his Church.

Zech. 6.13.
both Prince and Priest on horseback. He never prays but is answered, and he
ever prays before he goes forth upon expeditions as he does in this Vision, v.
13. and therefore in righteousness he judges and makes war. It Is said of old,
Rev. 19.11.
Nulla fides pietasque viris qui castra sequuntur. No faith or loyalty in the
field. But behold, here is one with a double-edged Sword in his Mouth, a fervent
prayer to make his Sword victorious. Judge. 7.18.
We have here the Sword of the Lord as well as of Gideon; a Sword from behind
the Ephod, none like it; it has cut down many a Philistine. The Sword of God
is the Sword of Christ: Prayer whets the Sword and courage brandishes it. In
his Majesty he rides on prosperously, Ps. 45.4.
and baths it in the hearts of his Enemies.

Zach. 6.13.
He is a Kingly and Royal Captain in order to the execution of his Priestly and
Prophetical Office. He fights not for warsake but for peace: He hates them that
delight in war and spin out long Sieges for large Wages. His End is to set
Peace in the Earth, an Universal Peace as long as the Sun and Moon endure. Is.
2.4.
He designs to bring all the Swords and Spears of his Warriors to the Smiths
Forge, and to fashion them into Sithes and Plow-shares, into Sickles and
pruning hooks. Ps. 72.7.
In his days shall the Righteous flourish, and abundance of peace (...) usq, ad
non lunam; till there be Moon no more. Yea, no less wise in management of his
Armies for this glorious Design: Insomuch, that Angels who excel in wisdom,
disdain not to march at his command, and wheel about at the clangor of his
Trumpet. There Is no mutiny in all Heavens Army. Alexanders Soldiers when they
were in the Indies among the Oritae, Curt. and Arian.
would march no surther though to finish the worlds Conquest and dip their feet
in the Eastern Ocean: But here is an unwearied Army that march up and down
through the whole Earth at his command. v. 11.
Angels are his Creatures, delighting to do his Will. The Inhabitants of Petra
in Sogdiana built upon an inaccessible Rock, jeered Alexander, Curt. l. 7. c.
11.
and asked him whether his Soldiers had wings: But behold here are winged
Soldiers riding upon winged Horses that can fly into Cities at their Pleasure.
Such a Captain wages war on behalf of his Church. This is he, Exodus 14.14, 25.
who fought from Heaven against the Egyptians and Pharach in the Red Sea. He
taught Joshua to lie in ambush against Ai. Josh. 8.2.
He instructed Gideon to astonish the Midianites by Lamps and Pitchers into a
panick fear. Jud. 7.16.
It Is he, who comes from Edom, with garments dyed red from Bozrah, glorious in
his bloody apparel, Is. 63.1.
and marching in the greatness of his Strength. This is the David, who guides
all according to the integrity of his heart, Ps. 78.72.
and by the skillfulness of his hands.

Ps. 45.5.
Successfulness in a Captain is a mark of Honor stamped upon him by God, to
signify that such should be used. Such a character was imprinted upon Joshua:
The Lord thy God is with thee whither soever thou go. Jos. 1.9.
Though the Church has sometimes been oppressed for a while, yet Christ never
went forth attended with his Angelical Troops, but his Sword returned fat with
the blood of the slain. We need not range into the Annals of Ancient times; for
even since the Incarnation, this Prince of Israel, this Michael, one like unto
God has fixed his Trophies with mighty honor upon the tops of the highest
Mountains. In what triumphant Chariots did he ride up to the Capitol in the
days of Constantine at the subduing of the Pagan persecuting Roman Empire: Rev.
12.7.
What Songs of deliverance filled the Church in the times of Theodosius the
great. He will perform the like and greater achievements against Papal Rome.
Rev. 17.14.
For the Lamb shall overcome them who is Lord of Lords, and King of Kings.

Heb. 1.14.
These Angels converse among the Myrtle Trees, as well as their glorious
Captain, and go forth for intelligence, and spy out the secretest counsels of
the Adversaries: So that if strength, number, policy, intelgence and success
can make an Army happy, the Saints and the Church are blessed. Nay, they are
such as no dint or force of their enemies can touch or wound them: they fight
invisibly: they need no scaling Ladders to climb and assault the Cities of
their Enemies; they can either fly over or pierce through their strongest Walls
and set the Church at rest, whensosoever infinite Wisdom shall think meet.

Julian was shot by a casual Arrow; it is reported that he flung his blood into
the Air against Christ, appearing to him (...) and accused him of his
slaughter: Sozomen l. 6. c. 2. p. 366. Theodoret. l. 3. c. 20. Cassendor. Trip.
Hist. l. 6. c. 47. Niceph. l. 10. c. 35.
Others say, that he cried out with scoff and blasphemy, Thou have overcome me
O Galilean, thou have overcome me. But whether Christ himself, or an Angel by
his ordination, as others report, it alters the case but little, since we are
sure it was like the Arrow ordained against Ahab, it hit by the assignation and
conduct of Heaven; or as Sozomen phrases (...), he was slain by God, and
received the due reward of his infamous taunt against our blessed Lord. For
when he was marching against the Persians, he sorely threatened the Christians
that the Carpenters Son should not avail them. Soz. ibid.
To which a Prophetical person smartly replied, that he was preparing a Coffin
for Julian, and he was buried with scorn in the Suburbs of Tarsus, by a rabble
piping and dancing, and exclaiming, Jud. 8.
O great fool, where are now thy Prophesies? God and his Christ have overcome
thee: So let all thine enemies perish O Lord. The great God has all the Hosts
in Heaven and Earth at his back: Various sorts and offices of Angels, some red,
others speckled and white, alluding to the diversities of Colors in the
Standards of Armies, to know their Leaders, and to keep rank and order. Aelian
has writ his Tacticks, and Polyaenus his Stratagems, but no Methods or
Policies like these of the Angelical Army, Ezekiel. 17.20. and 32.3.
who lie in ambush behind the Myrtle Trees, and spread their Nets over the
Heads of the ten-horned Beast of Babylon.

April will pass, and a durable Somer follow: What begins with red, goes on
with speckled, and ends in white. The Combat is bloody at first, but always
successful, and shall be crowned with victory. The Church is like the Roman
Empire, whereof the Historian said, Pugna victi sed nunquam bello: A Battle may
sometimes go off dubious but never overcome in a war. The Churches Myrtles
shall never be cut down so long as an Angel can keep the field, he will protect
them. So long as the Captain of the Lords Hosts wears his Myrtle Crown, Corona
Myrtea.
he will lead his Church in pleasant measures in the Wilderness of Shur, and teach
them to sing the triumphal Song of Moses and the Lamb on the brink of the Red
Sea, Exodus 15.22.
while the Egyptian Carcasses dance upon the waters in regular order to the
Churches Sonnets.

compass them round for a while: yet the Host of Angels within them shall break
through and put all the Armies of the Aliens to flight. The fourth watch of the
night though the darkest, yet it is nearest the morning, and the deepest place
of the Valley is next to the foot of the Mountain for ascent.

Let this Vision comfort the Church that God is pleased to send Prophets to
manifest the issue of all their troubles. They shall not only be delivered in
due time, but they shall know it beforehand to aswage their sorrows, and to
heighten their expectations of deliverance. Though the Vision be given by
night, yet he shines upon the head of his Zachary, Amos 3.7.
and does nothing but what he reveals to his Servants the Prophets; and we must
enquire from them not only our duty in a night of darkness, but our comfort
also in the Valley of affliction. Let Us remember to keep to the society of
Myrtles, if we would enjoy the presence of Christ, the protection of Angels,
the visions of Prophets, and final victory over the Churches Enemies.

The last Use should be for inquiry after the end of the Vision when the white
horses of victory and triumph shall appear to the Church: Us. 5. Add.
As he said to the man clothed in linen, Dan. 12.6.
How long shall it be to the end of these wonders! Or as that Saint enquired of
the Palmoni or the wonderful Numberer, How long shall it be that the Sanctuary
and the Host shall be trodden under foot? And he said unto him, 8.14.
2300 days, then shall the Sanctuary be cleansed.

Let Us count then from the burning of the City and Temple of Jerusalem by
Nebuchadnezzar in the 19th. 2 K. 25.8. Jer. 52.12. Usser. 2300 588 1712.
year of his Reign, which was concurrent with the 588th. vulgar year before the
Nativity of our blessed Lord: From which time, if we reckon 2300 years, it
leads us by the hand to the common year of our Lord 1712. About which time the
pure Worship which has been opposed and confused ever since the ruin of
Solomon's Temple, it is very likely may be restored to an Evangelical Glory, and
the abominations of desolation removed out of the way. I know what is said
about the literal fulfilling of this Text, under Antiochus, and the mystical in
the days of Julian; but I take it to be a more comprehensive Oracle, not to be
here amply discussed. As for Julians time, when the Jews attempted to rebuild
the Temple by his Edict in scorn to our Saviors Prophecy in the year 363, when
Julian was 4th time Consul with Salustius Promotus. We find no account of any
Sacrifice then offered, for they were but clearing the Rubbish. How then can
this be an Epoche from the taking away that Sacrifice which was not then
offered; no, nor since the days of Titus. Besides Julian did this in a
mock-savour to the Jews, and stood not with an Army in the Holy Place or City,
for he came no nearer than about Antioch in his march to Persia; and therefore
this can be no root of numeration in this case.

Another gracious manifestation of the time is in the 12th. Chapter, which must
be understood of the taking away Evangelical Worship for the time, Dan. 12.7.
times and a half mentioned, v. 7. are disertly and distinctly applied to the
duration of the ten-horned beast, 7.25.
Rev. 11.2.3.
in the 7th Chapter; and is coincident with 1260 days in John, (...) 13.5.
or the 42 months of their trampling down the Holy City, detaining the Woman in
the Wilderness and the Witnesses in sackcloth. But in as much that Daniel adds
30 days to the 1260, it may be suggested that he reflects upon the Restitution
of Israel and their conversion to offer up spiritual Sacrifice, which may be
performed some short time after the resurrection of the Estate of the Church in
the West. So then if the Ten-horned Beast rose in the Ruins of the Roman
Empire: It Is but considering when that City was taken, and the Imperial State
demolisht and finished, 1290 410 1700
and connex the 1260 or 1293; and the blessed times will appear to the comfort
and joy of the Church.

Rome was first taken by Alaricus A. 410.

A second time by Gensericus, A. 455.

The third by Odoacer, A. 476. When having taken Rome, deposed Augustulus.
Paul. Diacon in add. ad Eutrop l. 16. p. 155.
Paulus Diaconus subjoynes, Ita Romanorum apud Romam Imperium toto terrarum
orb venerabile and Augustalis illa sublimitas, quae ab Augusto quondam
Octaviano erecta est, cum hoc Augustulo periit. Thus the Empire of the Romans
at Rome, venerable through the whole World, and that imperial dignity which
rose in Augustus, perished in Augustulus.

Blessed is he that reads and they that he are the words of this Prophecy,
Rev. 1.3.
(...) and that keep the things written therein, for the time is at hand. The
word (...) sometimes signifies Astronomical Observations. We ought to be more
curious and diligent in calculating the motions of Scripture-times than the
most accurate Observer of Eclipses and other Heavenly Configurations which are
of great use in Scripture Chronology. Ps. 89.36, 37.
The Throne of this 2d. David is more established than the Sun or the Moon
before him, and as a faithful Witness in Heaven. Behold, he comes quickly,
Rev. 22 7.
blessed is he that keeps the sayings of the Prophecy of this Book.



2 Pet. 1.11.
that we may have abundant entrance into the Kingdom of our Lord and Savior.
And then, let the prosperity of Sion lie warm at our hearts. All the Holy men
of old took great delight in beholding the Churches Glory, though but in the
Glass of Vision; Ps. 102.14.
Nay they took pleasure in her stones and favored the dust thereof: For when
the Lord shall build up Zion, he shall appear in his glory. 16.
This shall be written for the Generation to come and the people that shall be
created, 18.
shall praise the Lord. The times of refreshing shall come, and the restitution
of all things whereof God has spoken by the mouth of all his Holy Prophets
since the world began; Acts 3.21.
2 Pet. 3.2.
and we ought to be mindful of the words spoken before by the holy Prophets and
Apostles concerning the promise of his coming; looking for, and hastening to the
coming of the day of God, 13.
when there shall be a new Heaven and a new Earth wherein dwells
righteousness, 15.
testifying that Holy Paul has spoken of these things in his Epistles: Romans
8.21.
When the Creature it self ( distinct from Saints, v. 23.) shall be delivered
from the bondage of corruption into the glorious liberty of the Sons of God.
Shall the great God think it meet in his heavenly wisdom and goodness to the
Church to foretell by all his Holy Prophets and Apostles these glorious times?
Shall the Son of God receive this discovery from the Father and signify it to
his Angel, and send it by his Angel to his Servant John his beloved Disciple.
What a magnificent apparatus is here from God the Father to the Son, from his
Son to the Angel, and from the Angel to John! Such as is before no Book of Holy
Scripture besides, and this upon the Lords Day to an Apostle in the Spirits
ecstasy, v. 10.
and to a bosom Apostle in tribulation, and in the Kingdom and Patience of Jesus
Christ. Nay, what a Majestical Scene is laid down in the 4th. Chapter, which is
wholly spent in preparation for these Visions of things to come. A door opened
in Heaven, and a voice like a Trumpet, and a glorious Throne appearing, and a
Person upon it in visage like the various-coloured Jasper and the incarnate
Sardine, and the Rainbow of the Covenant like the green Emerald round about the
Throne, And shall minute, silly, mortal worms make light of these things, and
despise to study the splendid radiant Prophesies let down from Heaven as a
token of Gods love to his Church; It becomes not any, who profess themselves
the Servants of the most high God. Dun. 19.2.
Are they wiser than Daniel, Ezekiel. 28.8.
who understood the number of the years by Books, and set himself to prayer
about it. Yea, Zach. 1.12.
the Angel of the Covenant urges the number of the years in prayer, Rev. 13.18.
and the Spirit of God sets it down for a point of wisdom to count the number
of the Beast. To what end? but for the consolation of the Church when they know
by the mouth of his holy Prophets that her warfare is accomplished; Is. 40.2.
41.25.
and that God would in due time raise up one from the North, Cyrus.
and the rising of the Sun. Behold, Jerusalem one that brings good tidings
It Is a great reviving to the hearts of Saints who are affectionately inclined
to the good and welfare of Zion, to hear that God will bring down his proud
enemies, Is. 62.7.
and shortly make Yerusalem the praise and joy of the whole Earth; and though
themselves should not survive to see all the goodness that God will show to his
people; yet like good old Simeon will sing to take the young beginnings of this
Salvation in their Arms.

David, 1 Chr. 28.3.
though forbidden to build the Temple, yet prepared for it with all his might
and set his affection upon it, 29.2, 3 9.
and rejoiced with great joy. Deuteronomy. 3.25.
Moses, though he could not obtain to see the good Land beyond Jordan, that
goodly Mountain, even Lebanon and that pleasant Valley of Damascus, which lies
between the two Lebanons from West to East about 40 miles in length, the
sweetest and goodliest Valley that ever the Sun shined upon: As a learned
Traveller told me, who was a late eye witness of its beauty; yet holy Moses
enjoyed great pleasure in taking but a prospect of it before he dyed from the
top of Pisgah. 34.1.


Beloved Daniel pronounces him blessed, Dan. 12.12.
that waits and comes to these happy times, and receives a promise of
standing in this Lot of his inheritance in the end of the days: And lastly,
blessed John prophesying of the New Jerusalem, Rev. 21.21, 24.
and of the saved Nations which shall walk in the light thereof, and of the
Kings of the Earth bringing their glory and honor into it, declares them
blessed that do his Commandments, and thereby have right to the Tree of Life,
22.14.
and to enter through the Gates into the City.

To end, What though several have erred in the Computation of Times, this does
no way invalidate the dignity of Scripture Oracles, nor the certainty of their
distinctly timed issue; but should stir up others to compare Scriptures more
accurately, to search the Ancient Histories more curiously, to discern what
providence have writ their comment upon those parts of prophecy already
fulfilled, to be diligent in the computation of Eclipses and other appearances
of the heavenly bodies. which are the only true fixers of Chronology, without
which all calculations in this nature will prove lame and insignificant, to
consider the nature of Scripture years which may somewhat differ from the
Julian, But above all, to pray ardently for the Spirits conduct, since the
Apostle conjoynes the quenching of the Spirit to the despising of prophecy, 1
These. 5.19, 20.
and know assuredly, Hab. 2.3.
That the Vision is for a fixed, an appointed time, and he that shall come will
come and will not tarry, and the benign Dews shall sweetly descend upon the
Mountains of Zion, Mic. 5.7.
which tarrieth not (for man's time) nor waits for the Sons of Men.

1673. Jul. 20.
The Second DISCOURSE ABOUT THE LILLY among THORNS.
Songs 2.2.
HERE we have Christ's own Pencil drawing the beautiful Face of his Spouse from
the Glass of his own Countenance, with this difference, v. 1.
Christ is a Lilly among the Roses of Sharon, the Church a Lilly among the
Thorns in the Valley of weeping: Christ, the Lilly in Glory, the Church in
Grace: Christ in Paradise, the Church in a Wilderness. And it is no small part
of his Lilly-like meekness, to own his Church in her thorny estate, and
describe her by his own beauty. She is perfect through the comeliness that he
puts upon her. Ezekiel. 16.14.
The Churches Moon shines by the Rays of the Sun of Righteousness reflected
upon her,

In the words observe:









There be some, (as Brightman and Cotton) who reduce this Song to a Prophecy,
and the Chaldee Paraphrast refers this staff of the Song to the time of
captivity; I suppose he means that of Babylon. I shall not discuss those
Prophetical Notions on this Song of Songs; nor be very sollicitous about the
sort of Lilly here assumed for the Metaphor. Whether the Tulip of Persia, to
which Solomon is resembled, Mat. 6.29.
when in all his glory; or whether that, now called the Lilly of the Valleys,
which bears that curious lovely Flower growing among Woods and Thickets.

Neither shall I enlarge my Discourse upon this Lilly-Valley, by drawing
Parallels between it and the Church as to its beauty, tenderness, lowliness,
purity, candor or sragrancy; its gratefulness to the Nerves and Medicinal
Virtue for affections of the Head, its sudden growth and blossoming in the
Spring time of the year. But leave all these for subjects to pious meditations,
and repair to the 2d. branch of the Text, scil. The state or position of the
Church of Christ among Thorns. By Thorns are meant the Daughters, so says the
Spirit. And as there are two sorts of Daughters, Genesis 6.4. Song. 2.7.
the Daughters of Men and the Daughters of Jerusalem,

Jerusalem were the outward Professors in the Jewish Church, who might possibly
at first be signinified by Weeds in the Garden. But when once they became
Persecutors, I suppose that they are not incongruously compared to the Brambles
of the Desert. For surely as Bernard glances, Bern. in Cor.
she is mala filia quae pungit Ecclesiam, an untoward Daughter that scratches
the Church. Yet, since the Wilderness is the proper and native Seat of
Brambles; this Text may possibly reflect upon the Lilly of the Gentile Church.
But it is safer to take in the whole Spouse of Christ, and show, That both
Heathens and formal Professors are very offensive and uncomfortable Associates
to the Church of Christ.

That the Lord Jesus has most tender love to his Church,

This Point divides it self into two Parts.




I shall endeavor to treat of the first under 6 Propositions.

There Is a vast disparity between a Lilly and a Thorn. Prop. 1.
Thorns are the natural Daughters of the World; or at best, but carnal
Professors with the Masque of Religion. The Lilly is a true Saint, v. 1.
an Off-set from the Root of Christ. He forms his holy Nature in the Church, and
then calls her by his own name of a spotless innocent Lilly. He turns a Bramble
into a Lilly by omnipotent grace, and then loves it with a spotless, endless
delight. A Child of God may remember his Bramble nature with holy shame and
humble thankfulness, and labor to lead a spiritual, meek, and heavenly life,
like a Lilly of Christ's regenerating.

himself has set it, and therefore sees and watches it in this perilous state.
His Wisdom thought meet to set it, and his love delights to guard it. Brambles
suck away the nitrous juice of the earth, to form their pungent prickles, that
Lillies may draw more wholesome balsame.

Saints grow the more gracious by the vicinity of scratching Briars, and holy
Men should meekly bear their station, since it is the will of Christ.

Its great discomfort to a Saint that is very gracious, to live in a vexing
World, But his tribulation works patience under sorrows, experience of divine
Protection, and hope of glory, To. 5.4. Ps. 120.5.
and therefore glorys in it, Woe is me that I sojourn in Mesech, and live in the
black Tents of Kedar, but joys in hope that the Badger-skins of Kedar, shall
one day be changed into the Purple Curtains of Solomon. Songs 1.5.
The Church both must and may have some society with thorny persons with sour
tempers, as well as sinful natures, not only originally wicked but of sharp
and contentious spirits.

A sweet temper mixed with holiness makes grace more beautiful, especially when
planted in the midst of thorns. Who would expect such a beautiful Lilly as
Abigail by the sides of a Churlish Nabal, or a meek David near a taunting
Michol? Thorns are the more uncomely, and the Lillies much more desirable.

But how shall a Saint behave himself among such ruggid and piercing spirits?

A. 1. With holy caution, when thorns be so near, remember how soon they may
prick, Saints must take heed of passive offense: Not to take it unkindly, as
well as not to provoke.

Briars are touchy things and act their nature, let them alone to the Juniper
Coals of Magistrates, Ps. 120.4.
or fire from Heaven as they live unfruitful and undesired, so they usually die
unlamented: No man is any farther troubled at a Dog when he snarles or bites,
then to avoid his currish temper, who expects from an Ass but rude braying;
from a Horse but surly kicks; from a Swine, but mire and grunting; or from
Thorns, but scratches. Stand out of their way as much as possible, and let such
beasts bite and fight and scratch together, Ps. 16.3.
let thy delight be among the excellent that are in the earth. The law of
kindness governs the tongue and the law of meekness the heart of a Saint. Pro.
31.26. 1 Pet. 3.4.


1 Pet. 2.23. and 3.1.
If possible, anoint their sharp prickles with the oil of a soft answer, that
when they enter, this may convey a healing drop into the wound. Its said of the
Viper, that with his needle-teeth he drops from his head a yellow poisonous
liquor dipped in rage, that inflames the wound, let us pour in some Balm of
Gilead, into the gauls and gashes of venomous spirits; Ecc. 10.4.
for healing apologies [(...)] comforts and sweetens against great offenses.

Hose. 14.5.
Though he grow like a small lowly Lilly, yet his roots are like the Cedars of
Lebanon. Ye never saw a Bramble scratching up the root of a Lilly; as he knows
it not, so he cannot. A Saints faith in and union to Christ remains inviolable.
Nay, many times, the pulling off his visible flowers, makes this root the
stronger.

O happy Church! O happy Saint! Ezekiel. 38.10.
No enemy can think a malicious thought, but it is foreseen, conducted and often
returned upon their own heads by an invisible power. Be patient, Ps. 37.13.
he sees that their day is coming who has appointed it. When the light of
Israel shall be for a fire, Is. 10.17.
and his holy one for a flame, and it shall burn and devour the thorns and
briars in one day.

(in promptu) ready for mischief, though not (in aectu) continually vexing the
Church of Christ: every wicked man has a Bramble in his heart, and sometimes
hangs out at his mouth in bitter taunts. Gal. 4.29.
The Son of the Bond woman will persecute him that is born after the Spirit.
The Nightingale sings with a thorn at her breast by night, though she sees it
not always, yet may sometimes feel it* Its vain for the Church to promise
self-security in a Land of Scorpions. Let the wind blow from any corner either
of Paganism or Heresy: the storms will impetuously clash the thorns upon the
Lillies, and the Churches sides receive many a gash. She has bin often taught
wisdom from the Briars and Thorns of the Wilderness. Jud. 8.16.
But here our thorns are the malepert daughters of Jerusalem. Such as grow in
Gardens are the worst, because the ranker soil breeds the strongest prickles.
The sharpest Persecutions pierce the Church from the daughters of formal
Jerusalem; Gal. 4.25.
as may appear by the Jewish, Arian, and Popish Tyrannies over the Spouse of
Christ. Mark an Apostate Julian, that scoffs and taunts most bitterly against
the Church, according to that old saying, Omnis apostata osor sui ordinis.
Every Apostate hates the party from which they declined, and become of all
Persecutors the most cruel and barbarous. Thorns that are nighest by education,
produce the sharpest trials, as the Psalmist Prophesied in the Person of
Christ, Ps. 41.9.
My familiar friend has lift up his heel against me, Zac. 13.6.
with which the Prophet accords, These are the wounds received in the house of
my friends, Song. 1.6.
My Mothers Children are angry with me. The sweetest wine makes the sharpest
Vinegar. The nearest Relations the most bitter conflicts, who ought to yield
the most tender embraces. Bernard observes they had not God to Bern, ib.
their Father, but the Devil, though they boasted of their formal Mother. A
cruel Mother that milks out poison and spits venom in the face of her
Children, pretends the honey of peace and discipline, and mixes the gall of
pride, and flings out firebrands.

one Lilly among many thorns, my dove says Christ, my undefiled is but one,
there is but one Spouse, one Bride of Christ.

One to show the paucity of true Believers, as to the multitude of ungodly
persons, hypocrites and sormal Professors. Briars multiply vastly, the vory
tops of Brambles will shoot down and take root in the neighboring mould. The
heads and hearts of the wicked run in the earth to a vast extent, but a Lilly
never. Feracious and fruitful is the nature of sin and sinners. How many
Families filled with unholy persons, scarce a Lilly to be sound. How few true
Saints in City or Country: As the Prophet speaks of the Berries of an
Olivetree, one of a City or two of a Tribe to come to Zion. Is. 17.6. Jer. 3.14.


2. One to show their unity, one root, though many flowors. The Church delights
in oneness of heart and society. Unity and verity cling together, falsity and
division are very numerous. The wicked seldom agree but in tearing and
defacing the Church, Pilat and Herod join hands against Christ, and mark what a
crew of enemies unite and consederate against the Church, Ps. 83.5, 6.
else there is little union among the wicked, because pride (the principle of
division) compass them like a chain, Ps. 73.6.
and therefore violence as a garment. Their enmity to the Church drags them
into some temporary union as with an iron Chain. The Popish Synagogue brags of
their general union: It Is but a Spanish brag. For one of their Cardinals
numbers above three hundred differences of opinion in the Romish Church, Bp.
Hall peace of Rome. Land. 1603.
and one of their Casuists confesses near threescore differences in the point
of Confession, and many more might be added of Popes and Counsels and Frieries
one against another. But the true Church has an admirable union, one Lord, one
says, one baptism, Jerusalem is a City compact together, and at unity within
her self. Though outward Professors have some variance, yet in the grand
sundamental of sree grace and salvation by faith alone the confessions of the
Reformed Churches rejoice in a sweet harmony, as to lesser points, Oh that it
were as it ought to be and shall be in the glorious times that are a coming.

One, to show what concerns the Church in general, is applicable to every
member. Each promise and privilege is universal and yet peculiar, to teach
Believers that are in Covenant to lay hold on every promise, as if made to them
alone. Romans 23, 24.
Abraham's promise is thine, for it was not written for his sake alone but for
us also if we believe. What was said to Joshua, was said to thee, he will never
leave thee nor forsake thee. Heb. 13.5. Tit. 1.4. Jude 3. Heb. 11.40.
Its common faith and common salvation, that they without us should not be made
perfect. The Church is a Dove that brings an Olive Branch to every Noah, within
the Ark of Christ; the love of Christ is general to all, and singular to each
individual member. Each Saint has an equal title to his love and all spiritual
joys as the whole.

Joseph, a Moses in the midst of Egypt, an Obadiah at Samaria, a Nehemiah in
Shushan, Luke 8.3.
a Joanna in Herod's Court, In a thorny family among sharp relations, in a
prickly Land to scent like Heaven. To retain growing innocence and
tender-hearted-lenity in a crooked and perverse Nation. To beautify and
sweeten the dunghill World. Phil. 21.15.
To lustrate a wild Common full of briars by the purity of holiness. To pray
for such as prick their sides, to do good to such as hate and spitefully
scratch them, a spirit of God and a spirit of glory rests upon them, to be
filled with the good will of him that dwelt and shined in the briar of Horeb:
This is to be like our heavenly Father. It Is no great praise to be quiet in a
Hermitage, and to fly like a Dove from Kedar, but in the midst of business,
relations and troubles, then shines the grace of a Saint.

Saul and the Philistines encountering together gave escape to David. Julian and
the Persians delivered the primitive Christians. The Sadduces and Pharisees
conflict rescued Paul into the hands of Lysias. Acts 23.7.
The Church often grows safely under the entangled counsels of infatuated
Achitophels, and subtle Hamans.

While they perplex and involve each other, Ps. 2.16.
they become ensnared by the works of their own hands, and the Church sings
Higgaion Selah. The state of Geneva is compared to a bone that 3 sturdy
Mastiffs stand by and snarl one at another, but dare not touch it. The Motto
upon the Churches briars, may well be that of Scotland's thistles, ne impune
lacessant: God fences his lillies about by the thorns of carnal Professors, as
well as the tall Brambles of Bashan, the open and violent Pagan enemies. The
multitudes of Formalists in and about the Church a wise God turns both to
shadow and shelter; to shadow from the scorching Sun that would wither it, and
to shelter it from the foot of Beasts, the foot of pride and violence that
might tread it down. They are always good subjects, useful and painful and
faithful in their stations. Joseph's srugal prudence gat him favor in the eye
of Pharaoh. Mordecai's trustiness to the life of Ahasuerus raised him to
honor, and Daniel's sagacity and expertness in affairs, was a notable step to
his personal honor, his further advancement in the rising Persian Court, and a
return for the Church of God out of Babylon.

Let Us descend to apply, the Use is twofold, to the thorns and lillies.



Ecc. 7.29.
He created man upright, but he sought out many inventions.



Most of the Worlds briars grow without any lillies among them* They live among
Nettles, Hemlock and Henbane and other poisonous Plants, stinging, and tearing,
and choking one another, Tit. 3.3.
living in malice and envy, hateful and hating one another, but remember you
that have Lillies among you; their humility, fragrancy, lenity, purity should
provoke you to holy emulation. They live peaceably by you, scratch them not.
Happy thorns, did you know it; God would soon fold you up into bundles and
deliver you to the surnace of his wrath, were it not for his Chosen among you,
Mat. 13.30.
Suffer them a while, let the Briars grow till the Harvest, says our Lord, Then
shall his Angels gather out of his Kingdom, v. 41.
all things that offend and them which do iniquity and cast them into a furnace
of fire; there shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth.

Heb. 6.8.
That earth that bears thorns and briars is rejected and is nigh unto
cursing, whose end is to be burnt. Unserviceable, unprofitable wretches cumber
the ground, suck away the juice from Gods Plants, unfit for building, and
injurious, that which their prickly venom heat and infest the hands that touch
them. Take heed of persecuting the meek and humble Lillies. There Is no one sin
more criminal and provoking in the sight of God. He ordains his arrows against
the Persecutors and dooms them to eternal fire. Ps. 7.13.
When once persons fall to that sin, Ps. 58.9.
God makes way and room for his wrath. Before the pots can feel the thorns
etc. a dark place but sharp against Gods enemies: Arias and Glassius translate
it, antequam spinae intelligant rhamnum, etc. Before the Thorns apprehend a
Bramble, an elegant metaphor from the growth of rational creatures. Before the
young tender thorns shall arise to the capacity of a great bramble to do more
mischief. The word (...) in the plural masculine signifies thorns, and the
Targum glosses the Text thus, while they are tender and green,: Isa. 54.13.
Eccl. 7.8.
while in their youth and vigor, as Husbandmen cut down thorns before they
grow rampant, so will the Lord tear off wicked Persecutors with the whirlwind
and burn them with the fire of his wrath before they grow old, withered and
dry, while yet in the sap and strength, while they are lively and flourishing.
The design of the Psalmist expresses the wrath of God against his enemies
before they shall finish their purposes to bring utter destruction to the
Congregation of the just.



frames of heart and life they may convince the briars that tear them of their
fiery, unrighteous sharpness. Saints must show a better spirit dwelling in
them, then the world knows off, sweet thoughts issuing into courteous and
affable words; smelling fragrantly of heavens influence, and the dews of Zion
moistning their lovely hearts with a conversation so amiable as may glorify
their heaven-born race that all about them may delight to come within them, to
taste of their delicious spirits as if they dwelt in a garden of Pomegranats.
Song 4.13.


A Lilly is a tractable Plant, a briar is of a sullen, churlish, rough,
Nabal-like spirit. Wicked men's tempers are commonly like nettles and thorns
thrust away that cannot be taken with hands, 2 Samuel 23.6.7.
he that touches them must be fenced with iron, and the staff of a spear, and
they shall be utterly burnt with fire in the same place, not to be handled
without hedgers gloves, without guards and fences, but so must not Saints, yet,
take heed of offenses even to the Sons of Belial. A Lilly will not cannot hurt
a thorn. You never heard a Sheep barking, at a Dog, or saw a Dove fly after a
Bird of Prey. A Saint must not be of a sturdy, dogged, proud, rapacious
insolent and revengeful temper, but commit themselves to God, For Vengeance is
mine says the Lord, Romans 12.9.
I Will repay it.

Q. But may not a Saint sometimes use the prick of reproof?

A. When the necessity of their calling, station and relation requires it, it is
their duty. Lev. 19.17.
They must in no no wise hate their Brother in their heart, but show their love
by rebuking him, and not suffer sin upon him. But, Pro. 15.12.
if he be a scorner he will never love his reprover, neither will he go unto the
wise, but sight and quarrel and backbite most venomously. Pro. 9.7.
He that reproves a scorner gets shame and blots and hatred. Therefore
remember the sphere of thy station and go no further. Thorns are always
scratching and censuring Saints for reproof though bound in duty, and though
never so mild, wherefore let the Lillies whiteness, purity and humility be a
silent standing reproof against their neighboring briars.

Let Us try] can you bear their prickly thorns with meekness of patience. A good
nature is seen more in bearing and passing by injuries that might provoke a
nettling temper, then in bestowing of benefits. Will ye pretend to a lilly and
cant bear a prick in your good name for Christ, nor a thorn in your liberty for
the Gospel sake, nor a scratch in your purses for pure worship and the
honorable name of the great Lilly of the Valleys, what conformity bear we to
Christ? The Head of the Church was girt and gored with a Crown of thorns for
us, and must not the Churches Sides expect the like, Delicatus es Christian
etc. said Jerome, thou art too dainty, that must be Crowned with roses here and
glory hereafter: what, swim in a River of oil, into the river of Paradise; no,
no! Canaanites will be thorns in your sides till ye come to that Canaan above.
Deceive not your selves, scandals at the Cross make formalists stumble into
Apostasy. A great Roman Emperor tried his Courtiers and State Officers by
Proclamation, who would renounce Christianity, to prove their constancy, and
such who for flattery or sear fled back from the truth, he turned out of their
places, telling them, that such who were false to their Savior, would never be
true to their Emperor. Our great Lord and King of the Church sometimes tries
whether we will suffer thorns in our comforts, rather then in our consciences.
Turning times are trying times.

Ps. 94, 19.
If multitudes of thoughts ramble and tumble within us, let divine comforts
delight our souls: a rare word in the Hebrew taken from the solaces, (...)
dancings, dandlings, singings of tender Mothers to their froward and sretful
Children. If thou can find and feel God to be in Covenant with thee, and
taking thee in arms and cherishing thee on the knees of his affection like a
Father, what matter what the scullions in the Kitchen, and wicked men the rods
of his wrath, the Hang-men and Executioners of Divine Judgments in the earth,
be they never so great, speak and twit against thee thou know thy Fathers
love is solid and permanent, though by an affliction he chide for a fault, yet
his heart is with thee, Joh. 14.3.17.24.
he will never leave thee till he bring thee to himself, and to the high
inheritance. Let all the Devils in Hell fling their ragged firebrands at thee,
make but a tush of it in the name of the Father of mercies, they cannot hurt
thee. Pray for the gentle Zephyrus, the sweet breathings of Gods Spirit to flow
down and invigorate your Beds of Spices. Song 4.16.


John 15.18.
If the World hate you, says our Lord, ye know that it hated me before it
hated you, If ye were of the World, the World would love its own, but because
ye are not of the world, but I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the
World hates you. In his heavenly prayer our Lord also addresseth thus to the
Father; John 17.14.
I have given them thy word and the World has hated them, because they are not
of the world, even as I am not of the world. Disgrace from the world, let it
arm you from going back, and let holy emulation edge you forward. Love not the
world, nor the things of this world, the childish fashion, the apish attire,
the vain pomp and glistering gewgaws, the tickling and soul-alienating
pleasures of this transient and perishing life. Be solid and serious persons,
let your affections be risen with Christ to the pleasures and treasures that
are above. Col. 3.1.


Paul had this thorn, 2 Cor. 12.7.
a thorn given, but it bore roses at last, His sufferings incensed him to fight
the good fight of faith the more courageously.

O the piercing thorns of temptation that annoy the choicest Saints! he mourns
more intensely for the thorns at his heart, then those at his feet. He cuts
down the former, but they grow again, Hinc ille lachrymae, hence his continual
spring of tears; the others without him he tramples down valiantly. Worldly
cares, fiery trials, dark desertions that touch his heart, these exercise his
says and patience. But O the fearful Bramble of Original lust, a bramble like
the Oaks in Bashan as big as the Waste of his soul. Here he lays on with the
ax of Repentance every day, and makes the Chips to fly, till death help him to
fetch the killing stroke upon all his deadly enemies. He sweats and pants till
he gets the Victory.

Col. 4.5.
walk in wisdom toward them that are without; let your speech be always with
grace, seasoned with Salt. If your salt be unsavory, wherewith (says our Lord)
shall it be seasoned. A violent calcining fire takes away much of the grateful
savor of salt. Take heed of fiery trials that are to try them that dwell upon
the earth; If ye draw back, Heb. 10.38.
my soul (says God) shall have no pleasure in you, a dreadful saying, Hosea
8.8.
to be like Israel's vessel wherein there is no pleasure. Hieronym. in loc.
Immundum vas seu inutile etc. quo ad projicienda stercora uti sobemus. a
vessel made for the requisites of nature to be filled with things unseemly: let
Saints study to be holy and useful and likewise to be careful and watchful
against the tinctures and temptations of a profane World. A Saint must always
carry about him a dove-like heart and sometimes use the nimble sparkling eye of
the Serpent to guard his dove-like innocence. Spina poena est, thorns will be
afflictive. To live near them and not to be hurt is the fruit of divine grace
and power, but it is usually connext with our use of holy wisdom toward them.
Persecutions are oftentimes chastisements for sin, and preparations for glory.
Though a fruit of the fall, yet they become medicinal to a Saint; his troubles
being his comforts. Boisterous winds hurry a Ship to its haven. Dangerous
diseases often ferment the blood into a purity for more prosperous health. The
poison of sin mingles the potion of repentance. (...) evipera.
Andromachus's Treakle composed of a Viper cures its venom. The flesh of a
Scorpion applied to the place affected, healed Olearius of his pain and
torment. Olear. Travels p. 195
A Saints inward bitings from Satan are cured by the Dragons blood slain by the
Spear of Christ. VVendelin de nilo C. 16. G.. 11.
Its said that Crocodile's tears pierce the skull of man, I am sure that a
Saints penitent tears dissolve the head and all the inventions of Satan. To
end; a gracious soul may gather the flowers of assurance from the sharp
prickles of temptation and persecution. He sucks much honey of the thorns that
molest and afflict him.

Jerusalem are lillies in show, but have thorns in heart, and sometimes grow
out from the midst of their seeming flowers. They Will prick sometimes as
peevishly and perversely as open wicked men, and as the Daughters of Babylon.
What delight can a Saint take in their vain converse, their pride and
worldliness? Many strange Professors start up now adays that bear the leaves of
their godly Fathers but not their fruit, they go for Daughters of Zion, but are
haughty, Is 3.16.
walk with stretched forth necks, and wanton eyes, mincing or tripping nicely
as they go, and making a tinkling with their feet. Crepitantibus Calceis and
Crepidis insistentes, A Lap.
With their flaps and slaps proclaiming their levity and folly, but their
hearts are little worth, Pro. 10.20.
and their tongues like Serpents fork'd with enmity, and sharp like crooked
thorns against the ways of holiness, Song 6.2.
let us depart from them and go with our Beloved into the Gardens, to the beds
of Spices to feed in the Gardens and to gather Lillies, where Christ has his
sets and knots of Lillies, has pure and holy worshipping Churches, there let us
assemble, though briars be near, yet Christ is nigher.

Ephesians. 6.15.
being well shod with the preparation of the Gospel of peace, yet leap nimbly
through them and hasten from them. Cry out of the Valley, the Settims, the
sharp Bushes in the Plains of Moab, and pant for Lebanon where thy Lilly shall
be planted under the true Vine and the Tree of Life; where thorns in duties,
relations, enjoyments shall make thy spirit to bleed no more. Where thorns from
Devils and a wicked World shall affront and gash no more, where thorns from our
own hearts or others tongues shall wound no more, whether from the Daughters of
Gath, or Jerusalem, 2 Samuel 1.20.
from outrageous wickedness, or perverse formalisme shall touch or prick or
punish the Church no more.

O pray for that Sabbath of rest, that Jubilee of joy, when from all thy
labors, sorrows and tears thou shall rest in the bosom of eternal love, when
the furrows made by the torrent of tears in thy hollow cheeks shall be filled
up by the Balm of Gilead, when all thy wounds and scarrs shall be bathed into
smoothness and beautifully healed in those rivers of pleasure that flow at the
right hand of him that sits upon the Throne, for evermore.

I should come now to the Second branch of the Doctrine to set forth the love
of Christ to his Church and each holy Soul while sighing and groaning among the
thorns of this Valley of Achor. Add.
whereof briefly and close.

thy Spirit by his Spirit. He sends his dove into our hearts, Ezekiel. 36.27.
and then we mourn like doves in the clefts of the rock of Ages. He puts his
spirit within us, and then hearkens to the groanings of his own Spirit, Romans
8.27. Song 2.14.
O my dove, let me hear thy voice, why? because thy Countenance is comely: Non
placet vox, si displiceat facies, Bern.
our face is comely in the beauty of his righteousness, and therefore our voice
is pleasant through the melody of his Spirit.

In all their affliction he is afflicted. Is. 63.9.
The thorn never pricks the sides of the Church, Zach 2.8.
but it touches the apple of his eye. Is this lilly parched with the Sun? Cor
Christi aestuat, the heart of Christ is affected with holy sympathy. Is it
blasted with East-winds? he comforts and relieves it by sweet Western Gales of
his Spirit. Is it spotted and stained with dirt struck up by the foot of
Beasts? he washes it clean in his own laver, our very hairs are numbered, Ps.
56.8.
our tears bottled, our desires known, our steps and wanderings are measured,
our groans are not hid from him, our members are written in his Book that not a
bone is broken but he sets them again.

Jews, and breathed his peace upon them. He was with the Church in the
Wilderness, he visited the lillys in the thorny bush, and conducted them and
planted them in the Land of Canaan. It was his hortus pensilis and
ambulatorius, he delighted in his walking Garden through the howling Deserts of
Arabia, the Type and Emblem of his Gospel Church in all her scatterings and
thirsty marches, and will never forsake them till like conquering Joshua he
bring them to their appointed rest. Neither is there any of the least of his
beloved ones but he will vouchsafe a gracious ear to their petitions, Is.
40.41.63.9.4.
and carry them in his bosom as all the days of old.

Is. 43.3.
He gave Egypt for their Ransom, Aethiopia and Seba for them, This is matter
of argument in our prayer thou have delivered this people out of Egypt until
now. Numb. 14.19.
And what if we be not fit for mercy, he is always fit to show it when heavenly
wisdom judges meet. The times of the Church are in the hands of a Father who
consults his own bowels and the expediency of his own glory. In that day when
the design and decrees of mercy, unite in accomplishment, he can form the
hearts of men and fashion them upon the wheel of Providence. Let none despond
because the Church is not prepared for approaching deliverance. The Prophets
are full of this encouragement that in such a day he will power out another
spirit, and make all things fall in joint and to hit the mark of his
appointment. The time is hastening and at the doors, that the Lord will power
out clean water upon his Sanctuary he will do a new thing on the earth, now it
shall spring forth (...) nunc germinabit, Is. 43.19.
(...) a manifest allusion with that of Zachary, Zech. 3.8.6.12.
I will bring forth my Servant, [Zemach] the BRANCH, called by Luke (...) the
Branch from on High: when the Beasts of the field, the Dragons and Owls of the
Gentile Wilderness shall honor me Then shall Zion bud forth and great shall be
the glory of her Children, from the North, and from the West, Is. 49.12.
and those from the Land of Sinim. Which some as Arias and others, understand
of China, but more likely of Sin or Pelusium by a trope for the Land of Egypt,
Sin being the great fortress at the entrance of Egypt, and South of the Land
of Canaan.

He is sore displeased with the Heathen that are at ease. Zech. 1.15.
When Gods a little displeased, they leap like Lions from Bashan upon the
Church. Is. 47.6.37.29.
When God is wroth with his People for their unholiness and defilements, they
show no mercy. But God will put a Hook in their nose, and lead them back like
beasts into the Land of Slaughter, for Sacrifices in the Temples of their own
Gods. Heathen briars may flourish and spread their twins far and near, but when
once they molest his Church they are nigh to burning. Pompey prospered not
after he stumbled in the Temple of Jerusalem. Many and fatal instances occur in
History of Gods vindictive Justice upon his enemies, when once they laid hands
upon the precious things of Zion. Discite justitiam moniti, etc. learn to
beware of Herod's destiny, smote by an Angel in the midst of all his glory.

Zion, Is. 13.12.
he will punish the fruit of their stout hearts, and the glory of their high
looks. When the People of Zion are meek and humble then they shall arise out of
obscurity, and shake of their dust and Kings shall come to the glory of Zions
rising, Is. 60.3. Bern.
humiliatio parit humilitatem, Sanctified humiliation brings advancing
humility. All their thorns shall be consecrated into sweet briars, and all
their pricking vexations shall prove medicinal, like potions made of the
Carduus bendictus, the blessed thistle. The troubles of the Church both for
time and measure are guided by her wise ad holy Husband, who has charged the
tossing waves of the Sea, hitherto shall ye come and no further.

She is black but comely, scratcht but beautiful. A Dove begrim'd among the
Pots but a Dove still. Song. 2.10.
Arise my Dove, my love, my fair one, Song 1.5.
my joy, come away. The Tents of Kedar set a luster upon the Curtains of
Solomon. A Jacob in Laban's Family, a Joseph in Pharaoh's, an Obadiah in
Ahab's, gives a perfume to the place they dwell in. there is a wall of fire
between the lillies and the thorns, Zach. 2.4.
to cherish the lillies and to consume the thorns. There Is a black side of the
Cloud to dannt the Egyptians, but a bright side to enlighten and comfort
Israel.

Let not the Church be discouraged for Christ owns and loves her in the midst
of deformities, Inser. 1.
imbecilities and conflicts. Though sometimes weak and a little heady and
conceited, it is his beloved Spouse still, whom he intends to form and beautify
for himself. A tender father pitties his sick and weakly Child, most of all. A
gracious Husband compassionates his sickly Spouse especially if sick of love,
His left hand is under her head, Song 2.6.
and his right hand does embrace her. A little pettishness and frowardness does
not alienate his heart from her, if right in the main; his generous love winks
at many things and pardons all. Though the Moon have her spots, the Sun
distains not to shine upon her, and though a Saint may have some foolishness,
Ps. 69.5.14.
yet God delivers him from draggling in the mire, and suffers him not to sink

Uprightness may consist with many imperfections. Infer. 2.
God takes his measures by sincerity and not infirmity, that is a Saints joy. He
considers our tentations and knows our frame and remembers that we are but
dust. Ps. 103 14
Some frowardness and frettings in the midst of integrity, nay a spark of grace
is highly regarded though at first struck from Heaven into an ocean of
corruption within us, its kindling and will be flaming. We have our coolings
and our warmths, some beauty though some deformities, and the heart is all with
God, if the bent and tenor of the spirit be toward him, only take heed lest
our weaknesses should eclipse his praise, despond our spirits in holy duties,
and indulging of touchy flashes should habituate into fierceness, and thereby
become envious at our betters in grace, and at last droop and sink into an
uncomfortable frame of spirit, and then censure and backbite others that
faithfully and meekly reprove us for our folly, and would restore us to a
heavenly frame and communion with God.

Be sensible and meek under every trial. Infer. 3.
Let crosses crucify the flesh within thee, and let every affliction mortify
the body of sin and death, and still remember thou art Christ's Lilly, though
distressed by manifold thorns. Keep in the royal highway to Heaven between
fainting and confidence. He that faints, Prove. 24.10.
the strength of his faith is small. Nourish faith by Promises, they are the
milk and honey of the Land of Canaan. Keep always some of these precious
cordials in the bottles of memory, and be ware also of too much confidence and
selfconceit Qui se sibi magistrum constituit stulto se discipulum subdit, Bern.
Epist. 87.
a self taught person has a fool to his Master.

The Church as far transcends the World as a pure unspotted Lilly outshines a
crew of intricate thorns upon a cragged rock, Inser. 4.
or as a garden of roses in Sharon is more pleasant then the cursed Mountains
of Gilboa, unpassable by briars and brambles.

Puniceis humilis quantum saliunca rosetis.
As sragrant roses prickly thorns excel
Brambles and Myrtles yield no parallel.
Is. 55.13.
Let none value true Saints by external grandeur, but their virtues and graces,
humility sweetness, peacefulness and innocence. Many Professors are esteemed
for riches and titles, for gold rings and gaudy cloths: James 2.3.
Sit here at my right hand, make room for a Silken Vest and fine toys upon an
empty head and a barren heart. Oh how our estimates stick in the mire! whom do
you most prize and admire, a poor sheep-skin Saint that stands his ground in
Persecution, Heb. 11.37.
or a proud Peacock that yelps at a Storm. Are ye not carnal and judges of
evil thoughts, James 2.4.
Since it appears not now what it is to be a true Son of God, but at that day
it will be revealed, when we shall see him as he is. 1 John 3.2. Infer. 5.


Let none stand amazed at the pageantry of false Churches, nor value the Whore
of Rome because of her bravery. Rev. 18.16.
She Is decked with Pearls and precious stones, but smells strong of Egypt. All
the Persumes of Arabia cannot hide or choke her stink. It Is not Lateran Music
will consecrate her Masses into audience, nor her incense procure access to the
Throne of Grace, Amos 5.22.
I will not smell says the Lord in your Solemn Assemblies. Take away the noise
of your Songs, the melody of your Viols, let judgment run down as waters and
righteousness like a mighty stream. I shall end with Bernard to Eugenius, the
4th. * Bern. de consid. l. 1. f. 238.
Plena est ambitiosis ecclesia, non est jam quod exhorreat in studiis and
molitionibus ambitionis, non plus quam spelunca latronum in spoliis viatorum.
The Church (of Rome) is stufft with ambitious persons, they tremble no more in
the studious endeavors after ambitious designs, then a den of Robbers at
dividing the spoils of innocent travelers. and then tells him to his face
among other smart but serious reflections upon his Lordliness, [ id. l. 3 f.
240.
praesis ut prosis, etc. ut dispenses, non imperes etc. Nullum tibi venenum
nullum gladium plus formido, quam libidinem dominandi] govern to edification,
act like a Servant, and Steward, not an Emperor, I dread no poison, no
assassinate more fatal to you, then the lust of domination.

Be not offended at the Church of Christ because of her mean and troublesome
State. Inser. 6.
What if the King of Zion come meek and lowly, riding upon an Ass, Zech 9.9.
or his holy Apostles walking on foot for the Conversion of Nations through the
World, what if the showrs of Heaven sall upon the cheeks of the lovely, lowly
Lilly, and she sit weeping among the briars, must true religion and pure
worship be never courted but when the Sun shines? The way to Canaan lay through
stones and rocks, Deuteronomy. 8.15
amidst Lions and Tigers, among Scorpions and fiery flying Serpents; true
genuine Israel must through all, and never be appaled, dismayed or dare to face
about to Egypt, of which the Lord has said ye shall return that way no more,
Deuteronomy. 17.16.
If we startle at the briars about the lillies, and flinch for a few prickles
we are not worthy of the Kingdom of Heaven. Mat. 10.37.
The troubles are but momentany, the glory eternal. They may hurt the flesh,
but cannot hinder the flight of the soul into the bosom of Abraham. Let not
the Churches afflictions obstruct your associating to her company which is
passing under the conduct of her 2d Joshua, Heb. 4.8.9.
into everlasting rest. Judge not her beauty, it is under a mask, and though
besmeared by the soil of her malignant enemies, she is all glorious within.
It Is our ignorance of the Churches beauty. A comely face must not be
disingeniously wiped by a malicious tongue, till the dust and spots be washed
off and its aspect clarified, nor a sweet temper dropped upon because of
calumnies, before converse does open it. It Is want of holiness in most, and
true love to it, 1 John 2.10.
that causes stumbling at the holy ways of God.

Resign your selves into his sweet and strong tuition, Inser. 7.
who can incline the worst of brambles to be a fence and security to his
lillies; and the sharper and stronger they are, the more offensive to the
Churches enemies. Is. 46.11.
Cyrus a ravenous Bird from East God called to feast upon the sacrifice of his
wrath in the Land of Chaldea, to root up the briars of Babylon, which had so
greatly vexed and abused his beloved people. All Histories yield notable
instances of divine severity against barbarous persecutors when once they
stretch out their hands against the Church, they are quickly withered. To what
fearful issues the enraged and infatuated instruments of Satan in the 10
primitive Persecutions were reduced, Ecclesiastic and Civil story is very
pregnant; let us endeavor with all sincerity and sedulity to lead lives
unblameable and keep Conscience unspotted before God and man, and arm our
selves with holy resolutions against every sinful course wherein we would
tremble to appear at the dreadful Judgment seat of Christ, and God, our
gracious father will take care of his part to give us divine protection and
preserve us to his heavenly Kingdom. What blessed lives might Christians live
did they walk always as under the eye of an Omniscient God, and with what
comfort might they resign their spirits at death into his hands, as of a
faithful Creator, and merciful Redeemer, obtaining an abundant entrance into
the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

FINIS.

