

THEODOSIUS: OR, The force of Love. A TRAGEDY.

ACTED BY Their ROYAL HIGHNESSES Servants, AT THE Duke's Theater.

Written by NOT. LEE.

WITH THE MUSIC betwixt the ACTS.

-- Nec minus periculum ex magna
Fama quam ex mala.
Tacit. LONDON, Printed for R. Bentley and M. Magnes, in Russel Street, near
Covent Garden. 1680.

The PERSONS.
Theodosius. Mr. Williams. Varanes. Mr. Betterton. Marcian. Mr. Smith. Lucius.
Mr. Wiltshire. Atticus, Chief Priest. Mr. Bowman. Leontine. Mr. Leitherfull.
Chorus.

Pulcheria. Mrs. Betterton. Athenais. Mrs. Barry. Jul^a. Del^a. Attendants,
Singers.

The SCENE CONSTANTINOPLE.

PROLOGUE.
WIT (...) oppressed, and filled at last with rage,
Thus in a sullen mood rebukes the Age.
What loads of Fame do modern Hero's bear,
For an inglorious, long, and lazy War?
Who for some skirmish or a safe Retreat,
(Not to be dragged to Battle) are called Great.
But oh, what do ambitious Statesmen gain!
Who into private Chests whole Nations drain?
What sums of Gold they hoard is daily known,
To all men's cost, and sometimes to their own.
Your Lawyer too, that like an O Yes bawls,
That drowns the Market-Higler in the Stalls,
That seems begot, conceived, and born in brawls;
Yet thrives: He and his crowd get what they please,
Swarming all Term-time through the Strand like Bees,
They buz at Westminster, and lie for Fees.
The godly too their ways of getting have;
But none so much as your Phanatick Knave:
Wisely the wealthiest Livings they refuse,
Who by the fattest Bishoprics would loose;
Who with short hair, large Ears, and small blue Band,
True Rogues, their own, not Gods Elect, command.
Let Pigs then be profane; but Broths allowed,
Possets and Christian Caudles may be good,
Meet helps to reinforce a Brothers blood;
Therefore each Female Saint he does advise,
With groans, and hums, and has, and gogling eyes,
To rub him down, and make the Spirit rise.
While with his zeal transported, from the ground
He mounts, and sanctifies the Sisters round.
On Poets only no kind Star e're smill'd;
Cursed Fate has damned 'em every Mothers Child:
Therefore he warns his Brothers of the Stage
To write no more to an ungrateful age.
Think what penurious Masters you have served;
Tasso ran mad, and noble Spencer starved:
Turn then, who e're thou art that can write well,
Thy Ink to Gaul, and in Lampoons excel.
Forswear all honesty, traduce the Great,
Grow impudent, and rail against the State;
Bursting with spleen, abroad thy Pasquils send,
And choose some Libel-spreader for thy Friend:
The Wit and Want of Timon point thy mind,
And for thy Satyr-subject choose Mankind.
THEODOSIUS.
To her Grace the Duchess of Richmond.
MADAM,
THE Reputation that this Play received on the Stage, some few Errors excepted,
was more than I could well hope from so Censorions an Age, from whom I ask but
so much necessary Praise as will serve, once or twice a Year at most, to gain
their good Company, and just keep me alive. There is not now that Mankind that
was then,
When as the Sun and Man did seem to strive
(Joynt-Tenants of the World) who should survive:
When if a slow-paced Star had stolen away,
From the Observer's marking, he might stay
Two or three hundred Years to see it again,
And then make up his Observation plain.
Dr. Donn.

For it is impossible in our limited Time (and I bring his Opinion to back my
own, who is without comparison the best Writer of the Age) to present our
Judges a Poem half so perfect as we could make it. I must acknowledge, Madam,
with all humility, I ought to have taken more time and more pains in this
Tragedy, because it is dedicated to Your Grace, who being the best Judge, (and
therefore can when You please make us tremble) yet with exceeding Mercy have
pardoned the defects of Theodosius, and given it Your entire Approbation. My
Genius, Madam, was Your Favorite when the Poet was unknown, and openly
received Your Smiles before I had the Honor to pay Your Grace the most
submissive Gratitude for so illustrious and advantageous a Protection. To let
the World too know that You do not think it beneath You to be officiously Good,
even from extremest Heights to discern the lowest Creatures, and give them all
the Noblest Influence You can, You brought Her Royal Highness just at the
exigent Time, whose single Presence, on the Poet's Day, is a Subsistence for
him all the Year after. Ah, Madam, if all the short-lived Happiness that
miserable Poets can enjoy consit in Commendation only; nay, if the most part
are content with Pop'lar Breath, and even for that are thankful: How shall I
express my self to Your Grace, who by a particular Goodness, and innate
Sweetness, merely for the sake of doing well, have thus raised me above my
self. To have Your Grace's Favor is, in a word, to have the Applause of the
whole Court, who are its Noblest Ornament, magnificent and eternal Praise.
Something there is in Your Mien so much above that we vulgarly call Charming,
that to me it seems Adorable, and Your Presence almost Divine, whosedazling and
Majestic Form is a proper Mansion for the most elevated Soul: And let me tell
the World, nay, sighing speak it to a Barbarous Age (I cannot help calling it
so, when I think of Rome and Greece) Your extraordinary Love for Heroic Poetry
is not the least Argument to show the Greatness of Your Mind, and fullness of
Perfection. To hear You speak with that infinite Sweetness and Cheerfulness of
Spirit that is natural to Your Grace, is methinks to hear our Tutelar Angels:
It Is to bemoan the present malicious Times, and remember the Golden Age: But to
behold you too, is to make Prophets quite forget their Heaven, and bind the
Poets with eternal Rapture. Here pure and eloquent Blood
Spoke in her Cheeks, and so distinctly wrought,
That one might almost say, her Body thought.
You for whose Body God made better Clay,
Or took Souls Stuff, such as shall late decay,
Or such as need small change at the last day.
Dr. Donn.

Ziphares and Semandra were first Your Grace's Favorites; and though I ought
not, Madam, to praise Your Wit by your Judgment of my Painting, yet I must say,
Such Characters every Dauber cannot draw. It has been often observed against
me, That I abound in ungoverned Fancy; but I hope the World will pardon the
Sallies of Youth: Age, Despondence, and Dullness come too fast of themselves. I
discommend no Man for keeping the beaten Road; but I am sure the Noble Hunters
that follow the Game, must leap Hedges and Ditches sometimes, and run at all,
or never come in to the fall of the Quarry. My comfort is, I cannot be so
ridiculous a Creature to any Man as I am to my self: for, who should know the
House so well as the good Man at home? who, when his Neighbors come to see
him, still sets the best Rooms to view; and, if he be not a wilful Ass, keeps
the Rubbish and Lumber in some dark Hole, where no body comes but himself, to
mortify at melancholy, Hours. But how then, Madam, in this unsuitable
condition, how shall I answer the infinite Honors and Obligations Your Grace
has laid upon me? Your Grace, who is the most beautiful Idea of Love and Glory;
who, to that Divine Composition, have the noblest and best-natur'd Wit in the
World. All I can promise, Madam, and be able to perform, is, That your Grace
shall never see a Play of mine that shall give offense to Modesty and Virtue;
and what I humbly offer to the World, shall be of use at least, and I hope
deserve imitation; which is, or ought to be, I am sure, the Design of all
Tragedies and Comedies both Ancient and Modern. I should presume to promise my
self too some Success in things of this nature, if. Your Grace (in whom the
Charms of Beauty, Wit, and Goodness seem reconciled) at a leisure Hour would
condescend to correct with Your excellent Judgment, the Errors of,

MADAM, Your Graces most humble, most obedient, and devoted Servant, NOT. LEE.

THEODOSIUS: OR, THE Force of Love.
ACT I. SCENE I.
A stately Temple, which represents the Christian Religion, as in its first
Magnificence: Being but lately established at Rome and Constantinople. The Side
Scenes show the horrid Tortures, with which the Roman Tyrants persecuted the
Church, and the Flat Scene, which is the Limit of the Prospect, discovers an
Altar richly adorned, before it Constantine, supposed kneels, with Commanders
about him, gazing at a bloody Cross in the Air, which being encompassed with
many Angels, offers it self to view, with these words distinctly written, (In
hoc signo vinces!) Instruments are heard, and many Attendants: The Ministers at
Divine Service, walk busily up and down, till Atticus, the Chief of all the
Priests, and Successor of St. Chrysostom, in rich Robes, comes forward with the
Philosopher Leontine: The Waiters in Ranks bowing all the way before him. A
Chorus heard at distance. Prepare, prepare! the Rites begin,
Let none unhallowed enter in,
The Temple with new Glory shines,
Adorn the Altars, wash the Shrines,
And purge the place from Sin.

Attic. O Leontine! was ever Morn like this,
Since the Celestial Incarnation dawned?
I think no Day since that, such Glory gave
To Christian Altars, as this Morning brings.

Leont. Great Successor of holy Chrysostom,
Who now triumphs above a Saint of Honor.
Next in degree to those bright Sons of Heaven;
Who never fell, nor stained their Orient Beams:
What shall I answer? How shall I approach you
Since my Conversion, which your breath inspired?

Attic. To see this Day, the Emperor of the East,
Leaves all the Pleasures that the Earth can yield,
That Nature can bestow, or Art invent,
In his Life's spring, and bloom of gaudy years,
To undergo the Penance of a Cloister,
Confined to narrow Rooms, and gloomy Walks,
Fastings, and Exercises of Devotion,
Which from his Bed at midnight must awake him,
Methinks, O Leontine! is something more,
Than yet Philosophy could ever reach.

Leont. True, Atticus; you have amazed my reason.

Attic. Yet more, to our Religious lasting honor,
Marina and Flavilla, two young Virgins,
Imperial born, cast in the fairest mould,
That e're the hands of Beauty formed for Woman;
The Mirrors of our Court, where Chastity
And Innocence might copy spotless Luster;
To Day with Theodosius leave the World.

Leont. Methinks at such a glorious resignation,
The Angelick Orders should at once descend,
In all the Paint and Drapery of Heaven;
With charming Voices, and with lulling Strings,
To give full Grace to such Triumphant Zeal.

Attic. No, Leontine; I fear there is a fault:
For when I last confessed the Emperor,
Whether disgust and melancholy Blood,
From restless Passions, urged not this Divorce?
He only answered me with Sighs and lushes;
It Is sure, his Soul is of the tenderest make:
Therefore, I Will tax him strictly; but, my Friend,
Why should give his Character to you,
Who when his Father sent him into Persia,
Were by that mighty Monarch then appointed
To breed him with his Son, the Prince Varanes.

Leont. And what will raise your Admiration, is,
That two such different Tempers should agree:
You know that Theodosius is composed
Of all the softness that should make a Woman,
Judgment almost like fear fore-runs his Actions;
And he will poise an Injury so long,
As if he had rather pardon than revenge it:
But the young Persian Prince quite opposite,
So Fiery sierce, that those who view him nearly
May see his haughty Soul still mounting in his Face;
Yet did I study these so different Tempers,
Till I at last had formed a perfect Union,
As if two Souls did but inform one Body.
A friendship that may challenge all the World,
And at the proof be matchless.

Attic. I long to read
This Gallant Prince, who, as you have informed me,
Comes from his Father's Court to see our Emperor.

Leon. So he intnded till he came to Athens;
And at my homely board beheld my Daughter;
Where, as Fate ordered, she who never saw
The Glories of a Court, bred up to Books
In Closets like a Sybil. She I say,
Long since from Persia brought by me to Athens!
Unskilled in Charms, but those which Nature gave her,
Wounded this scornful Prince: In short, he forced me
To wait him thither, with deep protestations,
That Moment that bereft him of the sight.
Of Athenais, gave him certain Death.
Enter Varanes, and Athenais. But see my Daughter honored with his presence.

Vara. It Is strange! O Athenais! wondrous, all
Wondrous the Shrines, and wonderful the Altars!
The Martyrs, though but drawn in painted Flames,
Amaze me with the Image of their sufferings:
Saints Canonized that dared with Roman Tyrants.
Hermits that lived in Caves, and fed with Angels,
By Orosmades, it is wondrous all.
That bloody Cross, in yonder Azure Sky,
Above the Head of kneeling Constantine;
Inscribed about with Golden Characters:
Thou shall o'er-come in this. If it be true,
I say again, by Heaven it is wondrous strange.

Athen. O Prince, if thus Imagination stirs you
A fancy raised from figures in dead Walls,
How would the Sacred Breath of Atticus
Inspire your Breast, purge all your dross away,
And drive this Athenais from your Soul,
To make a Virgin Room, whom yet the Mould
Of your rude Fancy cannot comprehend.

Vara. What says my Fair? Drive Athenais from me:
Start me not into Frenzy, lest I rail
At all Religion, and fall out with Heaven:
And what is she alas! that should supplant thee?
Were she the Mistress of the World, as fair
As Winter Stars, or Summer setting Suns,
And thou set by in Nature's plainest Dress,
With that chaste modest look when first I saw thee?
The Heiress of a poor Philosopher,
[Recorders ready to flourish. I swear by all I wish, by all I love,
Glory and thee, I would not lose a thought,
Nor cast an Eye that way, but rush to thee,
To these loved arms, and lose my self for ever.

Athenais. Forbear, my Lord.

Vara. O cruel Athenais!
Why do thou put me off, who pine to death?
And thrust me from thee when I would approach thee?
Can there be ought in this? Curse then thy birthright,
Thy glorious Titles and ill-suited Greatness,
Since Athenais scorns thee: Take again
Your ill-timed Honors; take 'em, take 'em Gods!
And change me to some humble Villager,
If so at least for toils at scorching Noon,
In mowing Meadows, or in reaping Fields,
At night she will but crown me with a smile,
Or reach the bounty of her hand to bless me.

Athen. When Princes speak, their Subjects should be silent,
Yet with humility I would demand,
Wherein appears my scorn, or my aversion?
Have I not for your sake abandoned home,
Where I had vowed to spend my calmer days?
But you perhaps imagine it but little
For a poor Maid to follow you abroad,
Especially the Daughter of old Leontine,
Yet I must tell you Prince --

Vara. I cannot bear
Those Frowns: I have offended, but forgive me.
For who, Athenais, that is tossed
With such tempestuous tides of love as I,
Can steer a steady course? Retire, my Fair,
[Recorders flourish. Hark! the Solemnities are now beginning,
And Theodosius comes: Hide, hide thy Charms,
If to his clouded Eyes such Day should break,
The Royal Youth who dotes to Death for Love,
I fear would forfeit all his Vows to Heaven,
And six upon thy World, thy World of Beauty.
[Excunt.
Enter Theodosius leading Marina and Flavilla (all three dressed in white)
followed by Pulcheria. Theo. Farewell, Pulcheria! and I pray, no more:
For all thy kind Complaints are lost upon me.
Have I not sworn the World and I must part?
Fate has proclaimed it, therefore weep no more,
Wound not the tenderest part of Theodosius,
My yielding Soul, that would expire in Calms!
Wound me not with thy Tears, and I will tell thee,
Yet e're I take my last farewell for ever,
The cause of all my sufferings: O, my Sister!
A bleeding Heart, the stings of pointed Love,
What Constitution soft as mine can bear?

Pulch. My Lord, my Emperor, my dearest Brother,
Why all this while did you conceal it from me?

Theo. Because I was ashamed to own my Weakness,
I knew thy sharper Wit, and stricter Wisdom
Would dart Reproofs, which I could not endure
Draw near, O Atticus, and mark me well,
For never yet did my complaining Spirit
Unlaid this weighty Secret upon him,
Nor groan a syllable of her Oppression.

Attic. Concealment was a fault; but speak at large,
Make bare the Wound, and I will pour in Balm.

Theo. It Is folly all, and fondness -- O, remembrance!
Why do thou open thus my Wound again,
And from my Heart call down those warmer drops
That make me die with shame? Hear then, Pulcheria!
Some few preceding days before I left
The Persian Court, hunting one morning early,
I lost my self and all the Company,
Still wandering on as Fortune would direct me,
I past a Rivulet, and alighted in
The sweetest Solitude I ever saw!
When straight, as if Enchantment had been there,
Two charming Voices drew me 'till I came,
Where diverse Arbours over-lookt the River.
Upon the Osier Bank two Women sat,
Who, when their Song was ended, talked to one,
Who, bathing, stood far in the Crystal stream.
But, oh, what thought can paint that fair Perfection,
Or give a glimpse of such a naked Glory!
Not Sea-born Venus, in the Courts beneath,
When the green Nymphs first kissed her Coral Lips,
All polisht, fair, and washed with Orient Beauty,
Could in my dazzling Fancy match her brightness.

Attic. Think where you are?

Theo. O! Sir, you must forgive me,
The chaste Enthusiastic Form appears,
As when I saw her; yet I swear, Pulcheria,
Had cold Diana been a looker or
She must have praised the Virtues of the Virgin,
The Satyrs could not g^in, for she was veiled:
Nothing immodest, from her naked Bosom
Down to her knees, the Nymph was wrapped in Lawn:
But oh for me! for me, that was too much!
Her Legs, her Arms, her Hands, her Neck, her Breasts,
So nicely shaped, so matchless in their Luster!
Such all-perfection, that I took whole draughts
Of killing Love, and ever since have languisht
With lingering surfeits of her fatal Beauty!
Alas, too fatal sure! O Atticus!
Forgive me, for my story now is done,
The Nymph was dressed, and with her two Companions,
Having descried me, shriekt and fled away,
Leaving me motionless, till Leontine,
The Instructor of my Youth, by chance came in,
And waked me from the wonder that entranced me.

Attic. Behold, my Lord, the Man whom you have named,
The Harbinger of Prince Varanes here.

Theod. O Leontine! ten thousand Welcomes meet thee!
Thou Foster-Father of my tender Youth,
Who reared the Plant, and pruned it with such Care;
How shall I look upon thee, who am fallen
From all the Principles of manlier reason,
By thee infused, to more than Woman's weakness?
Now by the Majesty Divine, that aws
This sacred place, I swear you must not kneel:
And tell me, for I have a thousand things
To ask thee; Where, where is my Godlike Friend?
Is he arrived, and shall I see his Face,
Before I am cloistered from the World for ever?

Leont. He comes, my Lord, with all the expecting Joys
Of a young promised Lover, from his Eyes
Big hopes look forth, and boiling Fancy forms
Nothing but Theodosius still before him;
His thought, his every word, is Theodosius.

Theo. Yet Leontine, yet answer me once more:
With tremblings I demand thee.
Say -- have thou seen? Oh, has that Heavenly form
Appeared to thee again? Behold he is dumb:
Proceed then to the Solemn last farewell;
Never was Man so willing, and prepared.

Enter Varanes, Aranthes, Attendants. Vara. Where is my Friend! oh where is my
beloved,
My Theodosius! point him out ye Gods,
That I may press him dead betwixt my Arms;
Devour him thus with overhasty Joys,
That languish at his Breast, quite out of breath,
And cannot utter more.

Theo. Thou mightiest Pleasure!
And greatest Blessing, that kind Heaven could send,
To glad my parting Soul, a thousand Welcomes!
O, when I look on thee, new starts of Glory
Spring in my Breast, and with a backward bound
I run the Race of lusty Youth again.

Vara. By Heaven it joys me too, when I remember
Our thousand Pastimes, when we borrowed Names;
Alcides, I, and Thou, my dearest Theseus,
When through the Woods, we chased the foaming Boar,
With Hounds that opened like Thessalian Bulls,
Like Tigers flu'd, and sanded as the shore,
With Ears, and Chests, that dashed the morning Dew:
Driven with the Sport, as Ships are tossed in Storms,
We ran like Winds, and matchless was our Course;
Now sweeping over the limit of a Hill!
Now with a full Career come thundering down
The Precipice! and sweat along the Vale.

Theo. O glorious time! and when the gathering Clouds
Have called us home, say, Did we rest, my Brother?
When on the Stage, to the admiring Court,
We strove to represent Alcides Fury,
In all that raging Heat, and pomp of Madness,
With which the stately Seneca adorned him:
So lively drawn, and painted with such horror,
That we were forced to give it over; so loud
The Virgins shrieked, so fast they died away.

Vara. My Theodosius still; it is my loved Brother;
And by the Gods we'll see those times again!
Why then has Rumor wronged thee, that reported
Christian Enthusiasm had charmed thee from us,
That drawn by Priests, and worked by Melancholy,
Thou had laid the golden Reins of Empire down,
And sworn thy self a Votary for ever?

Theo. It Is almost true; and had not you arrived,
The solemn business had by this been ended.
This I have made the Empress of the East,
My elder Sister: These with me retire,
Devoted to the Power, whom we adore.

Vara. What Power is that that merits such Oblations?
I thought the Sun more great and glorious,
Than any that e're mingled with the Gods;
Yet even to him my Father never offered
More than a Hecatomb of Bulls and Horses:
Now by those golden Beams, that glad the World,
I swear it is too much: For one of these,
But half so bright, our God would drive no more,
He Would leave the darkened Globe, and in some Cave
Enjoy such Charms for ever.

Attic. My Lord, forbear!
Such Language does not suit with our Devotion:
Nothing profane must dare to murmur here.
Nor stain the hallowed Beauties of the Place.
Yet thus far we must yield; the Emperor
Is not enough prepared to leave the World.

Vara. Thus low, most Reverend of this sacred place,
I kneel for Pardon, and am half converted,
By your permission that my Theodosius
Return to my Embraces. O my Brother!
Why do thou droop? There will be time enough
For Prayer and Fasting, and Religious Vows;
Let us enjoy, while yet thou art my own,
All the Magnificence of Eastern Courts;
I hate to walk a lazy Life away:
Let Us run the Race which Fate has set before us,
And post to the dark Goal.

Theo. Cruel Destiny!
Why am not I thus too? O my Varanes!
Why are these costly Dishes set before me?
Why do these sounds of Pleasure strike my Ears?
Why are these Joys brought to my sick remembrance;
Who have no appetite; but am to sense,
From Head to Foot, all a dead Palsy over?

Vara. Fear not, my Friend, all shall be well again,
For I have thousand ways, and thousand stories
To raise thee up to Pleasure, we'll unlock
Our fastest Secrets, shed upon each other
Our tender'st Cares, and quite unbarr those Doors,
Which shall be shut to all Mankind beside.

Attic. Silence and Reverence are the Temple's dues:
Therefore, while we pursue the Sacred Rites,
Be these observed, or quit the awful place,
Imperial Sisters, now twin-stars of Heaven,
Answer the Successor of Chrysostom;
Without least Reservation answer me;
By those harmonious Rules I charged ye learn.

Atticus Sings. Attic. Can thou, Marina, leave the World,
The World that is Devotion's bane;
Where Crowns are tossed, and Scepters hurld,
Where Lust and proud Ambition Reign?

2 Priest. Can you your costly Robes forbear,
To live with us in poor Attire?
Can you from Courts to Cells repair,
To sing at midnight in our Quire?

3 Priest. Can you forget your golden Beds,
Where you might sleep beyond the morn,
On Mats to lay your Royal Heads,
And have your beauteous Tresses shorn?

Attic. Can you resolve to fast all Day,
And weep and groan to be forgiven?
Can you in broken slumbers pray,
And by affliction merit Heaven?

Chor. Say, Votaries, can this be done,
While we the Grace Divine implore,
The World has lost, the Battel's won;
And sin shall never charm ye more?

Marina Sings. The gate to Bliss does open stand,
And all my penance is in view;
The World upon the other hand
Cries out, O do not bid adieu!
Yet, Sacred Sirs, in these extremes,
Where Pomp and Pride their Glories tell;
Where Youth and Beauty are the Themes,
And plead their moving Cause so well.
If ought that is vain my thoughts possess,
Or any Passions govern here,
But what Divinity may bless;
O may I never enter there!

Flavilla Sings. What! what can Pomp or Glory do;
Or what can humane Charms persuade,
That Mind that has a Heaven in view,
How can it be by Earth betrayed!
No Monarch full of Youth and Fame,
The Joy of Eyes, and Natures Pride,
Should once my thoughts from Heaven Reclaim!
Though now he wooed me for his Bride.
Haste then, Oh haste! and take us in,
For ever lock Religion's Door,
Secure us from the Charms of sin,
And let us see the World no more.

Attic. Sings. Hark! hark! behold the Heavenly Choir,
They cleave the Air in bright Attire,
And see his Lute each Angel brings,
And hark Divinely thus he Sings!
To the Powers Divine, all glory be given,
By Men upon Earth, and Angels in Heaven.
Scene shuts, and all the Priests with Marina, and Flav. disappear.
Pulch. For ever gone! for ever parted from me!
O Theodosius, till this cruel moment
I never knew how tenderly I loved 'em;
But on this everlasting separation,
Methinks my Soul has left me, and my Time
Of dissolution points me to the Grave.

Theo. O my Varanes, does not now thy temper
Bate something of its fire? do thou not melt
In mere Compassion of my Sister's Fate,
And cool thy self with one relenting thought?

Vara. Yes, my dared Soul rouls inward, melancholy,
Which I never felt before, now comes upon me;
And I begin to loath all humane greatness.
Oh! sigh not then, nor thy hard Fate deplore!
For, it is resolved, we will be Kings no more:
We'll fly all Courts, and Love shall be our guide;
Love that is more worth than all the World beside,
Princes are barred the liberty to roam.
The fettered mind still languishes at home;
In golden Bands she treads the thoughtful round,
Business and Cares eternally abound.
"And when for Air the Goddess would unbind,
"She Is clogged with Scepters, and to Crowns confined.
[Exeunt.
ACT II. SCENE I.
Enter Pulcheria, Julia, Attendants. Pulch. THese Packets for the Emperor
Honorius;
Be swift, let the Agent haste to Rome --
I hear, my Julia, that our General
Is from the Goths returned with Conquest home.

Jul. He is; to day I saw him in the Presence,
Sharp to the Courtiers, as he ever was:
Because they went not with him to the Wars.
To you he bows, and sues to kiss your Hand.

Pulch. He shall, my dearest Julia; often I have told thee
The secret of my Soul: It ever I marry,
Marcian's my Husband; he is a Man, my Julia,
Whom I have studied long, and found him perfect:
Old Rome at every glance looks through his Eyes,
And kindles the Beholders: Some sharp Atoms
Run through his Frame, which I could wish were out.
He sickens at the softness of the Emperor,
And speaks too freely of our Female Court;
Then sighs, comparing it with what Rome was.

Enter Marcian and Lucius. Pulch. Ha! Who are these that dare profane this
place
With more than barbarous Insolence?

Marc. At your Feet,
Behold I cast the scourge of these Offenders,
And kneel to kiss your Hand.

Pulch. Put up your Sword,
And ever I bid you welcome from the Wars,
Be sure you clear your Honor of this rudeness;
Or, Marcian, leave the Court.

Marc. Thus then, Madam;
The Emperor received me with affection,
Embraced me for my Conquests, and retired;
When on a sudden all the gilded Flies
That buz about the Court came fluttering round me:
This with affected Cringes, and mine'd Words,
Begs me to tell my Tale of Victories;
Which done, he thanks me, slips behind his Fellow,
Whispers him in the Ear, then smiles and listens,
While I relate my Story once again:
A third comes in, and asks me the same favor:
Whereon they laugh, while I still ignorant
Go on; but one behind, more impudent,
Strikes on my Shoulder; then they laughed outright,
But then I guessing the abuse too late,
Returned my Knight behind a box o'th Ear;
Then drew, and briefly told them they were Rascals.
They, laughing still, cried out the General's musty,
Whereon I drove 'em, Madam, as you saw:
This is in short the Truth, I leave the Judgment
To your own Justice; if I have done ill,
Sentence me, and I Will leave the Court for ever.

Pulch. First you are welcome, Marcian, from the Wars;
And still when ever occasion calls for Arms,
Heaven send the Emperor a General
Renowned as Marcian; as to what is past,
I think the World will rather praise than censure
Pulcheria, when she pardons you the Action.

Marc. Gods! Gods! and thou great Founder of Old Rome!
What is become of all that mighty Spirit,
That raised our Empire to a pitch so high?
Where is it pent? What, but Almighty Power
Could thus confine it, that but some few Atoms
Now run through all the East and Occident?

Pulch. Speak calmly, Marcian --

Marc. Who can be temperate,
That thinks as I do, Madam? Why here is a Fellow,
I have seen him fight against a Troop of Vandals
In your Defense, as if he loved to bleed:
Come to my arms, my Dear! Thou can not talk,
But have a Soul above the proudest of 'em.
O, Madam, when he has been all over Blood,
And hackt with Wounds that seemed to mouth his Praises;
I have seen him smile still as he pusht Death from him,
And with his actions rally distant Fate.

Pulch. He has a noble Form.

Marc. Yet even this Man,
That fought so bravely in his Country's Cause,
This excellent Man this Morning in the Presence,
Did I see wronged before the Emperor,
Scorned and despised because he could not cringe,
Nor plant his Feet as some of them could do.
One said his Clothes were not well made, and damned
His Tailor -- -- Another said, he looked
As if he had not lost his Maidenhead.
If things are suffered to be thus, down all
Authority, Preeminence, Degree and Virtue.
Let Rome be never mentioned, no, in the Name
Of all the Gods, be she forgotten ever.
Effeminate Persians, and the Lydian softness,
Make all your Fights, Marcian shall out no more;
For by my Arms it makes a Woman of me;
And my swollen Eyes run over to think this worth,
This fuller Honor than the whole Court holds,
Should be ridiculous to Knaves and Fools;
Should starve for want of what is necessary
To Life's Convenience. When luxurious Bawds
Are so over grown with Fat, and crammed with Riot,
That they can hardly walk without an Engine.

Pulch. Why did you not inform the Emperor?

Marc. Because he will not hear me: Alas, good Man!
He flies from this bad World, and still when Wars
And Dangers come, he runs to his Devotions,
To your new thing, I know not what you call it,
Which Constantine began.

Pulch. How, Marcian! are not you of that
Religion which the Emperor owns?

Marc. No, Madam, if you will see my naked thought,
I am not of their Principle, that take
A wrong; so far from bearing with a Foe,
I would strike first, like old Rome; I would forth,
Elbow the neighboring Nations round about,
Invade, enlarge my Empire to the bounds
Of the too narrow Universe. Yes, I own
That I despise your holy Innovations.
I am for the Roman Gods, for Funeral Piles,
For mounting Eagles, and the fancied greatness
Of our Forefathers. Methinks my heated Spirit
Could utter things worth losing of my Head.

Pulch. Speak freely, Marcian, for I know thee honest.

Marc. O, Madam! long, long may the Emperor live;
But, I must say, his gentle Disposition
Suits not, alas, the Oriental sway:
Bid him but look on Pharamond: O Gods!
Awake him with the Image of that Spirit,
Which, like a Pyramid reversed, is grown
Even from a point to the most dreadful greatness;
His very Name already shakes the World;
And still in Person heading his first Squadrons,
Like the first Caesar over the hardy Gauls,
He seems another Thunderbolt of War.

Pulch. I often have blamed my Brother most for this,
That to my hand he leaves the State Affairs:
And how that sounds, you know -- --

Mar. Forgive me, Madam;
I think that all the greatness of your Sex,
Rome's Clelia, and the famed Semiramis,
With all the Amazonian Valor too,
Meet in Pulcheria; yet, I say, forgive me,
If with reluctance I behold a Woman
Sit at the Empire's Helm, and steer the World.

Pulch. I stand rebuked --

Marc. Mark but the growing French.
The most auspicious Omen of their greatness,
That I can guess, is their late Salique Law,
Blessed by their Priests, the Salii, and pronounced
To stand for ever; which excludes all Women
From the Imperial Crown: But, oh! I speak
The least of all those infinite grievances,
Which make the Subjects murmur: In the Army,
Though I proceeded still like Hannibal,
And punished every Mutineer with Death;
Yet, oh! it stabbed me through and through the Soul
To pass the Wretches Doom, because I knew
With Justice they complained; for hard they fought,
And with their Blood earned that forbidden Bread,
Which some at Court, and great ones, though un-nam'd,
Cast to their Hounds, while the poor Soldier's starved --

Pulch. Your pity too in mournful fellowship,
No doubt might sooth their murmurs.

Marc. Yes, it did,
That I might put 'em once again in heart,
I said 'twas true, the Emperor was to blame,
Who dealt too coldly with his faithful Servants,
And paid their great Arrears by second hand:
I promised too, when we returned to Court,
Things should be mended --
But how! oh Gods! forgive my Blood this Transport!
To the Eternal Shame of Female Councils!
And to the blast of Theodosius Name,
Whom never Warlike Chronicle shall mention!
O let me speak it with a Roman Spirit,
We were received like undone Prodigals,
By cursed ungrateful Stewards, with cold looks;
Who yet got all by those poor Wretches ruin.
Like Malefactors, at the hands of Justice,
I blush, I almost weep with bursting rage;
If thus received, how paid our long Arrears?
Why, as entrusted Misers pay the Rights
Of helpless Widows, or the Orphans Tears.
O Soldier, for to thee, to Thee I speak it,
Bawd's for the drudgery of Citizens Wives,
Would better pay debilitated Stallions.
Madam, I have said perhaps too much; if so,
It matters not, for he who lies, like me,
On the hard ground, is sure to fall no further.

Pulch. I have given you patient hearing, honest Marcian!
And, as far as I can see into your Temper,
I speak my serious Judgment in cold Blood,
With strictest Consultation on the matter;
I think this seeming plain and honest, Marcian,
An exquisite and most notorious Traitor.

Marc. Ha! Traitor!

Pulch. Yes, a most notorious Traitor.

Marc. Your Grandfather, whose Frown could awe the World,
Would not have called me so -- or if he had --

Pulch. You would have taken it -- But to the Business,
Was It not enough! Oh Heaven! Thou know, too much!
At first to own your self an Infidel,
A bold Contemner, even to Blasphemy,
Of that Religion which we all profess;
For which your Heart's best Blood can never suffice:
But you must dare, with a seditious Army,
Thus to conspire against the Emperor;
I mention not your Impudence to me,
Taxing the folly of my Government,
Even to my Face: Such an Irreverence,
As sure no barbarous Vandal would have urged;
Beside your libelling all the Court, as if
You had engrost the whole World's honesty:
And Flatterers, Fools, Sycophants, Knaves,
Such was your Language, did inhabit here.

Marc. You wrest my honest meaning, by the Gods
You do, and if you thus go on, I feel
My struggling Spirit will no longer bear it.

Pulch. I thought the meaning of all rational Men
Should still be gathered out of their Discourse;
Nor are you so imprudent, without thinking,
To vent such words, though now you fain would hide it;
You find the Guilt, and bauk the Accusation:
But think not you shall escape so easily!
Once more I do confront you, as a Traitor;
And as I am entrusted with full power,
Divest you, in the Name of Theodosius,
Of all your Offices, Commissions, Honors,
Command you leave the Court within three Days,
Loyal, plain-dealing, honest Marcian.

Marc. Gods! Gods!

Pulch. What now! ha! does the Traitor murmur?
If in three days! mark me; it is I that doom thee!
Rash inconsiderable Man, a Wretch beneath
The Torments I could execute upon thee!
If after three days space you are found in Court,
Thou dy'st! thy head, thy head shall pay the forfeit.
Farewell: now rage! now rail and curse the Court;
Saucily dare to abuse the best of Princes,
And let thy lawless Tongue lash all it can;
Do, like a madman rave! deplore thy Fortune,
While Pages laugh at thee. Then haste to the Army,
Grow popular, and lead the multitude:
Preach up thy Wrongs, and drive the giddy Beast
To kick at Caesar. Nay, if thou weep'st, I am gone.
O Julia! if I stay, I shall weep too.
Yet it is but just that I the Heart should see
Of him who once must Lord it over me.
[Ex. Pulcheria, etc.
Luc. Why do you droop, Sir -- Come, no more of this,
You are and shall be still our General:
Say but the Word, I Will fill the Hippodrome
With Squadrons that shall make the Emp'ror tremble;
We'll fire the Court about his Ears.
Methinks like Junius Brutus I have watched
An Opportunity, and now it comes!
Few words and I are Friends; but, noble Marcian,
If yet thou art not more than General,
Ever dead of Night, say Lucius is a Coward.

Marc. I charge thee in the name of all the Gods,
Come back. I charm thee by the name of Friend.
All Is well, and I rejoice I am no General.
But hush! within three days we must be gone,
And then, my Friend, farewell to Ceremony.
We'll fly to some far distant lonely Village,
Forget our former state, and breed with Slaves.
Sweat in the Eye of Day, and when Night comes,
With bodies coursely filled, and vacant Souls,
Sleep like the labored Hinds, and never think;
For if I think again, I shall go mad.
Enter Leontine and Athonais, etc. Therefore no thought. But see, we are
interrupted!
O Court! O Emperor! yet let Death threaten,
I Will find a time. Till then be still my Soul --
No General now! A Member of thy Country,
But most corrupt, therefore to be cut off,
Loyal, plain-dealing, honest Marcian!
A Slave, a Traitor! O ye Eternal Gods --
[Exeunt.
Leon. So, Athenais! now our complement,
To the young Persian Prince, is at an end,
What then remains but that we take our leave,
And bid him everlastingly Farewell?

Athen. My Lord!

Leon. I say that decency requires
We should be gone, nor can you stay with Honor.

Athen. Most true, my Lord.

Leon. The Court is now at peace,
The Emperor's Sisters are retired for ever,
And he himself composed; what hinders then,
But that we bid adieu to Prince Varanes?

Athen. Ah, Sir, why will you break my heart?

Leon. I would not;
Thou art the only Comfort of my Age;
Like an old Tree I stand among the storms,
Thou art the only limb that I have left me:
[She kneels. My dear green branch, and how I prize thee, Child,
Heaven only knows! why do thou kneel and weep?

Athen. Because you are so good, and will I hope
Forgive my fault, who first occasioned it.

Leon I charged thee to receive and hear the Prince.

Athen. You did, and, Oh, my Lord! I heard too much!
Too much I fear for my Eternal Quiet.

Leon. Rise, Athenais! Credit him who bears
More years than thou: Varanes ha; deceived thee.

Athen. How do we differ then? You judge the Prince
Impious and base; while I take Heaven to witness,
I think him the most Virtuous of men:
Therefore take heed, my Lord, how you accuse him,
Before; on make the Trial. Alas, Varanes,
If thou art false, there is no such thing on Earth
As solid Goodness, or substantial Honor.
A thousand times, My Lord, he has sworn to give me
(And I believe his Oaths) his Crown and Empire,
That day I make him Master of my Heart.

Leon. That day he will make thee Mistress of his power,
Which carries a foul name among the Vulgar.
No, Athenais! let me see thee dead,
Born a pale Corpse, and gently laid in Earth,
So I may say she is chaste, and died a Virgin,
Rather than view thee with these wounded Eyes
Seated upon the Throne of Isdigerdes,
The blast of Common Tongues, the Nobles scorn,
Thy Father's Curse; that is, the Prince's Whore.

Athen. O horrid supposition! how I detest it!
Be witness Heaven, that sees my secret thoughts!
Have I for this, my Lord, been taught by you
The nicest Justice, and severest Virtue,
To fear no Death, to know the end of Life,
And with a long search discern the highest good?
No, Athenais! when the Day beholds thee
So scandalously raised, Pride cast the down,
The scorn of Honor, and the People's prey!
No, cruel Leontine, not to redeem
That aged Head from the descending Axe,
Not though I saw thy trembling Body rackt,
Thy wrinckles about thee filled with Blood,
Would I for Empire, to the Man I love,
Be made the object of unlawful Pleasure.

Leon. O greatly said, and by the Blood which warms me,
Which runs as rich as any Athens holds,
It would improve the Virtue of the World,
If every Day a thousand Votaries,
And thousand Virgins came from far to hear thee!

Athen. Look down ye powers, take notice we obey
The rigid Principles ye have infused;
Yet oh my noble Father! to convince you,
Since you will have it so, propose a Marriage;
Tho with the thought I am covered over with Blushes,
Not that I doubt the Prince, that were to doubt
The Heavens themselves. I know he is all truth:
But modesty --
The Virgins troublesome and constant guest,
That, that alone forbids --

Leon. I wish to Heaven
There prove no greater bar to my belief:
Behold the Prince, I will retire a while,
And, when occasion calls, come to thy aid.
[Ex. L
Enter Varanes, and Aranthes. Vara. To fix her on the Throne, to me, seems
little,
Were I a God, yet would I raise her higher.
This is the nature of thy Prince: But oh!
As to the World thy judgment soars above me,
And I am dared with this Gigantick Honor;
Glory forbids her prospect to a Crown,
Nor must she gaze that way; my haughty Soul,
That day when she ascends the Throne of Cyrus,
Will leave my Body pale, and to the Stars
Retire in Blushes, lost, quite lost for ever,

Aran. What do you purpose then?

Vara. I know not what,
But see she comes, the glory of my arms,
The only business of my instant thought,
My Souls best Joy, and all my true repose.
I swear I cannot bear these strange desires,
These strong impulses which will shortly leave me
Dead at thy Feet --

Athen. What have you found, my Lord,
In me so harsh or cruel, that you fear
To speak your griefs?

Vara. First let me kneel and swear,
And on thy hand seal my Religious Vow,
Straight let the breath of Gods blow me from Earth,
Swept from the Book of Fame, forgotten ever,
If I prefer thee not, O Athenais,
To all the Persian greatness!

Athen. I believe you!
For I have heard you swear as much before.

Vara. Have thou? O why then did I swear again?
But that my Love knew nothing worthier of thee,
And could no better way express my Passion.

Athen. O rise, my Lord --

Vara. I will do every thing
Which Athenais bids: If there be more
In Nature to convince thee of my Love,
Whisper it, oh some God, into my Ear!
And on her Breasts thus to her listening Soul
I Will breath th'Inspiration! Will thou not speak?
What but one sigh, no more! Can that suffice
For all my vast expense of Prodigal Love?
O Athenais! What shall I say or do,
To gain the thing I wish?

Athen. What Is that, my Lord?

Vara. Thus to approach thee still! thus to behold thee --
Yet there is more --

Athen. My Lord, I dare not hear you.

Vara. Why do thou frown at what thou do not know
It Is an imagination which never pierced thee;
Yet as it is ravishing, it is full of Honor.

Athen. I must not doubt you, Sir: But oh I tremble
To think if Isdigerdes should behold you,
Should hear you thus protesting to a Maid
Of no Degree, but Virtue, in the World --

Vara. No more of this, no more; for I disdain
All Pomp when thou art by; far be the noise
Of Kings and Courts from us, whose gentle Souls
Our kinder Stars have steered another way.
Free as the Forest-Birds, we'll pair together,
Without remembering who our Fathers were;
Fly to the Arbors, Grots, and flowery Meads,
And in soft murmurs interchange our Souls.
Together drink the Crystal of the stream,
Or taste the yellow Fruit which Autumn yields,
And when the Golden Evening calls us home,
Wing to our Downy Nest, and sleep till Morn.

Athen. Ah Prince! no more!
Forbear, forbear to charm me,
Since I am doomed to leave you, Sir, for ever.

Vara. Hold, Athenais --

Athen. I know your Royal Temper,
And that high Honor reigns within your Breast,
Which would disdain to wast so many hours
With one of humble blood compared to you:
Unless strong passion swayed your thoughts to love her,
Therefore receive, oh Prince! and take it kindly,
For none on Earth but you could win it from me,
Receive the gift of my Eternal Love.
It Is all I can bestow, nor is it little,
For sure a heart so coldly chaste as mine,
No Charms but yours, my Lord, could ever have warmed!

Vara. Well have you made amends by this last comfort,
For the cold Dart you shot at me before,
For this last Goodness? (Oh, my Athenais!)
(For now, methinks, I ought to call you mine!)
I empty all my Soul in thanks before you:
Yet oh! one Fear remains, like Death it chills me;
Why my relenting Love did talk of parting!

Athen. Look there, and cease your wonder, I have sworn
To obey my Father and he calls me hence --

Enter Leontine. Vara. Ha, Leontine! by which of all my Actions
Have I so deeply injured thee, to merit
The smartest wound revenge could form to end me?

Leon. Answer me now, O Prince! for virtue prompts me,
And honesty will dally now no longer,
What can the end of all this Passion be,
Glory requires this strict account, and asks
What you intend at last to Athenais?

Vara. How, Leontine!

Leon. You saw her, Sir, at Athens; said you loved her,
I charged her humbly to receive the Honor,
And hear your Passion: Has she not, Sir, obeyed me?

Vara. She has, I thank the Gods! but whither would thou?

Leon. Having resolved to visit Theodosius,
You swore you would not go without my Daughter,
Whereon I gave command that she should follow.

Vara. Yes, Leontine, my old Remembrancer,
Most learned of all Philosophers, you did.

Leon. Thus long she has attended, you have seen her,
Sounded her Virtues and her Imperfections;
Therefore, dread Sir, forgive this bolder Charge,
Which Honor sounds, and now let me demand you --

Vara. Now help, Aranthes, or I am dashed for ever.

Aran. Whatever happens, Sir, disdain the Marriage.

Leon. Can your high thoughts so far forget themselves,
To admit this humble Virgin for your Bride?

Vara. Ha!

Athen. He blushes, Gods! and stammers at the question.

Leon. Why do you walk, and chafe your self, my Lord?
The business is not much.

Vara. How, Leontine!
Not much; I know that she deserves a Crown;
Yet it is to Reason much, though not to Love?
And sure the World would blush to see the Daughter
Of a Philosopher on the Throne of Cyrus.

Athen. Undone for ever!

Leon. Is this your answer, Sir?

Vara. Why do thou urge me thus, and push me to
The very brink of Glory? where, alas!
I look and tremble at the vast Descent:
Yet even there, to the vast bottom, down
My rash Adventurer Love would have me leap,
And grasp my Athenais with my Ruin.

Leon. It Is well, my Lord --

Vara. Why do thou thus provoke me,
I thought that Persia's Court had store of Honor
To satisfy the height of thy Ambition.
Besides, old Man, my Love is too well grown,
To want a Tutor for his good Behavior;
What he will do, he will do of himself,
And not be taught by you --

Leon. I know he will not!
Fond Tears away; I know, I know he will not;
But he would buy with his Old Man's Preferment,
My Daughter for your Whore.

Vara. Away, I say, my Soul disdains the Motion!

Leon. The Motion of a Marriage; yes, I see it;
Your angry looks and haughty words betray it:
I found it at the first; I thank you, Sir,
You have at last rewarded your old Tutor
For all his Cares, his Watchings, Services;
Yet, let me tell you, Sir, this humble Maid,
This Daughter of a poor Philosopher,
Shall, if she please, be seated on a Throne
As high as that of the Immortal Cyrus.

Vara. I think that Age and deep Philosophy
Have cracked thy Brain: Farewell, old Leontine,
Retire to rest, and when this brawling Humor
Is rockt asleep, I Will meet my Athenais,
And clear the accounts of Love, which thou have blotted.

Leon. Old Leontine! perhaps I am mad indeed.
But, hold my Heart, and let that solid Virtue,
Which I so long adored, still keep the Reins.
O Athenais! But I will not chide thee,
Fate is in all our Actions, and, methinks,
At least a Father judges so; it has
Rebuked thee smartly for thy Easiness:
There is a kind of mournful Eloquence
In thy dumb grief, which shames all clamorous sorrow.

Athen. Alas! my Breast is full of Death; methinks
I fear even you --

Leon. Why should thou fear thy Father?

Athen. Because you have the Figure of a Man!
Is there, O speak, a possibility
To be forgiven?

Leon. Thy Father does forgive thee,
And Honor will; but on this hard Condition,
Never to see him more --

Athen. See him! Oh Heavens!

Leon. Unless it be, my Daughter, to upbraid him:
Not though he should repent and straight return,
Nay proffer thee his Crown -- No more of that.
Honor too cries revenge, revenge thy Wrongs,
Revenge thy self, revenge thy injured Father.
For it is Revenge so wise, so glorious too,
As all the World shall praise --

Athen. O give me leave,
For yet I am all tenderness, the Woman,
The weak, the mild, the fond, the coward Woman,
Dares not look forth; but runs about my Breast,
And visits all the warmer Mansions there,
Where she so often has harbored false Varanes.
Cruel Varanes! false forsworn Varanes!

Leon. Is this forgetting him? is this the Course
Which Honor bids thee take?

Athen. Ah, Sir, allow
A little time for Love to make his way;
Hardly he won the place, and many sighs,
And many tears, and thousand Oaths it cost him.
And oh I find he will not be dislodged
Without a Groan at parting hence for ever.
No, no! he vows he will not yet be razed
Without whole Floods of Grief at his farewell,
Which thus I sacrifice! and oh I swear,
Had he proved true, I would as easily
Have emptied all my Blood, and died to serve him,
As now I shed these drops, or vent these sighs,
To show how well, how perfectly I loved him.

Leon. No Woman sure, but thou, so low in Fortune,
Therefore the nobler is thy fair Example,
Would thus have grieved, because a Prince adored her;
Nor will it be believed in aftertimes,
That there was ever such a Maid in being;
Yet do I advise, preserve thy Virtue;
And since he does disdain thee for his Bride,
Scorn thou to be --

Athen. Hold, Sir, oh hold, forbear.
For my nice Soul abhors the very sound;
Yet with the shame of that, and the desire
Of an Immortal Name, I am inspired!
All kinder Thoughts are fled for ever from me,
All Tenderness, as if I never had loved,
Has left my Bosom colder than the Grave.

Leon. On, Athenais! on, it is bright before thee,
Pursue the Track, and thou shall be a Star:

Athen. O, Leontine, I swear, my noble Father,
That I will starve ever once forego my Virtue;
And thus let us join to contradict the World,
That Empire could not tempt a poor old Man,
To sell his Prince the Honor of his Daughter;
And she, too, matched the Spirit of her Father;
Though humbly born, and yet more humbly bred;
She for her Fame refused a Royal Bed;
Who, though she loved, yet did put off the Hour,
Nor could her Virtue be betrayed by Power.
"Patterns like these will guilty Courts improve,
"And teach the Fair to blush at Conscious Love:
"Then let all Maids for Honor come in view,
"If any Maid can more for Glory do.

ACT III. SCENE I.
Enter Varanes and Aranthes. Vara COme to my Arms, my faithful, dear Aranth
Soft Counselor, Companion of my Youth;
If I had longer been alone, most sure,
With the Distraction that surrounds my Heart,
My Hand would have rebelled against his Master,
And done a Murder here.

Aranth. The Gods forbid.

Vara. I swear, I press thee with as hearty Joy,
As ever fearful Bride embraced her Man,
When from a Dream of Death she waked and found
Her Lover safe, and sleeping by her side.

Aranth. The Cause, my Lord?

Vara. Early thou know last Night I went to rest;
But long, my Friend, ever Slumber closed my Eyes;
Long was the Combat fought, 'twixt Love and Glory;
The Fever of my Passion burnt me up,
My Pangs grew stronger, and my Rack was doubled;
My Bed was all a-float with the cold drops
That mortal Pain wrang from my laboring Limbs;
My Groans more deep than others dying Gasps:
Therefore, I charge thee, haste to her Apartment;
I do conjure thee tell her, tell her all
My Fears can urge, or Fondness can invent:
Tell her how I repent, say any thing;
For any thing I Will do to quench my Fires:
Say, I will marry her now on the instant:
Say all that I would say; yet in the end
My Love shall make it more than Gods can utter.

Aranth. My Lord! both Leontine and she are'gone
From their Apartment --

Vara. Ha! gone, say thou! whither?

Aranth. That was my whole Employment all this day:
But, Sir, I grieve to speak it, they have left
SONG after the Second ACT.
^ Sad as Death at dead of night the fair complaining Caelia sat, but ^ ^ one
poor Lamp was all her light, while thus she rea -- son'd ^ ^ with her Fate; Why
should Man such Tri -- umphs gain, and ^ ^ purchase Joys that gives us pain.
Ah! what Glory; ah what Glory ^ ^ can en -- sue, a help -- less Vir -- gin to
un -- do. ^ ^ Curse the Night then, Curse the Hour when first he drew thee ^ to
his arms, when vir -- tue was be-tray'd by pow-er, and ^ yield -- ed to un --
law -- full Charms, when Love approached with ^ all his Fires armed with hopes
and strong de-sires, sighs and tears, and ^ every wile with which the Men, with
which the Men the Maids be- ^ guile, with which the Men, with which the Men the
Maids beguile.

SONG after the Second ACT.
^ Dream no more of Plea-sures past, since all thy tor-ments are to ^ ^ come;
the se -- cret is made known at last, and end -- less shame is ^ ^ now thy
Doom; The false for -- sworn a -- las is gone, and ^ ^ left thee to de-spair a
-- lone. Who that hears of Caelia's pain, will ^ ^ e -- ver trust, will e --
ver trust a Man a -- gain. ^ Chorus. ^ The false for-sworn a -- las is gone,
and left thee to de -- spair a -- lone. ^ The false for-sworn a -- las is gone,
and left thee to de -- spair ^ ^ a -- lone. Who that hears of Caelia's pain,
will e -- ver ^ Who that hears of Caelia's pain, will e -- ver ^ ^ trust, will
e -- ver trust a Man a -- gain. ^ trust, will e -- ver trust a Man a -- gain: ^

No track behind for Care to find 'em out;
Nor is it possible --

Vara. It is, it shall;
I Will struggle with impossibilities,
To find my Athenais: Not the Walls
Of Athens, nor of Thebes, shall hide her from me:
I Will bring the Force of all my Fathers Arms,
And lay 'em waste, but I Will redeem my Love.
O, Leontine! morose old Leontine,
Thou mere Philosopher! O cruel Sage,
Who for one hasty word, one Choleric doubt,
Have turned the Scale; though in the sacred Balance
My Life, my Glory, and my Empire hung.

Aranth. Most sure, my Lord, they are retired to Athens,
I will send Post to Night --

Vara. No, no, Aranthes,
Prepare my Chariots, for I Will go in Person;
I swear 'till now, 'till I began to fear
Some other might enjoy my Athenais,
I swear, I did not know how much I loved her;
But let us away, I Will to the Emperor,
Thou to the hasty management of my business;
Prepare, to day I Will go, to day I Will find her:
No more; I Will take my leave of Theodosius,
And meet thee on the Hippodrome: away,
Let the wild hurry of thy Masters Love,
Make quick thy apprehension: Haste, and leave me.
[Exeunt.
SCENE II.
Pulcheria, Atticus, Leontine, Votaries leading Athenais in procession after
her Baptism, to be confirmed. Atticus Sings. O, Chrysostom! look down and see,
An Offering worthy Heaven and thee!
So rich the Victim, bright and fair,
That she on Earth appears a Star.

Chor. Endosia is the Virgin's Name,
And aftertimes shall sing her Fame.

Atticus Sings. Lead her, Votaries, lead her in,
Her holy Birth does now begin.

1 Votary. In humble Weeds, but clean Array,
Your hours shall sweetly pass away;
And, when the Rites Divine are past,
To pleasant Gardens you shall haste.

2 Votary. Where many a flowery Bed we have,
That Emblem still to each a Grave:
And when within the Stream we look,
With Tears we use to swell the Brook:
But oh, when in the liquid Glass,
Our Heaven appears, we sigh to pass!

Chor. For Heaven alone we are designed,
And all things bring our Heaven to mind.

Athen. O Princes! O most worthy of the World,
[Kneels. That is submitted by its Emperor,
To your most wise and providential sway:
What Greek or Roman Eloquence can paint
The Rapture and Devotion of my Soul!
I am adopted yours; you are my Goddess,
That have new-form'd, new-moulded my Conceptions,
And by the platform of a Work Divine,
New-fram'd, new-built me to your own desires;
Thrown all the Lumber of my Passions out,
And made my heart a Mansion of perfection;
Clean as an Anchorite's Grot, or Votary's Cell,
And spotless as the Glories of his steps
Whom we far off adore!

Pulch. Rise, Eudosia,
And let me fold my Christian in my Arms,
With this dear pledge of an Eternal Love
I Seal thee, O Eudosia! mine for ever.
Accept, blessed Charge, the Vows of my Affection;
For by the sacred Friendship that I give thee,
I think that Heaven by Miracle did send thee,
To ease my Cares, to help me in my Councils,
To be my Sister, partner in my Bed;
And equally, through my whole Course of Life,
To be the better part of thy Pulcheria,
And share my Griefs and Joys.

Athen. No, Madam, no;
Excuse the Cares that this sad Wretch must bring you;
O rather let me leave the World for ever;
Or if I must partake your Royal Secrets,
If you resolve to load me with such Honor,
Let it be far from Cities, far from Courts,
Where I may fly all human Conversation;
Where I may never see, nor hear, nor name,
Nor think, nor dream, O Heaven If possible,
Of Mankind more.

Pulch. What now, in Tears, Eudosia?

Athen. Far from the guilt of Palaces! O send me!
Drive me! O drive me from the Traitor Man:
So I might 'scape that Monster, let me dwell
In Lions haunts, or in some Tyger's Den;
Place me on some steep, craggy, ruined Rock,
That bellies out, just dropping in the Ocean;
Bury me in the hollow of its Womb;
Where, starving on my cold and flinty Bed,
I may from far, with giddy apprehension,
See infinite Fathoms down the rumbling deep!
Yet not even there, in that vast whirl of Death,
Can there be found so terrible a ruin,
As Man: false Man, smiling destructive Man.

Pulch. Then thou have loved, Eudosia, or my Sister;
Still nearer to my heart, so much the dearer;
Because our Fates are like, and hand in hand
Our Fortunes lead us through the Maze of Life:
I am glad that thou have loved; nay, loved with Danger;
Since thou have 'scap'd the ruin -- -- Methinks it lightens
The weight of my Calamities, that thou
(In all things else so perfect and Divine,)
Art yet akin to my Infirmity,
And bear thy part in Love's melodious ill:
Love that like bane perfumed infects the mind,
That sad delight that Charms all womankind.

Athen. Yes, Madam, I confess, that Love has charmed me
But never shall again. No, I renounce him;
Inspire me all the wrongs of abused Women,
All you that have been cozened by false Men:
See what a strict Example I will make;
But for the Perjuries of one I will revenge ye
For all that is past, that is present, and to come.

Pulch. O thou far more than the most Masculine Virtue!
Where our Astraea; where, O drowning brightness,
Where have thou been so long? Let me again
Protest my Admiration and my Love;
Let me declare aloud, while thou art here,
While such clear Virtue shines within our Circle,
Vice shall no more appear within the Palace,
But hide her dazzled Eyes, and this be called
The holy Court: But lo, the Emperor comes:
Enter Theodosius, and Attendants: Beauty, like thine, may drive that Form away
That has so long entranced his Soul -- My Lord --

Theod. If yet, alas! I might but hope to see her;
But, oh forgive me Heaven! this wilder start,
That thus would reach impossibility:
No, no, I never must behold her more,
As well my Atticus might raise the Dead,
As Leontine should charm that Form in view.

Pulch. My Lord, I come to give your grief a Cure,
With purer Flames to draw that cruel Fire
That tortured you so long -- Behold this Virgin --
The Daughter of your Tutor Leontine.

Theo. Ha!

Pulch. She is your Sisters Charge, and made a Christian,
And Athenais is Eudosia now;
Be sure a fairer never graced Religion,
And for her Virtue she transcends Example.

Theod. O all ye blessed above how can this be?
Am I awake, or is this possible?
[Athen. Kneels
Pulch. She kneels, my Lord, will you not go and raise her?

Theod. Nay, do thou raise her, for I am rooted here;
Yet if laborious Love and Melancholy
Have not overcome me, and quite turned me mad,
It must be she! that naked dazzling sweetness:
The very Figure of that morning Star,
That dropping Pearls, and shedding dewy Beams,
Fled from the greedy Waves when I approached:
Answer me, Leontine, am I distracted?
Or is this true? by thee in all encounters
I will be ruled, in Temperance and Wildness,
When Reason clashes with extravagance;
But speak --

Leon. It Is true, my Lord, this is my Daughter,
Whom I concealed in Persia from all Eyes
But yours, when chance directed you that way.

Theo. He says, it is true: Why then this heartless Carriage?
O? were I proof against the Darts of Love,
And cold to Beauty as the Marble-Lover
That lies without a thought upon his Tomb;
Would not this glorious dawn of Life run through me,
And waken Death it self -- Why am I slow then?
What hinders now but in spite of Rules
I burst through all the bands of Death that hold me,
[He kneels. And fly with such a have to that Appearance,
As buried Saints shall make at the last Summons?

Athen. The Emperor at my Feet; O Sir! forgive me,
Drown me not thus with everlasting shame;
Both Heaven and Earth must blush at such a view?
Nor can I bear it longer --

Leon. My Lord, she is unworthy --

Theo. Ha! what say thou, Leontine!
Unworthy! O thou Atheist to perfection!
All that the blooming Earth could send forth fair;
All that the gaudy Heavens could drop down glorious!
Unworthy say thou! Were thou not her Father,
I swear I would revenge -- But have, and tell me,
For love like mine will bear no second thought,
Can all the Honors of the Orient,
Thus sacrificed with the most pure Affection,
With spotless thoughts and languishing desires,
Obtain, O Leontine, (the Crown at last)
To thee, I speak, thy Daughter to my Bride?

Leon. My Lord, the Honor bears such estimation,
It calls the Blood into my aged Cheeks,
And quite o'er-whelms my Daughter with Confusion;
Who with her Body prostrate on the Earth
Ought to adore you for the proffered Glory.

Theo. Let me embrace, and thank thee: O kind Heaven!
O Atticus! Pulcheria! O my Father!
Was ever change like mine? Run through the Streets;
Who waits there? Run, and loud as Fame can speak,
With Trumpet-sounds proclaim your Emperor's joy.
And as of old, on the great Festival
Of her they call the Mother of the Gods;
Let all work cease, at least an Oaken Garland
Crown each Plebeian Head: Let sprightly Bowls
Be doal'd about, and the tossed Cymbals sound:
Tell 'em their much lamented Theodosius
By Miracle is brought from Death to Life:
His Melancholy's gone, and now once more
He shall appear at the State's Helm again;
Nor fear a Wrack while this bright Star direct us;
For while she shines, no Sands, no cowring Rocks
Shall lie unseen, but I will cut my way
Secure as Neptune through the highest stream,
And to the Port in safety steer the World.

Athen. Alas, my Lord, consider my Extraction,
With all my other Wants --

Theo. Peace, Empress, peace!
No more the Daughter of old Leontine.
A Christian now, and Partner of the East.

Athen. My Father has disposed me, you command me;
What can I answer then but my Obedience?

Theo. Attend her, dear Pulcheria; and, oh tell her,
To Morrow, if she please, I will be happy.
[Ex. Pulch. and Athen. O why so long should I my Joys delay?
Time imp thy Wings, let not thy Minutes stay,
But to a moment change the tedious day.
The day! 'twill be an Age before to Morrow:
An Age, a Death, a vast Eternity,
Where we shall cold, and past Enjoyment lie.

Enter Varanes and Aranthes: Vara. O, Theodosius!

Theo. Ha! my Brother here!
Why do thou come to make my Bliss run over?
What is there more to wish? Fortune can find
No flaw in such a glut of happiness,
To let one Misery in -- O, my Varanes!
Thou that of late did seem to walk on Clouds,
Now give a loose, let go the slackned Reins,
Let us drive down the Precipice of Joy,
As if that all the Winds of Heaven were for us.

Vara. My Lord, I am glad to find the Gale is turned,
And give you Joy of this auspicious Fortune.
Plough on your way, with all your Streamers out:
With all your glorious Flags and Streamers ride
Triumphant on -- And leave me to the Waves,
The Sands, the Winds, the Rocks, the sure destruction
And ready Gulphs that gape to swallow me.

Theo. It was thy Hand that drew me from the Grave,
Who had been dead by this time to Ambition,
To Crowns, to Titles, and my slighted Greatness.
But still as if each work of thine deserved
The smile of Heaven -- thy Theodosius met
With something dearer than his Diadem,
With all that is worth a wish, that is worth a life;
I met with that which made me leave the world.

Vara. And I, O turn of Chance! O cursed Fortune!
Have lost at once all that could make me happy.
O ye too partial Powers! But now no more
The Gods, my dear, my most loved Theodosius,
Double all those Joys that thou have met upon thee;
For sure thou art most worthy, worthy more
Than Jove in all his Prodigality
Can ever bestow in Blessings on Mankind!
And oh, methinks, my Soul is strangely moved,
Takes it the more unkindly of her Stars,
That thou and I cannot be blessed together:
For I must leave thee, Friend! this night must leave thee,
To go in doubtful search of what perhaps
I never shall find: if so my cruel Fate
Has ordered it: Why then farewell for ever,
For I shall never, never see thee more.

Theo. How sensible my tender Soul is grown
Of what you utter! O my gallant Friend!
O Brother! O Varanes! Do not judge
By what I speak? for Sighs will interrupt me;
Judge by my Tears, judge by these strict Embraces,
And by my last Resolve: Though I have met
With what in silence I so long adored,
Though in the Rapture of protesting Joys,
I had set down to morrow for my Nuptials;
And Atticus to Night prepares the Temple.
Yet my Varanes, I will rob my Soul
Of all her Health, of my Imperial Bride,
And wander with thee in the search of that
On which thy Life depends --

Vara. If this I suffer,
Conclude me then begotten of a Hind,
And bred in Wilds: No, Theodosius, no;
I charge thee by our Friendship, and conjure thee
By all the Gods, to mention this no more:
Perhaps, dear Friend, I shall be sooner here
Than you expect, or I my self imagine:
What most I grieve, is that I cannot wait
To see your Nuptials: Yet my Soul is with you,
And all my Adorations to your Bride.

Theo. What, my Varanes, will you be so cruel
As not to see my Bride before you go?
Or are you angry at your Rival's Charms,
Who has already ravished half my Heart,
That once was all your own?

Vara. You know I am disordered!
My melancholy will not suit her blessed Condition.
[Exit. Theo. And the Gods know, since thou, my Athenais,
Art fled from these sick Eyes, all other Women
To my palled Soul seem like the Ghost of Beauty,
And haunt my memory with the loss of thee.

Enter Athenais, Theodosius Leading her. Theo. Behold, my Lord, the occasion of
my Joy.

Vara. O ye immortal Gods! Aranthes! oh!
Look there, and wonder: Ha! is it possible?

Athen. My Lord, the Emperor says you are his Friend,
He charges me to use my Interest,
And beg of you to stay, at least so long
As our Espousals will be solemnizing;
I told him I was honored once to know you;
But that so slightly, as I could not warrant
The grant of any thing that I should ask you --

Vara. O Heaven! and Earth! O Athenais! why,
Why do thou use me thus? Had I the World,
Thou know it should be thine.

Athen. I know not that --
But yet, to make sure work, one half of it
Is mine already, Sir, without your giving.
My Lord, the Prince is obstinate, his Glory
Scorns to be moved by the weak Breath of Woman;
He is all Hero, bent for higher Game;
Therefore, it is nobler, Sir, to let him go:
If not for him, my Lord, yet for my self,
I must entreat the Favor to retire.
[Exit. Athen. etc.
Vara. Death! and Despair! Confusion! Hell and Furies!

Theo. Heaven guard thy Health, and still preserve thy Virtue.
What should this mean? I fear the Consequence,
For it is too plain they know each other well.

Vara. Undone! Aranthes! lost, undone for ever,
I see my Doom, I read it with broad Eyes,
As plain as if I saw the Book of Fate:
Yet I will muster all my Spirits up,
Digest my Griefs, swallow the rising Passions.
Yes, I will stand this Shock of all the Gods
Well as I can, and struggle for my Life.

Theo. You muse, my Lord: and if you will give me leave
To judge your thoughts, they seem employed at present
About my Bride: I guess you know her too.

Vara. His Bride! O Gods! give me a moments Patience!
I must confess the sight of Athenais,
Where I so little did expect to see her,
So graced and so adorned, did raise my wonder;
But what exceeds all admiration, is
That you should talk of making her your Bride;
It Is such a blind effect of monstrous Fortune,
That though I well remember you affirmed it,
I cannot yet believe --

Theo. Then now believe me:
By all the Powers Divine, I will espouse her.

Vara. Ha! I shall leap the bounds, Come, come, my Lord.
By all these Powers you named, I say you must not.

Theo. I say, I will; and who shall bar my pleasure?
Yet more, I speak the Judgment of my Soul,
Weigh but with Fortune Merit in the Balance,
And Athenais loses by the Marriage.

Vara. Relentless Fates! malicious cruel Powers!
O for what Crime do you thus rack your Creature?
Sir, I must tell you this unkingly meanness
Suits the Profession of an Anchorite well,
But in an Oriental Emperor
It gives offense; nor can you without Scandal,
Without the notion of a grovelling Spirit,
Espouse the Daughter of old Leontine,
Whose utmost Glory is to have been my Tutor.

Theo. He has so well acquitted that Employment,
Breeding you up to such a gallant height
Of full perfection, and imperial greatness,
That even for this respect, if for no other,
I will esteem him worthy while I live.

Vara. My Lord, you will pardon me a little Freedom?
For I must boldly urge in such a Cause,
Who-ever slatters you, though never so near
Related to your Blood, should be suspected.

Theo, If Friendship would admit a cold Suspicion,
After what I have heard, and seen to day,
Of all Mankind I should suspect Varanes.

Vara. He has stung me to the Heart; my Groans will choke me,
Unless my struggling Passion gets a vent.
Out with it then -- I can no more dissemble --
Yes, yes, my Lord, since you reduce me to
The last necessity, I must confess it;
I must avow my Flame for Athenais.
I am all Fire! my Passion eats me up,
It grows incorporate with my flesh and Blood!
My Pangs redouble, now they cleave my heart!
O Athenais! O Eudosia -- oh --
Though plain as day I see my own destruction,
Yet to my death, and oh, let all the Gods
Bear Witness! I swear I will adore thee.

Theo. Alas! Varanes. Which of us two the Heavens
Have marked for death is yet above the Stars;
But while we live let us preserve our Friendship
Sacred and just, as we have ever done.
This only Mean in two such hard Extremes
Remains for both: To morrow you shall see her,
With all advantage, in her own Apartment;
Take your own time, say all you can to gain her,
If you can win her, lead her into Persia;
If not, consent that I espouse her here.

Vara. Still worse and worse! O Theodosius! oh,
I cannot speak for sighs, my death is sealed
By this last sweetness; had you been less good,
I might have hoped; but now my Doom's at hand.
Go then, and take her, take her to the Temple:
The Gods too give you joy. O Athenais!
Why does thy Image mock my Foolish sorrow?
O Theodosius, do not see my Tears:
Away, and leave me! leave me to the Grave.

Theo. Farewell; let us leave the Issue to the Heavens,
I will prepare your way with all that Honor
Can urge in your behalf, though to my Ruin.
[Ex. Theod.
Vara. O I could tear my Limbs, and eat my Elesh;
Fool that I was, fond, proud, vainglorious Fool!
Damned be all Courts, and treble damned Ambition:
Blasted be thy remembrance! Curses on thee,
And plagues on plagues fall on those Fools that seek thee.

Aranth. Have comfort, Sir --

Vara. Away, and leave me, Villain;
Traitor, who wrought me first to my destruction --
Yet stay and help me, help me to curse my pride,
Help me to wish that I had never been Royal,
That I had never heard the name of Cyrus,
That my first Brawl in Court had been my last.
O that I had been born some happy Swain,
And never known a life so great, so vain!
Where I extremes might not be forced to choose,
And blessed with some mean Wife, no Crown could lose:
Where the dearer Partner of my little state
With all her smiling Offspring at the Gate,
Blessing my Labors, might my coming wait.
Where in our humble Beds all safe might ly,
And not in cursed Courts for Glory die. --
[Exeunt.
SONG.
1.
Hail to the Myrtle Shade,
All hail to the Nymphs of the Fields;
Kings would not here invade
Those pleasures that virtue yields. SONG after the Third ACT.
^ Hail to the Myrtle shade, all Hail to the Nymphs of the Fields, ^ ^ Kings
will not her in-vade, tho Vir -- tue all free -- dom yields. ^ ^ Beauty here
opens her arms to soften the languishing mind, and ^ ^ Phillis un -- locks her
Charms, ah Phillis! ah! why so kind? ^ Chorus. ^ Beauty here opens her Arms to
soften the languishing mind, and ^ Beauty here opens her Arms to soften the
languishing mind, and ^ ^ Phillis un locks her Charms; ah! Phillis! ah! why so
kind? ah ^ Phillis un locks her Charms; ah Phillis! ah! why so kind? ah ^ ^
Phil -- lis! ah! why so kind? ^ Phil -- lis! ah! why so kind? ^


Chor. Beauty here opens her Arms,
To soften the languishing mind;
And Phillis unlocks her Charms;
Ah Phillis! ah why so kind?
2.
Phillis, thou Soul of Love,
Thou joy of the Neighboring Swains;
Phillis that Crowns the Grove,
And Phillis that guilds the Plains.
Chor. Phillis, that never had the skill,
To paint, to patch, and be fine;
Yet Phillis whose Eyes can kill,
Whom Nature has made Divine.
3.
Phillis, whose charming Song,
Makes labor and pains a delight;
Phillis that makes the day young,
And shortens the live-long night.
Chor. Phillis, whose lips like May,
Still laughs at the sweets that they bring;
Where Love never knows decay,
But sets with Eternal Spring.
ACT IV. SCENE II.
Enter Marcian, and Lucius at a distance. Marc. THE General of the Oriental
Armies,
Was a Commission large as Fate could give:
It Is gone: why what care I: O Fortune, Fortune!
Thou laughing Empress of this busy World,
Marcian defies thee now --
Why what a thing is a discarded Favorite?
He who but now though longing to retire,
Could not for busy Waiters be alone,
Thronged in his Chamber, haunted to his Closet
With a full Crowd, and an Eternal Court;
When once the Favor of his Prince is turned,
Shunned as a Ghost, the clouded Man appears;
And all the gaudy worshippers forsake him;
So fares it now with me wherever I come,
As if I were another Cataline.
The Courtiers rise, and no man will sit near me,
As if the Plague were on me all men fly me:
O Lucius! Lucius! if thou leave me too,
I think, I swear I think I could not bear it;
But, like a Slave, my Spirit broke with Suffering,
Should on these Coward Knees fall down and beg,
Once to be great again --

Luc. Forbid it, Heaven!
That ever the noble Marcian condescend
To ask of any, but the Immortal Gods;
Nay, I avow, if yet your Spirit dare,
Spite of the Court, you shall be great as Caesar.

Mar. No, Lucius, no; the Gods repel that humor.
Yet since we are alone, and must ere long
Leave this bad Court; let us, like Veterans,
Speak out -- Thou say, alas! as great as Caesar:
But where is his Greatness? Where is his ambition?
If any Sparks of Virtue yet remain
In this poor Figure of the Roman Glory;
I say, if any be, how dim they shine,
Compared with what his great Forefathers were?
How should he lighten then, or awe the World,
Whose Soul in Courts is but a Lambent-fire,
And scarce, O Rome! a Glowworm in the Field:
Soft, Young, Religious, God-like qualities,
For one that should recover the lost Empire:
And wade through Seas of Blood, and walk over Mountains
Of slaughtered Bodies to immortal Honor.

Luc. Poor heart! he pined awhile ago for Love.

Marc. And for his Mistress vowed to leave the World;
But some new chance it seems has changed his Mind.
A Marriage! but to whom or whence she came,
None knows: but yet a Marriage is proclaimed,
Pageants prepared; the Arches are adorned;
The Statues Crowned; the Hippodrome does groan
Beneath the Burden of the mounted Warriors;
The Theater is opened too, where he
And the hot Persian mean to act their Follies.
Gods! Gods! Is this the Image of our Caesar's?
Is this the Model of our Romulus?
O why so poorly have you stamped Rome's glory!
Not Rome's but yours! is this Man fit to bear it?
This waxen Portraicture of Majesty!
Which every warmer Passion does melt down,
And makes him fonder than a Woman's longing!

Luc. Thus much I know to the eternal shame
Of the Imperial Blood; this upstart Empress,
This fine new Queen is sprung from abject Parents;
Nay, basely born! but that is all one to him,
He likes and loves, and therefore marries her.

Marc. Shall I not speak? Shall I not tell him of it?
I feel this big-swollen throbbing Roman Spirit
Will burst, unless I utter what I ought.

Enter Pulcheria with a Paper in her hand, and Julia. Marc. Pulcheria here! why
she is the Scourge of Marcian;
I tremble too when ever she approaches,
And my Heart dances an unusual measure;
Spite of my self I blush and cannot stir
While she is here -- What, Lucius, can this mean?
It Is said Calphurnia had the heart of Caesar:
Augustus doted on the subtle Livia:
Why then should I not worship that fair Anger?
Oh did thou mark her when her Fury lightened,
She seemed all Goddess; nay, her Frowns became her,
There was a Beauty in her very Wildness.
Were I a Man born great as our first Founder,
Sprung from the Blood Divine: But I am cast
Beyond all possibility of Hope.

Pulch. Come hither, Marcian! read this Paper over,
And mark the strange neglect of Theodosius:
He signs what-e'er I bring; perhaps you have heard
To morrow he intends to wed a Maid of Athens,
New-made a Christian, and new-nam'd Eudosia;
Whom he more dearly prizes than his Empire:
Yet in this Paper he has set his Hand,
And sealed it too with The Imperial Signet,
That she should lose her Head to morrow morning.

Marc. It Is not for me to judge; yet this seems strange --

Pulch. I know he rather would commit a murder
On his own Person, than permit a Vein
Of her to bleed; yet, Marcian, what might follow,
If I were envious of this Virgins Honor,
By his rash passing whatsoever I offer -- --
Without a view -- ha, but I had forgot!
Julia, let us haste from this infectious Person --
I had forgot that Marcian was a Traitor;
Yet by the Powers Divine, I swear it is pity,
That one so formed by Nature for all Honor,
All Titles, Greatness, Dignities Imperial,
The noblest Person, and the bravest Courage,
Should not be honest: Julia, is it not pity? --
O Marcian, Marcian! I could weep to think
Virtue should lose it self as thine has done.
Repent, rash Man, if yet it is not too late,
And mend thy Errors; so farewell for ever.
[Ex. Pulch. Jul.
Marc. Farewell for ever! no, Madam, ere I go,
I am resolved to speak, and you shall hear me:
Then, if you please, take off this Traytor's Head?
End my Commission and my Life together.

Luc. Perhaps you will laugh at what I am going to say;
But by your Life, my Lord, I think it is true:
Pulcheria loves this Traitor! Did you mark her?
At first she had forgot your Banishment;
Makes you her Counselor, and tells her Secrets,
As to a Friend; nay, leaves them in your Hand,
And says, it is pity that you are not honest,
With such Description of your Gallantry,
As none but Love could make: Then taking leave,
Through the dark Lashes of her darting Eyes,
Methought she shot her Soul at every Glance;
Still looking back, as if she had a mind
That you should know she left her Heart behind her.

Marc. Alas! thou do not know her, nor do I!
Nor can the Wit of all Mankind conceive her;
But let us away. This Paper is of use.

Luc. I guess your purpose;
He is a Boy, and as a Boy you will use him.
There is no other way.

Marc. Yes, if he be not
Quite dead with sleep, for ever lost to Honor,
Marcian with this shall rouse him. O, my Lucius!
Methinks the Ghosts of the great Theodosius,
And thundering Constantine appear before me:
They charge me as a Soldier to chastise him,
To lash him with keen words from lazy Love,
And show him how they trod the paths of honor.
[Exeunt.
SCENE II.
Theodosius lying on a Couch, with two Boys dressed like Cupids singing to him as
he sleeps. SONG.
Happy day! ah happy day,
That Caesar's Beams did first display,
So peaceful was the happy day.
The Gods themselves did all look down,
The Royal Infant's Birth to Crown,
So pleased, they searce did on the guilty frown.
Happy day! ah happy day!
And oh thrice happy hour,
That made such Goodness Master of such Power.
For thus the Gods declare to Men,
No day like this shall ever come again.

Enter Marcian with an Order. Theo. Ha! what rash thing art thou, who set'st so
small
A value on thy Life, thus to presume
Against the fatal Orders I have given,
Thus to entrench on Caesar's solitude,
And urge me to thy ruin?

Marc. Mighty Caesar,
I have transgrest, and for my Pardon bow
To thee, as to the Gods when I offend:
Nor can I doubt your Mercy, when you know
The nature of my Crime. I am Commissioned
From all the Earth to give thee thanks and praises,
Thou Darling of Mankind! whose Conquering Arms
Already drown the Glory of great Julius,
Whose deeper reach in Laws and Policy,
Makes wise Augustus envy thee in Heaven?
What mean the Fates by such prodigious Virtue?
When scarce the manly Down yet shades thy Face,
With Conquest thus to overrun the World,
And make Barbarians tremble? O, ye Gods!
Should Destiny now end thee in the Bloom,
Methinks I see thee mourned above the loss
Of loved Germanicus, thy Funerals
Like his, are solemnized with Tears and Blood.

Theo. How, Marcian!

Marc. Yes, the raging Multitude,
Like Torrents, set no bound to their mad grief;
Shave their Wives Heads, and tear off their own Hair;
With wild Despair they bring their Infants out,
To brawl their Parents sorrow in the Streets;
Trade is no more, all Courts of Justice stopped;
With Stones they dash the Windows of their Temples,
Pull down their Altars; break their Household Gods;
And still the Universal Groan is this,
Constantinople's lost, our Empire's ruined:
Since he is gone, that Father of his Country;
Since he is dead, O Life, where is thy Pleasure?
O Rome! Oh conquered World, where is thy Glory?

Theo. I know thee well, thy Custom and thy Manners;
Thou do upbraid me; but no more of this,
Not for thy Life --

Marc. What Is Life without my Honor?
Could you transform your self into a Gorgon,
Or make that beardless Face like Jupiter's,
I would be heard in spite of all your Thunder:
O power of Guilt, you fear to stand the Test
Which Virtue brings; like Sores your Vices shake
Before this Roman-healer. But, by the Gods,
Before I go I Will rip the Malady,
And let the Venom flow before your Eyes.
This is a Debt to the great Theodosius,
The Grandfather of your Illustrious Blood;
And then farewell for ever.

Theo. Presuming Marcian!
What can thou urge against my Innocence?
Through the whole Course of all my harmless Youth,
Even to this hour, I cannot call to mind
One wicked act which I have done to shame me.

Marc. This may be true: yet if you give the sway
To other Hands, and your poor Subjects suffer,
Your negligence to them is as the Cause.
O Theodosius credit me, who know
The World, and hear how Soldiers censure Kings;
In aftertimes, if thus you should go on,
Your Memory by Warriers will be scorned,
As much as Nero or Caligula loathed;
They will despise your sloth, and backward case,
More than they hate the others Cruelty.
And what a thing, ye Gods, is scorn or pity?
Heap on me, Heaven, the hate of all Mankind;
Load me with Malice, Envy, Detestation:
Let me be horrid to all apprehension,
And the World shun me, so I escape but Scorn.

Theo. Prithee, no more!

Marc. Nay, when the Legions make Comparisons;
And say, thus cruel Nero once resolved
On Galba's Insurrection, for Revenge,
To give all France as Plunder to the Arms,
To poison the whole Senate at a Feast;
To burn the City, turn the wild Beasts out;
Bears, Lions, Tigers, on the Multitude;
That so obstructing those that quenched the Fire,
He might at once destroy Rebellious Rome.

Theo. O cruelty! why tell thou me of this?
Am I of such a barbarous bloody temper?

Marc. Yet some will say, this showed he had a spirit,
However fierce, avenging, and pernicious,
That savored of a Roman; but for you,
What can your partial Sycophants invent,
To make you room among the Emperors?
Whose utmost is the smallest part of Nero;
A pretty Player, one that can act a Hero,
And never be one. O ye immortal Gods,
Is this the old Caesarian Majesty?
Now, in the name of our great Romulus,
Why sing you not, and siddle too as he did?
Why have you not, like Nero, a Phenascus?
One to take care of your Celestial Voice?
Lie on your Back, my Lord, and on your Stomach
Lay a thin Plate of Lead, abstain from Fruits;
And when the Business of the Stage is done,
Retire with your loose Friends, to costly Banquets,
While the lean Army groans upon the Ground.

Theo. Leave me, I say, lest I chastise thee:
Hence, be gone, I say --

Marc. Not till you have heard me out --
Build too, like him, a Palace lined with Gold,
As long and large as that to the Esquiline:
Enclose a Pool too in it, like the Sea,
And at the Empires cost let Navies meet:
Adorn your starry Chambers too with Gems,
Contrive the plated Ceilings to turn round,
With Pipes to cast Ambrosian Oils upon you:
Consume with his prodigious Vanity,
In mere Perfumes and Odorous Distillations,
Of Sisterces at once 400 Millions,
Let naked Virgins wait you at your Table,
And wanton Cupids dance and clap their Wings,
No matter what becomes of the poor Soldier;
So they perform the Drudgery they are sit for;
Why let 'em starve for want of their Arrears,
Drop as they go, and lie like Dogs in Ditches.

Theo. Come, you are a Traitor!

Marc. Go too, you are a Boy --
Or by the Gods --

Theo. If Arrogance, like this,
And to the Emperor's Face, should 'scape unpunished,
I Will write my self a Coward; die then, Villain,
A Death too glorious for so bad a Man,
By Theodosius's hand.
[Marcian disarms him, but is wounded.
Marc. Now, Sir, where are you?
What, in the name of all our Roman Spirits,
Now charms my Hand from giving thee thy Fate?
Has he not cut me off from all my Honors?
Torn my Commissions, shamed me to the Earth,
Banished the Court, a Vagabond for ever?
Does not the Soldier hourly ask it from me?
Sigh their own wrongs, and beg me to revenge 'em?
What hinders now, but that I mount the Throne?
And make to that this purple Youth my Footstool?
The Armies court me, and my Countries Cause:
The Injuries of Rome and Greece persuade me.
Show but this Roman Blood which he has drawn,
They Will make me Emperor whether I will or no:
Did not for less than this the latter Brutus,
Because he thought Rome wronged, in Person, head,
Against his Friend, a black Conspiracy?
And stab the Majesty of all the World?

Theo. Act as you please, I am within your Power.

Marc. Did not the former Brutus, for the Crime
Of Sextus, drive old Tarquin from his Kingdom?
And shall this Prince too, by permitting others
To act their wicked Wills and lawless Pleasures,
Ravish from the Empire its dear Health,
Well-being, Happiness, and ancient Glory,
Go on in this dishonorable rest?
Shall he, I say, dream on, while the starved Troops
Lie cold and waking in the Winter Camp;
And like pined Birds, for want of sustenance,
Feed on the Haws and Berries of the Fields!
O temper! temper me! ye gracious Gods!
Give to my Hand forbearance, to my Heart
Its constant Loyalty! I would but shake him,
Rouse him a little from this death of Honor,
And show him what he should be.

Theo. You accuse me,
As if I were some Monster, most unheard of:
First, as the Ruin of the Army, then
Of taking your Commission: But, by Heaven,
I swear, O Marcian! this I never did,
Nor ere intended it: Nor say I this
To alter thy stern usage; for with what
Thou have said, and done, and brought to my remembrance,
I grow already weary of my life,

Marc. My Lord, I take your word: you do not know
The wounds which rage within your Country's Bowels:
The horrid usage of the suffering Soldier:
But why will not our Theodosius know,
If you entrust the Government to others
That act these Crimes; who but your selfs to blame?
Be witness, ye Gods! of my plain dealing,
Of Marcian's honesty, how-e'er degraded:
I thank you for my banishment! but alas!
My loss is little to what soon will follow;
Reflect but on your self and your own Joys:
Let not this Lethargy for ever hold you!
'Twas rumored through the City that you loved:
That your Espousals should be solemnized;
When on a sudden here you send your Orders
That this bright Favorite, the loved Eudosia,
Should lose her Head.

Theo: O Heaven, and Earth! What say thou,
That I have sealed the death of my Eudosia?

Marc. It Is your own Hand and Signet: Yet I swear,
Though you have given to Female hands your sway,
And therefore I, as well as the whole Army,
For ever ought to curse all Womankind;
Yet when the Virgin came, as she was doomed,
And on the Scaffold, for that purpose raised,
Without the walls appeared before the Army!

Theo. What, on a Scaffold! ha, before the Army!

Marc. How quickly was the Tide of Fury turned!
To soft Compassion and relenting Tears: But when the Axe
Severed the brightest Beauty of the Earth
From that fair Body, had you heard the groan,
Which like a peal of distant Thunder, ran
Through all the armed Host, you would have thought,
By the immediate Darkness that fell round us,
Whole Nature was concerned at such a Suffering,
And all the Gods were angry.

Theo. O Pulcheria!
Cruel ambitious Sister, this must be
Thy doing. O support me, noble Marcian!
Now, now is the time, if thou dare strike; behold
I offer thee my Breast, with my last Breath,
I Will thank thee too, if now thou draw'st my Blood.
Were I to live, thy Council shall direct me;
But it is too late --
[He swoons.
Marc. He faints! what, hoa there, Lucius!
[Enter Lucius. My Lord, the Emperor, Eudosia lives;
She Is here, or will be in a minute, moment,
Quick as a thought she calls you to the Temple.
O Lucius, help -- I have gone too far; but see,
He breaths again -- Eudosia has awaked him.

Theo. Did you not name Eudosia?

Marc. Yes, she lives;
I did but feign the story of her Death,
To find how near you placed her to your Heart:
And may the Gods rain all their Plagues upon me,
If ever I rebuke you thus again:
Yet it is most certain, that you signed her death,
Not knowing what the wise Pulcberia offered,
Who left it in my Hand to startle you:
But by my Life and Fame, I did not think
It would have touched your Life. O pardon me,
Dear Prince, my Lord, my Emperor! Royal Master!
Droop not because I uttered some rash words,
And was a mad Man -- by the immortal Gods!
I love you as my Soul: what ever I said,
My thoughts were otherwise; believe these Tears
Which do not use to flow; all shall be well:
I swear that there are Seeds in that sweet Temper,
To atone for all the Crimes in this bad Age.

Theo. I thank thee first for my Eudosia's Life.
What, but my Love, could have called back that Life
Which thou have made me hate? But oh, methought
'Twas hard, dear Marcian, very hard from thee,
From him I ever reverenced as my Father,
To hear so harsh a Message -- but no more:
We are Friends: Thy hand; Nay, if thou will not rise,
And let me told my Arms about thy Neck,
I Will not believe thy Love! In this forgive me.
First let me wed Eudosia, and we'll out;
We will, my General, and make amends
For all that is past: Glory and Arms ye call,
And Marcian leads me on --

Marc. Let her not rest then,
Espouse her straight; I Will strike you at a heat;
May this great humor get large growth within you,
And be encouraged by the emboldning Gods,
O what a sight will this be to the Soldier,
To see me bring you dressed in shining Armor,
To head the shouting Squadrons -- O ye Gods!
Methinks I hear the echoing Cries of Joy;
The sound of Trumpets, and the beat of Drums.
I see each starving Soldier bound from Earth,
As is some God by Miracle had raised him,
And with beholding you grow fat again.
Nothing but gazing Eyes, and opening Mouths;
Cheeks red with Joy, and lifted Hands about you:
Some wiping the glad Tears that trickle down
With broken Io's, and with sobbing Raptures,
Crying to Arms: He Is come! our Emp'rour's come
To win the World. Why is not this far better
Than lolling in a Lady's lap, and sleeping,
Fasting, or praying? Come, come, you shall be merry:
And for Eudosia, she is yours already:
Marcian has said it, Sir, she shall be yours.

Theo. O Marcian! oh my Brother! Father! all:
Thou best of Friends, most faithful Counselor,
I Will find a Match for thee too ever I rest,
To make thee love me. For when thou art with me
I Am strong and well; but when thou art gone, I am nothing.

Enter Athenais, meeting Theodosius. Theo. Alas! Eudosia, tell me what to say;
For my full Heart can scarce bring forth a word
Of that which I have sworn to see performed.

Athen. I am perfectly obedient to your pleasure.

Theo. Well, then I come to tell thee, that Varanes
Of all mankind is nearest to my Heart;
I love him, dear Eudosia; and to prove
That Love on trial, all my Blood's too little;
Even thee, if I were sure to die this moment,
(As Heaven alone can tell how far my Fate
Is off!) O thou my Soul's most tender Joy,
With my last Breath I would bequeath him thee.

Athen. Then you are pleased, my Lord, to yield me to him.

Theo. No, my Eudosia; no, I will not yield thee,
While I have Life; for Worlds I will not yield thee:
Yet, thus far I am engaged to let thee know,
He loves thee, Athenais, more than ever.
He languishes, despairs, and dies like me;
And I have past my word that he shall see thee.

Athen. Ah, Sir, what have you done against your self,
And me? Why have you past your fatal word?
Why will you trust me, who am now afraid
To trust my self? Why do you leave me naked
To an assault, who had made proof my Virtue,
With this sure Guard, never to see him more.
For, oh with trembling Agonies I speak it,
I cannot see a Prince, whom once I loved,
Bathed in his Grief, and gasping at my Feet,
In all the violent Trances of Despair,
Without a sorrow, that perhaps may end me.

Theo. O ye severer Powers! too cruel Fate!
Did ever Love tread such a maze before?
Yet, Athenais, still I trust thy Virtue;
But if thy bleeding Heart cannot refrain,
Give, give thy self away; yet still remember,
That moment Theodosius is no more. --
[Ex. Theo. with Attic. Pulc. Leon.
Athen. Now glory! now, if ever thou did work
In Woman's Mind, assist me -- Oh my Heart,
Why do thou throb, as if thou were a breaking?
Down, down, I say, think on thy Injuries,
Thy wrongs! thy wrongs. It Is well my Eyes are dry,
And all within my Bosom now is still.
Enter Varanes, leaning on Aranthes. Ha! is this he! or is it Varanes Ghost?
He looks as if he had bespoke his Grave,
Trembling and pale; I must not dare to view him;
For oh I feel his melancholy here,
And fear I shall too soon partake his sickness!

Vara. Thus to the angry Gods offending Mortals,
Made sensible by some severe Affliction,
How all their Crimes are registered in Heaven,
In that nice Court, how no rash word escapes,
But even extravagant Thoughts are all set down:
Thus the poor penitents with Fear approach
The Reverend Shrines, and thus for Mercy bow;
[Kneels. Thus melting too, they wash the hallowed Earth,
And groan to be forgiven --
O Empress! O Eudosia! such you are now,
These are your Titles, and I must not dare
Ever to call you Athenais more.

Athen. Rise, rise, my Lord, let me entreat you rise,
I will not hear you in that humble Posture:
Rise, or I must withdraw -- The World will blush
For you and me, should it behold a Prince,
Sprung from Immortal Cyrus, on his Knees
Before the Daughter of a poor Philosopher.

Vara. It Is just, you righteous Gods! my Doom is just;
Nor will I strive to deprecate her Anger.
If possible, I Will aggravate my Crimes,
That she may rage till she has broke my heart:
For all I now desire, and let the Gods,
Those cruel Gods that join to my undoing,
Be Witnesses to this unnatural Wish,
Is to fall dead without a Wound before her.

Athen. O ye known sounds! But I must steel my Soul.
Methinks these Robes, my Delia, are too heavy.

Vara. Not worth a word, a look, nor one regard!
Is then the Nature of my Fault so heinous,
That when I come to take my eternal leave,
You Will not vouchsafe to view me? This is scorn,
Which the fair Soul of gentle Athenais,
Would never have harbored --
O, for the sake of him, whom you ere-long
Shall hold as fast as now your Wishes form him,
Give me a patient hearing; for however
I talk of Death, and seem to loath my Life,
I would deliberate with my Fate a while,
With snatching Glances eye thee to the last;
Pause over a loss like that of Athenais,
And parley with my ruin.

Athen. Speak, my Lord;
To hear you is the Emperor's Command;
And for that Cause I readily obey.

Vara. The Emperor, the Emperor's Command
And for that Cause she readily obeys.
I thank you, Madam, that on any terms
You condescend to hear me --
Know then, Eudosia. Ah, rather let me call thee:
By the loved Name of Athenais still;
That Name that I so often have invoked!
And which was once auspicious to my Vows;
So often at Midnight sighed amongst the Groves,
The Rivers murmur and the Echo's burden,
Which every Bird could sing, and Wind did bear!
By that dear Name, I make this Protestation,
By all that is good on Earth, or blessed in Heaven,
I swear I love thee more, far more than ever,
With conscious Blushes too! Here, help me, Gods!
Help me to tell her, though to my Confusion,
And everlasting Shame; yet I must tell her,
I lay the Persian Crown before her Feet.

Athen. My Lord, I thank you, and to express those thanks,
As nobly as you offer 'em, I return
The gift you make; nor will I now upbraid you
With the Example of the Emperor;
Not but I know it is that that draws you on,
Thus to descend beneath your Majesty;
And swell the Daughter of a poor Philosopher
With hopes of being great.

Vara. Ah, Madam! ah, you wrong me; by the Gods
I had repented ever I knew the Emperor --

Athen. You find perhaps, too late, that Athenais,
However slighted for her Birth and Fortune,
Has something in her Person, and her Virtue,
Worth the Regard of Emperors themselves;
And, to return the Complement you gave
My Father, Leontine, that poor Philosopher,
Whose utmost Glory is to have been your Tutor:
I here protest, by Virtue, and by Glory,
I swear by Heaven and all the Powers Divine,
The abandoned Daughter of that poor old Man
Shall never be seated on the Throne of Cyrus:

Vara. O Death to all my Hopes! what have thou sworn?
To turn me wild! Ah cursed Throne of Cyrus,
Would thou had been o'erturn'd and laid in Dust,
His Crown too Thunderstruck. My Father, all
The Persian Race, like poor Darius, ruined,
Blotted, and swept for ever from the World;
When first Ambition blasted thy Remembrance --

Athen. O Heaven! I had forgot the base Affront
Offered by this proud Man! a Wrong so great,
It is removed beyond all hope of Mercy:
He had designed to bribe my Father's Virtue,
And by unlawful means --
Fly from my sight, left I become a Fury --
And break those Rules of Temperance I proposed;
Fly, fly, Varanes! fly this sacred place
Where Virtue and Religion are professed:
This City will not harbor Insidels,
Traitors to Chastity, licentious Princes;
Be gone, I say, thou can not here be safe,
Fly to Imperial Libertines abroad;
In foreign Courts thou wilt find a thousand Beauties
That will comply for Gold, for Gold they will weep,
For Gold be fond as Athenais was;
And charm thee still as if they loved indeed.
Thou Wilt find enough Companions too for Riot:
Luxuriant all, and Royal as thy self,
Though thy loud Vices should resound to Heaven.
Art thou not gone yet?

Vara. No, I am charmed to hear you:
O from my Soul I do confess my self
The very blot of Honor; I am more black
Than thou, in all thy Heat of just Revenge,
With all thy glorious Eloquence, can make me.

Athen. Away, Varanes.

Vara. Yes, Madam, I am going --
Nay, by the Gods, I do not ask thee pardon:
Nor while I live will I implore thy mercy:
But when I am dead, if as thou do return,
With happy Theodosius from the Temple,
If as thou go in Triumph through the streets,
Thou chance to meet the cold Varanes there,
Born by his Friends to his Eternal home;
Stop then, O Athenais! and behold me;
Say as thou hang'st about the Emp'rour's Neck,
Alas! my Lord, this sight is worth our pity;
If to those pitying words, thou add a Tear,
Or give one parting groan -- If possible,
If the good Gods will grant my Soul the freedom,
I Will leave my Shroud, and wake from Death to thank thee.

Athen. He shakes my resolution from the Bottom:
My bleeding Heart too speaks in his behalf,
And says my Virtue has been too severe.

Vara. Farewell! O Empress: No, Athenais, now
I will not call thee by that tender Name,
Since cold despair begins to freeze my Bosom,
And all my Powers are now resolved on Death.
It Is said, that from my Youth I have been rash,
Choleric, and hot, but let the Gods now judge
By my last wish, if ever patient Man
Did calmly bear so great a loss as mine;
Since it is so doomed, by Fate you must be wedded,
For your own Peace, when I am laid in Earth,
Forget that e're Varanes had a Being;
Turn all your Soul to Theodosius Bosom:
Continue Gods their Days, and make 'em long:
Lucina wait upon their fruitful Hymen,
And many Children, beauteous as the Mother,
And pious as the Father, make 'em smile.

Athen. O Heavens!

Vara. Farewell -- I Will trouble you no more:
The malady that is lodged within grows stronger;
I feel the shock of my approaching Fate:
My heart too trembles at his distant march;
Nor can I utter more, if you shoul'd ask me.
Thy arm, Aranthes! O farewell for ever -- --

Athen. Varanes, stay, and ere you go for ever,
Let me unfold my heart.

Vara. O Athenais!
What further cruelty have thou in store
To add to what I suffer?

Athen. Since it is doomed
That we must part, let us part as Lovers should,
As those that have loved long, and loved well.

Vara. Art thou so good! O Athenais, oh!

Athen. First from my Soul I pity and forgive you;
I pardon you that hasty little Error,
Which yet has been the cause of both our Ruins.
And let this sorrow witness for my Heart,
How eagerly I wish it had not been,
And since I cannot keep it, take it all.
Take all the Love, O Prince, I ever bore you:
Or, if it is possible, I Will give you more;
Your noble Carriage forces this confession:
I rage! I burn! I bleed! I die for Love:
I am distracted with this World of Passion.

Vara. Gods! cruel Gods! take notice I forgive you.

Athen. Alas! my Lord! my weaker tender Sex
Has not your manly Patience; cannot curb
This Fury in; therefore I let it loose;
Spite of my rigid Duty, I will speak
With all the dearness of a dying Lover,
Farewell most lovely, and most loved of Men;
Why comes this dying paleness over thy Face?
Why wander thus thy Eyes? Why do thou bend
As if the fatal weight of Death were on thee?

Vara. Speak yet a little more; For, by the Gods!
And as I prize those blessed happy moments,
I swear, O Athenais! all is well!
O never better!

Athen. I doubt thee, dear Varanes;
Yet, if thou dy'st, I shall not long be from thee.
Once more farewell, and take these last Embraces,
Oh! I could crush him to my Heart! Farewell;
And as a dying pledge of my last Love,
Take this, which all thy Prayers could never Charm;
What have I done? oh lead me, lead me, Delia!
Ah, Prince farewell! Angels protect and guard thee.

Vara. Turn back! O Athenais! and behold me!
Hear my last words, and then farewell for ever:
Thou have undone me more by this confession:
You say, you swear, you love me more than ever;
Yet, I must see you married to another:
Can there be any Plague or Hell like this?
O Athenais! Whither shall I turn me?
You have brought me back to life; but, oh, what life?
SONG after the Fourth ACT.
^ Ah Cru -- el Bloo -- die Fate, what can thou now do more? A -- las ^ ^ it is
now too late Philander to re-store. Why should the Heavenly ^ ^ Powers persuade
poor Mortals to believe that they guard us here, or re -- ward us there, yet
all our Joys deceive. ^

2.
Her Poniard then she took,
And held it in her Hand,
And with a dying look,
Cried, thus I Fate command.
Philander! Ah my Love, I come
To meet thy Shade below!
Ah! I come, she cried,
With a Wound so wide,
There needs no second blow.
3.
In Purple Waves her Blood,
Ran streaming down the Floor,
Unmoved she saw the Flood,
And blessed the Dying Hour
Philander! Ah Philander! still
The bleeding Phillis cried;
She wept a while,
And she forced a smile,
Then closed her Eyes, and died.
FINIS.
To a life more terrible than a thousand deaths;
Like one that had been buried in a Trance,
With racking starts, he wakes and gazes round,
Forced by despair his whirling Limbs to wound,
And bellow like a Spirit under ground.
Still urged by Fate, to turn, to toss, and rave,
Tormented, dashed, and broken in the Grave.
[Exeunt.
ACT V. SCENE I.
Athenais dressed in Imperial Robes, and Crowned: A Table with a Bowl of Poison.
Athen. A Midnight Marriage! must I to the Temple
Thus, at the Murderers hour? It Is wondrous strange!
But so thou say my Father has commanded;
And that is Almighty Reason.

Delia. The Emperor in compassion to the Prince,
Who would, perhaps, fly to extravagance,
If he in public should resolve to espouse you,
Contrived by this close Marriage to deceive him.

Athen. Go fetch thy Lute, and sing those Lines I gave thee;
So, now I am alone, yet my Soul shakes;
For where this dreadful Draught may carry me,
The Heavens can only tell; yet I am resolved
To drink it off in spite of Consequence,
Whisper him, O some Angel! what I am doing;
By sympathy of Soul let him too tremble,
To hear my wondrous Faith, my wondrous Love,
Whose Spirit not content with an Ovation,
Of lingering Fate, with Triumph thus resolved:
Thus in the rapid Chariot of the Soul;
To mount and dare as never Woman dared:
It Is done, haste, Delia, haste! come bring thy Lute,
[Drinks. And sing my waftage to immortal Joys,
Methinks I cannot but smile at my own bravery,
Thus from my lowest Fortune raised to Empire,
Crowned and adorned! worshipped by half the Earth,
While a young Monarch dies for my Embraces:
Yet now to wave the Glories of the World,
O my Varanes! though my Births unequal,
My Virtue sure has richly recompensed,
And quite out-gone Example!

SONG.
1.
Ab Cruel bloody Fate,
What oanst thou now do more?
Alas, it is all too late,
Philander to restore:
Why should the Heavenly Powers persuade
Poor Mortals to believe,
That they guard us here,
And reward us there,
Yet all our Joys deceive?
2.
Her Poniard then she took,
And held it in her Hand;
And with a dying look,
Cried, thus I Fate commmand:
Philander! ah my Love I come,
To meet thy shade below;
Ah, I come, she cried,
With a Wound so wide,
There needs no second Blow:
3.
In Purple Waves her Blood
Ran streaming down the Floor,
Unmoved she saw the Flood,
And blessed her dying hour:
Philander! ah, Philander! still
The bleeding Phillis cried,
She wept a while,
And forced a smile;
Then closed her Eyes and died.
Enter Pulcheria. Pulch. How fares my dear Eudosia? ha, thou look,
Or, else the Tapers cheat my sight, like one
That Is fitter for thy Tomb than Caesar's Bed;
A fatal Sorrow dims thy shaded Eyes,
And in despite of all thy Ornaments,
Thou seem to me the Ghost of Athenais.

Athen. And what is the punishment, my dear Pulcheria?
What Torments are allotted those sad Spirits,
Who groaning with the burden of Despair;
No longer will endure the Cares of Life,
But boldly set themselves at liberty,
Through the dark Caves of Death to wander on,
Like wilded Travelers without a Guide,
Eternal Rovers in the gloomy Maze,
Where scarce the Twilight of an Infant Moon,
By a faint Glimmer checkering through the Trees,
Reflects to dismal view the walking Ghosts,
And never hope to reach the blessed Fields?

Pulch. No more of that, Atticus shall resolve thee;
But see, he waits thee from the Emperor;
Thy Father too attends.

Enter Leontine, Atticus, etc. Leont. Come, Athenais! Ha, what now in Tears?
O fall of Honor, but no more I charge thee,
I charge thee, as thou ever hop'st my Blessing,
Or fear my Curse, to banish from thy Soul
All Thoughts, if possible, the Memory
Of that ungrateful Prince that has undone thee.
Attend me to the Temple on this Instant,
To make the Emperor thine, this Night to wed him,
And lie within his Arms.

Athen. Yes, Sir, I Will go --
Let me but dry my Eyes, and I will go;
Eudosia, this unhappy Bride shall go,
Thus like a Victim crowned and doomed to bleed,
I Will wait you to the Altar, wed the Emperor,
And if he pleases, lie within his Arms.

Leont. Thou art my Child again.

Athen. But do not, Sir, imagine that any Charms,
Or Threatenings shall compel me
Never to think of poor Varanes more:
No, my Varanes: No --
While I have Breath, I will remember thee:
To thee alone I will my Thoughts consine,
And all my Meditations shall be thine:
The Image of thy Woes my Soul shall fill,
Fate and my End, and thy Remembrance still;
As in some Pop'lar Shade the Nightingale,
With piercing Moans does her lost Young bewail,
Which the rough Hind, observing as they lay
Warm in their Downy Nest, had stolen away,
But she in mournful Sounds does still complain,
Sings all the Night, though all her Songs are vain,
And still renews her miserable strain:
So my Varanes, 'till my Death comes on,
Shall sad Eudosia thy dear Loss bemoan.
[Ex. Athenais, Atticus.
SCENE II.
Enter Varanes. Vraa. It Is Night, dead Night, and weary Nature lies
So fast, as if she never were to rise:
No breath of Wind now whispers through the Trees;
No noise at Land, nor murmur in the Seas;
Lean Wolves forget to howl at Night's pale Noon;
No wakeful Dogs bark at the silent Moon:
Nor 'bay the Ghosts that glide with Horror by,
To view the Caverns where their Bodies lie,
The Ravens perch, and no Presages give;
Nor to the Windows of the dying cleave.
The Owls forget to scream, no midnight sound
Calls drowsy Echo from the hollow ground;
In Vaults the walking Fires extinguished lie;
The Stars, Heavens Centry, wink and seem to die.
Such universal Silence spreads below,
Through the vast Shades where I am doomed to go;
Nor shall I need a Violence to wound:
The Storm is here that drives me on the Ground,
Sure means to make the Soul and Body part,
A burning Fever, and a broken Heart.
What, hoa, Aranthes!
[Enter Aranthes. I sent thee to the Apartment of
Athenais! I sent thee, did I not, to be admitted?

Aran. You did, my Lord; but oh
I fear to give you an account.

Vara. Alas!
Aranthes, I am got on the other side
Of this bad World; and now am past all fear.
O ye avenging Gods, is there a Plague
Among your hoarded Bolts and heaps of Vengeance
Beyond the mighty Loss of Athenais?
It Is contradiction, speak, then speak, Aranthes.
For all misfortunes, if compared with that,
Will make Varanes smile --

Aranth. My Lord, the Empress,
Crowned and adorned with the Imperial Robes,
At this dead time of Night with silent Pomp,
As they designed from all to keep it secret,
But chiefly sure from you; I say the Empress
Is now conducted by the General.
Atticus and her Father, to the Temple,
There to espouse the Emperor, Theodosius.

Vara. Say thou? is it certain! hah.

Arant. Most certain, Sir, I saw 'em in procession.

Vara. Give me thy Sword, malicious Fate! O Fortune!
O giddy Chance! O turn of Love and Greatness!
Married! she has kept her Promise now indeed;
And oh her pointed Fame and nice Revenge,
Have reached their end. No Aranthes! no!
I will not stay the lazy Execution
Of a slow Fever: Give me thy Hand, and swear
By all the Love and Duty that thou ow'st me,
To observe the last Commands that I shall give thee;
Stir not against my purpose, as thou fear
My Anger and Disdain; Nor dare to oppose me
With troublesome unnecessary formal Reasons;
For what my Thought has doomed, my Hand shall seal.
I charge thee hold it steadfast to my Heart,
Fixed as the Fate that throws me on the Point.
Though I have lived a Persian, I will fall
As fair, as fearless, and as full resolved
As any Greek or Roman of 'em all.

Aranth. What you command is terrible but sacred,
And to atone for this too cruel Duty,
My Lord, I Will follow you -- -- --

Vara. I charge thee not!
But when I am dead take the attending Slaves,
And bear me, with my Blood distilling down,
Straight to the Temple; lay me, O Aranthes!
Lay my cold Coarse at Athenais's Feet,
And say, O why, why, do my Eyes run over!
Say with my latest Gasp I groaned for Pardon.
Just here my Friend, hold fast, and fix the Sword;
I feel the Artery, where the Lifeblood lies;
It heaves against the Point -- -- Now, O ye Gods,
If for the greatly wretched you have room,
Prepare my place, for dauntless lo I come!
The force of Love thus makes the Mortal Wound,
And Athenais sends me to the Ground.
[Kills himself.
SCENE III. The outward part of the Temple.
Enter Pulcheria and Julia at one Door, Marcian and Lucius at another. Pulch.
Look Julia, see the pensive Marcian comes;
It Is to my wish, I must no longer lose him,
Lest he should leave the Court indeed: he looks
As if some mighty secret worked within him,
And labored for a Vent; inspire me Woman,
That what my Soul desires above the World,
May seem imposed and forced on my Affections --

Luc. I say she loves you, and she stays to hear it
From your own Mouth: Now, in the Name of all
The Gods at once, my Lord, why are you silent?
Take heed, Sir, mark your opportunity;
For if the Woman lays it in your way,
And you over-see it, she is lost for ever.

Marc. Madam, I come to take my eternal leave;
Your Doom has banished me, and I obey:
The Court and I shake Hands, and now we part,
Never to see each other more; the Court
Where I was born, and bred a Gentleman:
No more, till your Illustrious Bounty raised me,
And drew the Earth-born Vapor to the Clouds:
But, as the Gods ordained it, I have lost,
I know not how, through Ignorance, your Grace:
And now the Exhalation of my Glory
Is quite consumed and vanished into Air.

Pulch. Proceed, Sir -- --

Marc. Yet let those Gods that doomed me to displease you,
Be Witnesses how much I honor you --
Thus, worshipping, I swear by your bright self,
I leave this infamous Court with more content
Than Fools and Flatterers seek it. But, oh Heaven!
I cannot go if still your hate pursues me;
Yes, I declare it is impossible,
To go to Banishment without your Pardon.

Pulch. You have it, Marcian; is there ought beside,
That you would speak, for I am free to hear?

Marc. Since I shall never see you more, what hinders
But my last words should here protest the Truth?
Know then, Imperial Princess, matchless Woman,
Since first you cast your Eyes upon my meanness,
Even till you raised me to my envied height,
I have in secret loved you --

Pulch. Is this Marcian?

Marc. You frown! but I am still prepared for all;
I say I loved you, and I love you still,
More than my Life, and equal to my Glory;
Methinks the warring Spirit that inspires
This Frame, the very Genius of old Rome!
That makes me talk without the fear of Death,
And drives my daring Soul to acts of Honor.
Flames in your Eyes! our Thoughts too are akin,
Ambitious, fierce, and burn alike for Glory:
Now, by the Gods, I loved you in your Fury,
In all the Thunder that quite riv'd my hopes,
I loved you most, even when you did destroy me.
Madam, I Have spoke my heart, and could say more,
But that I see it grieves you, your high Blood
Frets at the Arrogance and saucy Pride
Of this bold Vagabond: may the Gods forgive me:
Farewell; a worthier General may succeed me;
But none more faithful to the Emperor's Interest,
Than him you are pleased to call the Traitor, Marcian.

Pulch. Come back, you have subtly played your part indeed;
For first, the Emperor whom you lately schooled,
Restores you your Commission; next commands you,
As you're a Subject not to leave the Court,
Next, but oh Heaven! which way shall I express
His cruel Pleasure, he that is so mild
In all things else, yet obstinate in this,
Spite of my Tears, my Birth, and my Disdain,
Commands me, as I dread his high Displeasure,
O Marcian! to receive you as my Husband.

Marc. Ha, Lucius! what, what does my Fate intend?

Luc. Pursue her, Sir, it is as I said, she yields,
And rages that you follow her no faster!

Pulch. Is then at last my great Authority,
And my entrusted Power, declined to this?
Yet oh my Fate, what way can I avoid it!
He charged me straight to wait him to the Temple;
And there resolve! oh Marcian! on this Marriage.
Now generous Soldier, as you're truly noble;
O help me forth, lost in this Labyrinth;
Help me to loose this more than Gordian Knot,
And make me and your self for ever happy.

Marc. Madam, I Will speak as briefly as I can,
And as a Soldier ought, the only way
To help this Knot is yet to tie it faster.
Since then the Emperor has resolved you mine,
For which I will for ever thank the Gods,
And make this Holy Day throughout my Life,
I take him at his word, and claim his promise;
The Empire of the World shall not redeem you.
Nay, weep not, Madam, though my out side's rough,
Yet, by those Eyes, your Soldier has a Heart
Compassionate and tender as a Virgins,
Even now it bleeds to see those falling Sorrows,
Perhaps this Grief may move the Emperor
To a Repentance! Come then to the Trial;
For by my Arms, my Life, and dearer Honor,
If you go back when given me by his Hand,
In distant Wars my Fate I will deplore,
And Marcian's Name shall never be heard of more.
[Exeunt.
SCENE, the Temple.
Theodosius, Athenais, Atticus joining their hands -- Marcian, Pulcheria,
Lucius, Julia, Delia, etc. Leontine. Attic. The more than Gordian knot is tied,
Which Death's strong Arm shall never divide;
For when to bliss ye wafted are,
Your Spirits shall be wedded there.
Waters are lost, and Fires will die;
But Love alone can Fate defy.

Enter Aranthes with the Body of Varanes. Arant. Where is the Empress? Where
shall I find Eudosia?
By Fate I am sent to tell that cruel Beauty,
She has robbed the World of Fame; her Eyes have given
A blast to the big Blossom of the War;
Behold him there nipt in his flowery Morn,
Compelled to break his promise of a Day;
A Day that Conquest would have made her Boast;
Behold her Laurel withered to the Root,
Cankered and killed by Athenais scorn.

Athen. Dead! dead, Varanes!

Theo. O ye Eternal Powers
That guide the World! why do you shock our Reason,
With acts like these that lay our Thoughts in dust?
Forgive me Heaven this start, or elevate
Imagination more, and make it nothing.
Alas! alas, Varanes! But speak, Aranthes,
The manner of his Fate: Groans choke my words;
But speak, and we will answer thee with Tears.

Arant. His Fever would, no doubt, by this have done
What some few minutes past his Sword performed,
He heard from me your progress to the Temple,
How you designed at midnight to deceive him,
By a Clandestine Marriage: But, my Lord,
Had you beheld his Racks at my Relation;
Or had your Empress seen him in those Torments,
When from his dying Eyes, swollen to the Brim,
The big round drops rolled down his manly Face;
When from his hallowed Breast a murmuring Crowd
Of groans rushed forth, and echoed, All is well:
Then had you seen him! O ye cruel Gods!
Rush on the Sword I held against his Breast,
And dye it to the Hilts, with these last words --
Bear me to Athenais --

Athen. Give me way, my Lord,
I have most strictly kept my promise with you,
I am your Bride, and you can ask no more,
Or if you did, I am past the power to give:
But here! oh here! on his cold bloody Breast,
Thus let me breath my last.

Theo. O Empress, what, what can this transport mean?
Are these our Nuptials! these my promised Joys?

Athen: Forgive me, Sir, this last respect I apy
These sad remains -- And oh thou mighty Spiit,
If yet thou art not mingled with the Stars,
Look down and hear the wretched Athenais,
When thou shall know, before I gave consent
To this indecent Marriage, I had taken
Into my Veins a cold and deadly Draught,
Which soon would render me, alas, unfit
For the warm Joys of an Imperial Lover,
And make me ever thine! yet keep my word
With Theodosius. Will thou not forgive me?

Theo. Poisoned to free thee from the Emperor!
Oh, Athenais! thou have done a deed
That tears my Heart! what have I done against thee,
That thou should brand me thus with Infamy
And everlasting shame! Thou might have made,
Thy choice without this cruel act of Death,
I left thee to thy will? and in requital
Thou have murdered all my Fame --

Athen. O pardon me!
I lay my dying Body at your Feet,
And beg, my Lord, with my last sighs entreat you
To impute the fault, if it is a fault, to love;
And the ingratitude of Athenais,
To her too cruel Stars: Remember too,
I begged you would not let me see the Prince,
Presaging what has happened; yet my word,
As to our Nuptials was inviolable.

Theo. Ha! she is going! see her languishing Eyes
Draw in their Beams; the sleep of death is on her.

Athen. Farewell, my Lord! alas! alas, Varanes,
To embrace thee now is not immodesty;
Or if it were, I think my bleeding Heart,
Would make me criminal in Death to clasp thee,
Break all the tender niceties of Honor,
To fold thee thus, and warm thee into Life,
For oh what Man, like him, could Woman move!
O Prince beloved! O Spirit most divine!
Thus by my Death, I give thee all my Love,
And seal my Soul and Body ever thine --
[Dies.
Theo. O Marcian! O Pulcheria! did not the Power,
Whom we adore plant all his Thunderbolts
Against Self-murderers, I would perish too:
But as I am, I swear to leave the Empire:
To thee, my Sister, I bequeath the World;
And yet a gift more great the Gallant Marcian!
On then my Friend, now show thy Roman Spirit:
As to her Sex, fair Athenais was,
Be thou to thine a Pattern of true Honor,
Thus we'll atone for all the present Crimes,
That yet it may be said in aftertimes,
No Age with such Examples could compare,
So Great, so Good, so Virtuous, and so Fair!
[Ex. Omnes.
FINIS.
Epilogue.
THrice happy they that never writ before;
How pleased and bold they quit the safer shore:
Like some new Captain of the City Bands,
That with big looks in Finsbury Commands,
Swelled, with huge Ale he cries, beat, beat a Drum,
Pox of the French-King, uds bud let him come:
Give me ten thousand Redcoats, and alloo,
We'll firk his Cr^qui and his Conde too.
Thus the young Scriblers, Mankinds sense disdain;
For ignorance is sure to make 'em vain,
But far from Vanity, or dangerous pride;
Our cautious Poet courts you to his side:
For why should you be scorned, to whom are due,
All the good days that ever Authors knew.
If ever gay it is you that make 'em fine;
The Pit and Boxes make the Poet dine,
And he scarce drinks but of the Critics Wine.
Old Writers should not for vain glory strive
But like old Mistresses think how to thrive,
Be fond of every thing their Keepers say,
At least till they can live without a Play.
Like one that knows the Trade, and has been bit;
She doats and fawns upon her wealthy Cit;
And swears she loves him merely for his Wit.
Another more untaught than a Walloon,
Antic and ugly, like an old Baboon;
She swears is an accomplished Beau-garson,
Turns with all winds, and sails with all desires;
All hearts in City, Town, and Court, she sires,
Young callow Lords, lean Knights, and driv'ling Squires.
She in resistless flattery finds her ends,
Gives thanks for Fools, and makes ye all her Friends,
So should wise Poets sooth an awkard Age,
For they are Prostitutes upon the Stage:
To stand on points were foolish and ill-bred,
As for a Lady to be nice in Bed:
Your wills alone must their performance measure,
And you may turn 'em every way for pleasure.
FINIS.
A Catalogue of some Plays Printed for R. Bently and M. Magnes, in
Russel Street, near Covent Garden.
TArtuff, or the French Puritan. Forced Marriage, or the Jealous Bride. English
Monsieur. All Mistaken, or the mad Couple. Generous Enemies. Andromacha: A
Tragedy. Calisto: or the Masque at Court. Country-Wit, A Comedy. Destruction
of Jerusalem, 2 parts Miseries of Civil-War. Henry 6. with the Murder of the
Duke of Gloucester. Nero, a Tragedy. Gloriana, a Tragedy. Sophonisba, or
Hanibals overthrow. Alexander the Great, or the Rival Queens. Mithridates King
of Pontus. Caesar Borgia, Son of Pope Alexander 6. Oedipus, King of Thebes.
Theodosius, or the Force of Love. The Plain Dealer. The Town Fop, or Sir
Timothy Taudry. Abdellazar, or the Moors Revenge. Madam Fickle: or the Witty
False one. The Fond Husband, or the Plotting Sisters. The Virtuous Wife, or
good luck at last. The Fool turned Critic, a Comedy. Squire Oldsap, or the
Night Adventurers. The Mistaken Husband, a Comedy. Mr. Limberham, or the
Kind-Keeper. Notes and Observations on the Empress of Morocco. The Orphan, or
Unhappy Marriage. The Soldier of Fortune, in the Press.

