'Eleothziambos''

Or the Triumph of Mercy In the Chariot of Praise.

A TREATISE OF Preventing secret and unexpected Mercies with some mixed
Reflections.

Psalm. 21.3. Thou preventest him with the blessings of goodness. LONDON,
Printed for John Hancock, at the three Bibles in Pope's Head Alley in Cornhill,
1677.

To the unknown Dispenser of a considerable Kindness, on Thursday Febr. 4. 1674.
Honored Sir,
WHen I lay faint and weak in my bed, under a dispiriting and wasting Distemper
of the Yellow Jaundies; by the holy dispensation of the all-wise God, an
unknown Messenger comes from an unknown Benefactor with a Token of value, who
determined, that his left hand should not discern what his right hand did; Mat.
6.3.
but the Eye of God saw both. Though, Sir, my Tongue as yet has not found you
out, yet I hope my Pen may reach you. Should I never arise to that happy
Cognizance; yet I could not suffer your kindness to lie hid under the clods of
ingratitude; but heartily return a public Testimony by these Papers, which I
have enjoined the duty of diligent searching out the path to the same hands,
and to kiss them in the dark by a private reception. Aelian reports of
Democritus, that great Thracian Philosopher, [(...)] That he most earnestly
coveted to lie hid, though a great Benefactor to the world by his learned
Studies. You have traced his footsteps in trampling-upon the airy bubble of
vain glory; desiring to be good rather then seem to be so. Kindnesses done to
others with a single Eye to God, are consecrated into Free-will-offerings: For
with such Sacrifices God is well pleased. Heb. 13.16. Lamprid. in Sever. Lug.
B. p. 378.
Alexander Sever the Roman Emperor, when an Ambassador had presented his
Empress with Two Oriental Pearls, of price invaluable, caused her to dedicate
them to the Temple and Statue of Venus, judging the too splendid to hang in the
Ears of Mortals. Happy persons, that present of their gain and substance to the
God of the whole Earth! Mic. 4.13.
Cold water in the name of a Disciple shall be warmed at the Hearth in Zion,
and run to account. Nay it will turn into a more precious Liquor then Gold
potable, and prove more Cordial then all Earthly Treasure. Suidas relates,
Suid. p. 1197.
That Hercules used to succor the oppressed before he was entreated; and being
of a generous temper wrencht the three Apples of Anger, Pleasure and
Covetousness from the mouth of the Dragon of Lust: to intimate that no covetous
man can be truly beneficent or noble minded, especially to relieve the indigent
with unexpected kindness, and to reap no harvest but the satiating of an
enlarged heart; Upton de milit. offic. p. 172.
like the Princely Eagle that disdains to eat of his prey alone. Though
kindnesses are to be given freely, and not put to the usury of return, either
by open praise, or secret requital; yet who will plow upon the rocks, or
scatter his precious seed upon the sands. The whole circle of Nature teaches
the duty of Gratitude. The wise Athenians enacted a Law, Valor. max. l. 5. c. 3.
that ungratefulness should bear an action in their Courts; and the Roman state
made a Decree, that Women should take the upper hand in streets, because two
Noble Matrons had prevailed with Coriolanus their Son and Husband, not to
invade their City. From whom, during their abode in Britain, it is likely that
Custom might be derived to us.

To contract: Let this little Treatise be hung up like a votive Table in the
Temple of praise, and your Honorable Name be engraven on the bowls of the
Altar, Acts 10.4.
when your Prayers and Alms rise up like Incense for a memorial before God. If
any demand, why these Characters came in so late for Sculpture upon the Marble
Pillars? Know, that some showers and storms of afflictive providence from
Heaven detained the Votary.

If others of uncandid breasts doom these Lines precarious, I hope I may safely
reply, they are of a more generous Offspring, and like the Lark which sings
praises in a May morning, flies up toward Heaven, disregarding tatling
Travelers. Their vicious breath, like that of Cats, brings Hecticks to such as
hug them, and distills corrosive Salt upon their own Lungs. The cheerful Rose
with a ruddy blush smells sweetly among the prickles of Envy, and much sweeter
when set among rank Onions.

I know not your Noble Personage, nor can divine whether my Pen be plucked from
so dextrous a wing as to fly to your bounteous bosom, and utter complaints how
I have weltred in the shame of silence. I bless God 'twas a seasonable mercy,
and I trust some secret mercy of more inestimable value will in due time find
you out. I magnify God, Prove. 30.8
I am in Agurs station, and for those that have strengthened it to help some
charge, I beg the blessings of the God of Jabez; 1 Chronicles. 4.10.
enlarging my grateful thoughts toward the Heavenly Mansions: and as the
Speakers before the Conference in Plato's Timaeus went to prayer; so let this
Preface lift up its hand toward his Holy Temple: That the scent of your name
may be fragrant as the Field which the Lord has blessed: Genesis 27.27. Eccl. 9.8.
That your Head may lack no Ointment, and your Garments be always white and
odoriferous, taken out of Cedar Chests of the growth of Lebanon: Number. 24.6
That the perfuming Trees of Lignaloes of the Lords planting may grow thick and
shady about your Tabernacle, as in their native and genuine Soil: That the
Spices of Eden, and the Heavenly Indies and Diamonds more orient then those of
Borneo may lade your Vessels: That a greater then Solomon, even the true
proprietor of the Isle of Ceylon (the ancient Ophir) would invest your Soul
with Faith, Psalm. 45.9. Rev. 3.18.
that true cloth of Gold; with the meekness of our blessed Savior, more soft
then the Oils of Zant, or the Silks of Smyrna: That your hopes of Glory may
flower more pleasant and lovely then the beautiful Blossoms of the Pistachia in
the Gardens of Syria, and send them as experienced Tokens to your Children, as
holy Jacob did to his beloved Joseph. Genesis 43.11. Rev. 2.8.
That the first and last who was dead and is alive, would wreath your Temples
with a Crown of Life, and keep you from hurt by the second death. That the
wealth of the Terra Incognita, the Land of Promise may be your inheritance, so
little known to rambling Mortals that pant after the dust of Egypt. Suid. in
Dioclet.
That the fatness of Heaven may drop down upon your heart; Deuteronomy. 33.13, etc.
the dew and the deep which coucheth beneath may run by your roots, the
precious fruits thrust forth by the Sun and Moon, and the chief things of the
Eastern Mountains, and the choice things of the lasting Hills, and the costly
things of the Earth and its fullness from every corner; above all, the good will
of him who dwelt in the bush of Horeb defend all your flourishing Mercies from
flames of wrath; and like that marching Pillar of Fire, conduct you to that
City above, whose builder and maker is God, where your feet may tread that
malleable pavement of transparent Gold, Rev. 21.18.
and your thirst after righteousness quenched with the Living Water of the Well
of Jacob, Joh. 4.14.
that Water of Paradise which issues from the Throne of God, Rev. 22.1.
and be replenisht with those 12 sorts of Fruits which hang upon the Trees of
Life, and drink abundantly with the beloved Spouse of Christ, Song 5.1.
of the spiced Wine of the Kingdom, in the presence of the Father and his Holy
Angels, at the Marriage Supper of the Lamb.

Samuel Lee
Febr. 8. 1676.
Triumph of Mercy. A TREATISE OF Preventing, secret and sudden Mercies.
CHAP. I. The Beneficence of God, the Spring and Source of preventing Mercies.
THE infinite goodness of God bestows more Mercies upon us in the method of
prevention, then of answer to particular Prayers. We enjoy most things before
we ask, and oftentimes more excellent in kind, and more abundant in measure
then we ask. The Lord began thus with Man at the first Creation, when there was
none as yet to know his mind, Romans 11.35.
or sit in Council with him. He framed the stupendous and glorious Fabric of
the Universe. Job 26.7
By his Wisdom he stretched out the North upon the empty place, and hung the
Circle of the Earth upon nothing. He thrust up its Glebe into aspiring
Mountains, Isa. 40.22.
fashioning their Concave Heads for Springs, their Bowels for a Matrix to
Minerals, and their external Convexities and Declivities for beautiful
Prospects. He commanded some Portions to subside into humble Valleys, and to be
extended into Champain Plains. He clothed its surface with stately Cedars,
shady Palms, and Sea traveling Pines, with all the Fruitful, Medicinal, and
Sweet-sented Groves, Balsamic Shrubs, and wholesome Herbs, graceful and various
in curious Flowers, wherewith the lovely Meadows laugh and sing at the return
of their shining Psalm. 19.5.
Bridegroom in his vernal Progress. He spread its native Landscapes with that
green Carpet of Grass woven by the hands of the blew Nitre of the Air, and the
yellow Sulphur of the Earth into that delectable Color, which salutes the eye
of Man with so grateful a pleasance when painted upon its inward Vestment or
Coat the Retina. He enjoined the Ocean to compass and embrace the habitation of
Man, to minister Rain to the Bottles of Heaven, and Liquor to the bubling
Fountains when strained through the Veins of the Earth. And lastly, for support
to Ships for Navigation and Commerce. 'Twas the work of his Hand to interweave
the Fertile Vales with Crystal Streams in their sporting Meanders, Psalm.
104.10.
curing the fat Pastures of anxiety about Summer droughts, relieving the chafed
and sweltring Air with cooler Vapors, and indulging to the neighbor Villages
easy conveyance, and many delicious pleasures.

Neither was his Divine Bounty withheld from the dark Caverns of the Earth,
replenished with his hid Treasures: Those deep and gloomy Regions being
impregnated with various Salts, with subterraneous Steams and Juices to give
origin and food to Metalline Concretes, for the service of Manual Arts, and for
the cure of the more obstinate Diseases in the bodies of Animals, shortly to be
formed out of the same congenial Earth.

Then his Curious Pencil embroiders the Land with rare variety of living
Creatures, and his Voice inspires the healthful Air with Vocal Music from the
winged Choristers that sing among the Branches; Psalm. 104.12.
whose warbling notes are not more pleasant to the Ear, then their painted
Feathers beautiful to the Eye of Man. His Hand furnishes the liquid Seas with
numerous Passengers, who Sail under water, fearing neither storms nor stifling.

At length, having established the Heavens by his Wisdom, he casts a glittering
Canopy over all his Sublunary works, admirably garnisht with spangling Stars,
glorious for Luster, harmonious for Motion, and powerful in Influence.

Lo, these are part of his ways, Job 26.14
but how little portion is heard of him! We are in deep darkness to what is
visible: The essence of a small pebble gravels our stupid understandings; the
Eye of our Reason is so blunt, that it cannot pierce into the shape or Emerald
Color of the growing Green-sword. How much less able to Anatomize the Entrails
of the Earth of some thousand miles Diameter? Who can account for the Sand's
being a bound to the Ocean; though the Waves toss themselves, yet they cannot
prevail; though they roar, Jer. 5.22.
yet cannot go over it? Who can solve the flux of the Sea, either by the Moon
or the Earths motion? Lydeat. Spagnet Enchir. philos. c. 20. and l. 12. c. 22.
l. 13. and c. 15. Austin confess. l. 13. c. 32.
Or who so hardy to dive to the top of the under-wave Mountains, or set their
foot on the ridge of those hidden Ararats? What Philosopher ever fathomed the
Air, and all its Meteors, in his Arms, or formed a genuine conception of that
liquid Ether, wherein the Stars do swim, or of those waters above the Heavens?
Genesis 1.7; Psalm. 148. 4.
What Telescopes (those curious Spectacles of our late Astronomers) ever
pierced into that Sapphire pavement beyond their Unequal, Exodus 24.10. Ezekiel.
1.26. Ephesians. 4.10.
the Place of the Blessed, and the Seat of our Lords Glorified Body, where
Angels and Saints stand trumpeting his Praises through voluminous stations of
Eternity, who is wonderful in Counsel, and excellent in Working. Isa. 28.29.


Whose Infinite Power and Goodness having finished his six days wonders, and
prevented the wishes of Man by these excellent preparations for him; last of
all forms the Head of the visible Creation, and exalts him into the Chair of
Dominion over all this capacious Theater, antedates his most ample desires,
rarifies his Heart with sacred wonder, and installs him for High Priest of the
whole Creation, to offer their Tribute, to worship, adore and love him, and to
sing his Praises.

But oh heedless Man! being fixed upon the Pinnacle of the Temple of Honor, was
soon enchanted by a vertiginous blast of the subtle Serpent, Jer. 17.13
and forgot his Sovereign, the Fountain of Living Waters; and falling headlong,
drank deep of the muddy Cistern invenomed by his poison, and became like the
Beasts that perish. But being sensible of his shame, and confounded at his base
disloyalty, and afraid of Gods awful Majesty, fled into the Woods to hide his
distrustful Countenance, yet found no shelter for his guilty Conscience.
Justice might now have pursued him with the flaming Sword of Cherubims; but
preventing Mercy steps into the close and shady Thickets, and proffers a
Covenant of Grace, to the amazement of Angels, and admiration of them that
believe. A Covenant flowing from the good pleasure of his Will, Ephesians. 1.5.
and founded in the mystical Union of the Son of God with the Nature of Man in
the promised Seed, and established upon better promises. Hence issued that
Living Fountain of all that beneficence, that comforts his chosen Flock in the
state of Grace, and beautifies their Souls in Glory.

CHAP. II. The Government of the World administered by preventing Providence
and Mercies.
THe most Wise and Holy God having finished all in number, weight and measure,
and adjusted all the proportions of Heaven and Earth in his Sacred Balance;
that not the least Atom of dust in the Mountains, or Drop in the Ocean, or
Vapor in the Air, but came out of his accurate Scales, and settled in their due
place by his arbitrament. Neither is his Infinite Wisdom more radiant and
magnificent in the composure of the vast circumference of the Celestial Bodies,
then admirably curious and stupendous in those minute and numerous Creatures,
which by reason of their smalness fly the sight of man. Insomuch that the
Majesty of God is most illustrious and conspicuous in those lesser Beings;
which the world never understood till he blessed it with the rare invention of
Microscopes. By which we are assisted to contemplate his Glory, while sitting
under he shadow of a Plant that grows it a cankered Rose leaf, Hook.
Micrograph. p. 124.
as well as of he tallest Cedar. May not admiration be inflamed to view the
quick and voluble motion of those Eels that swim up and down in their little
Sea of a drop of Vinegar, more then when Mariners from their Ships gaze at the
tumblings of Whales in he Atlantic Ocean? Or when we consider the fineness of
those Spirits that agitate the Nerves of Mites, or of those supposable
Creatures that may draw their origin from the corruption of those little
bodies, or creep among their hairs while yet alive: As Mites in Spiders. Power,
p. 19.
Or when we view by the aid of those discovering Glasses the 8 Eyes in a
Spider, or the 24 Teeth in the mouth of an Ant, as black as Ebony, as well as
those vast Ivory Tusks in the head of the generous Elephant: Or when we delight
our Eyes in the rare textures of vivid marbling colors in the flowers of
Eyebright, Panzies, or the checkered Fritillary, as well as the prophetical
varieties in the Rainbow: We may well cry out with Pliny, while he descants on
the great voice of a Gnat flying about in a Summers Evening, Rerum natura
nusquam magis quam in minimis tota sit. Plin. l. 11. c. 2.
That the great God of Nature is never more admirable then in framing the least
of Beings.

But howsoever unspeakably and unimaginably glorious his Divine Providence
shines in the management and government of all his works: It is yet most
admirable in his preventing goodness to the sinful sons of Adam, and much more
to his own chosen Inheritance.

As to Man in general, he makes his Sun to rise every morning upon the unjust,
and his Moon to fill her Orb with light upon the Turkish Crescent: Psalm. 65.11.
His paths in the Clouds drop fatness upon the fields of bloody Tyrants, and
his Ocean is open, and sweet Western Gales often swell he Sails of rambling and
roving Pirates: The Earth is full of his goodness. Psalm. 119.64.
He spread and filled the Tables of Heliogabalus with his hidden Treasures. No
Inhabitant but is laden with his benefits, however abused to their luxury,
pride, and wantonness: His Mercies are over all his Works: He makes the
outgoings of the Morning, Psalm. 65.8. and 121.8.
and Evening to sing: He preserves the goings out and comings in of the
Children of Men.

All the operations and influences of second causes are primarily ascribed to
him. Psalm. 139.15.
The formation of our bodies, when curiously wrought in the lowest parts of the
Earth, was of his secret texture. The race of the Sun, the bright appearance of
Venus like the Moon, and the nimble motions of Mercury and the 4 Planets
dancing their measures about Jupiter, and all the Ordinances of Heaven, they
are his, he sets the dominion of them in the Earth. He binds up the sweet
influences of the Pleiades in April, Job 38.33
and loses the frosty bands of Orion in November when he pleases: he is the
Father of the Rain, and the pearly drops of Dew he has begotten them from the
Morning Womb. Amos 5.8.
He calls for the waters of the Sea, and pours them out upon the face of
the Earth, the Lord is his Name. He sends the turbulent and tempestuons winds
out of the hollow of his Hand. Psalm. 104.32.
He looks on the Earth and it trembles, he touches the Hills and they
smoke, he shook lately the Cities of Ragusa and Rimini into ruins. He cast up
out of the bowels of Aetna the late dreadful River of sulphurous flames to run
six miles breadth by the City Catania into the Sea. He kindles the Lightnings
in the Regions of the Air, and they answer to him, Job 38.35
here we are. It Is the voice of his Thunder that breaks the Cedars of
Lebanon, and makes Mount Sirion to skip like a young Unicorn. Psalm. 29.5, 6.
Whatever he pleases, that he does in Heaven and Earth, Psalm. 135.6.
in the Seas, and in all deep places. He causes Grass to grow for the Cattle,
Psalm. 104.14, etc.
and Herbs for the service of Man, the Wine to rejoice his Spirits, the Oil to
make strengthen his heart. He gives life his face to shine, and Bread to
strengthen his heart. He gives life and food to all Creatures, they wait upon
him to receive their meat in due season, he opens his Hand every morning, the
Fowls of the Heaven fly to his feet and are filled with good. The Gardener may
plant, and his servant may water, but it is God that gives increase to the
stature of Vegetables, their Verdure, their Flowers and Fruits. 1 Chronicles. 3.6.
Mat. 6.28.
He clothes the Tulips of Persia, those Lillies of the Plains of Shushan, with
more Royal Attire then Solomon's.

As to the Church in special, he often and mercifully prevents the fears of his
people. How graciously he dealt with Jacob in the case of Laban, Genesis 31.24
commanding him in the night not to speak roughly to his servant from good to
bad, and made the face of Esau to shine upon him as the face of God. Genesis 33.10
In the time of Famine he planted a Corn-field in the bottom of a barrel of
meal for Elijah, and an Olive-yard in a cruse for the Widow of Sarepta, and
opened as it were the Windows of Heaven in the time of Elisha, and poured out
Corn among the poor in the streets of Samaria.

Such stupendous Mercies, which the ungrateful world calls hap and fortune,
are the sudden and sweet dispensations of his Heavenly and Holy Providence. He
is pleased out of his munificent bounty to prevent our expectations with sudden
and surprising benefits to amuse, yea amaze, us under the sense of Divine
Goodness, and to draw our Hearts with the silken cords of love.

It Is his favor that drops the inclinations of affection into the hearts and
tempers, the reciprocal tides in the breasts of such whom he ordains for
conjugal relation. His Eye guided outcast Hagar to a shrub in Paran; Genesis
24.39, 40, 58. and 29.11.
and rather then her son should perish for thirst, an Angel must point out a
Well to slake her sorrow.

Wonderful are the instances both in sacred and civil Story in discovery of
means, ordering of method, guiding of accidents to the prevention of dangers,
and preservation of life, and the sudden issuing of sudden distresses. No less
admirable are many quick and stupendous deliverances out of Dungeons and
Prisons to great and famous Advancements; and by providence to us occasional
and accidental, flow high and exalted manifestations of God to his Church and
people.

Not to be curious in ranking under distinct heads, give leave to mention a few
mixed Examples in various kinds.

Pharaohs Daughter coming occasionally to the Rivers side, Exo. 2.6.
had compassion on little Moses weeping in his Cradle of Bulrushes. Her heart
wept over the tears of Moses, and she brought him up like a Prince in Egypt to
be Prince of Israel. Thus God makes his enemies to foster their own
Supplanters, and to build up their own destroyers. After this, the Humanity of
Moses to the Daughters of Jethro in watering their Sheep, advanced him to be
Son in Law to the Prince of Midian. A poor Captive Maiden in the Land of Syria,
by a few words, was the occasion of the cure of Naamans Leprosy both in soul
and body. And another finding favor in the eyes of the great King of Persia,
was the occasion of delivering the Jews from destruction in 127 Provinces; and
the Reading of that Kingdoms Chronicles opened a door to Mordecai's Glory and
Haman's Infamy. Joseph and Daniel arrived to unexpected Preferment by
exposition of Princes Dreams, whereby the Church of God was strangely
preserved, and at length delivered from Exile. Simeon and Anna coming into the
Temple, at an instant of Providence met with the Lords Anointed, and saw his
Salvation. Many of the choicest Mercies fall under this head. The first and
primary Mercy to the World, the Protevangelium, the preaching of the Gospel to
Adam by God himself, transcended the thoughts and imaginations of our fallen
Parents. The sending of the Messiah's Scepter out of Zion among the Gentile
Idolaters, who sought him not; and the Conversion of whole Nations to the
Obedience of his Spiritual Law, was performed by preventing Grace to the whole
world; and the particular turnings of Rebellious Souls to God are often managed
by secret instincts. Austin would needs sail over Sea to Rome against the
prayers and tears and fears of his holy Mother. She dreaded his being corrupted
by the debauchery of Rome, but God sent him to Milan to be converted by
Ambrose: and as he speaks sweetly of Gods denial of her prayers as to his
journey, Confess. 1. ^ c. 8.
Sed tu alte consulens and exaudiens cardinem desiderii ejus, non curasti quod
tunc petebat, ut in me faceres quod semper petebat. But thou in wise counsel
did regard the hinge on which her desires turned, did reject her present
prayer, to give in the effect of her constant petitions. Many times such who
run from the means of their own Salvation, fall into the happy snares of Divine
Mercy; and such who are naturally unwilling to be saved, Austin.
( praevenisti ut vellem) the secret Wisdom of Providence allures to become a
willing people in the day of his Power. Should I enlarge upon the many rare
cases of special preventing Mercies, this Discourse would run over the banks of
Volumes. Famous is the Instance of that man, whose Horse in a dark night wafted
him over a Plank laid upon the breach of Rochester Bridge, and the next day
coming to see the place of his strange deliverance, sunk into the deep waters
of Amazement and died away. Great Salvation did the Lord work also for a Friend
of mine, M. Charles Morton.
who riding in the night along the High Way at Menegizy Cliffs in Cornwall,
which was fallen down into the Sea at a vast depth, might have perished
inevitably, had not a man suddenly stepped out of his door at his passing by, and
prevented the mischief. More admirable the safe fall of a Butcher upon his
Sheep from the Cliff at Dover Castle, as the Inhabitants report. How did an
impulse upon Mr. Dods Spirit to visit a Friend two miles off in the night,
prevent the Self-murder of that person by a Halter, who was esteemed truly
gracious, but overwhelmed by direful tentations? How did an unexpected Fog
prevent a second Battle between the English and Dutch in the late Wars? And the
like happened in the days of King Edward the Confessor upon the Navies
addressing to fight. How admirably have many persons been cured, preserved,
delivered by sudden accidents? Memorable is that story in Tilingius, of one who
being cured of a Dropsy by the poison of a Toad designed for his destruction,
became the Publisher of that Specific. Some by Falls into Rivers have been
cured of Madness; others by sudden frights restored to the use of their Limbs;
and others by Shipwreck have escaped Piracy. And (which is distinct as to
relief unexpected in deep poverty) that of Accesilaus is remarkable, who caused
a Bag of Money to be conveyed under the pillow of a sick Friend, modestly
hiding his poverty, that he might find it rather then receive it. And others
that have let fall Money into the laps of persons from a window, as if it fell
from Heaven.

As to preventing Mercy in reference to prayer. ^. 65.24.
Sometime before we call God is pleased to answer. When the Heart is but a
tuning, he discovers the Lesson and turns it into a Song of praise. Ps. 32.5.
When David was under resolutions of Confession, God actually forgave the
iniquity of his sin. Genesis 24.15, 45.
Before Eliezer had done speaking in the case of Isaac, out comes Rebecca with
the answer of prayer. When Hezekiah was praying and weeping, 2 Kings 20.5.
Turn again (says the Lord to Isaiah) and tell the Captain of my people, I will
heal thee. And Gabriel told beloved Daniel, Dan. 9.20, 21, 23.
that at the beginning of his Supplication he was commanded to fly more swiftly
down to Daniel, then his prayer could fly up to Heaven. So ready is our
gracious Father to smell a savor of rest, when the Incense of prayer is but
newly kindled.

CHAP. III. The Numerousness of Preventing Mercies.
THE glittering Stars of Heaven, the drops of the briny Ocean, and the Sands
upon the winding Shores, the Dusts of the Earth, and the Atoms that swim in the
Sunbeams, are not so numerous as these excellent Mercies. Archimedes could
write a Treatise of the Sands, but no person that ever appeared on the stage of
Being, though he should spend all his time in writing Volumes of his own Life,
could trace the measures of his Mercies, were he never so observant, or did pry
never so curiously into the passages of Divine Providence. Every draught of Air
into the Lungs is attended with Mercy. When it carries out the fuliginous
Vapors of the Heart, who can attract it in again for the refrigeration of the
Blood, and mixing the volatile balsam of the air to circulate that purple
liquor in its motions. The pulses of providence are quicker then chose of our
Wrists or Temples. How manifold are his mercies? Ps. 139.14.
The soul of David knew right well their multiplicity, but could not multiply
them aright by any skill in Arithmetic. Nay, the very sum or chief heads of
divine kindnesses were innumerable. His wonderful works and thoughts toward
him could not be reckoned up in order by him, they were more then could be
numbered. Ps. 40.5.


It Is impossible to follow the footsteps of these mercies: Heaven it self is
not sufficient for a finite capacity to measure them. They endure to eternity
in preventing our lapse from happiness. Lets try a little speculation on 2
heads. 1. On some gracious occurrences in the (...), the compass of day and
night; and 2. The preventing mercies that are laid up in the bowels of
afflictions: both as to subsequent sins and dangers.


As to the first, When we rise in the morning, that sudden palsies do not
unloose our Nervs, or painful Convulsions shrink them up; that we are not able
to descend our Stairs; that when we are down, some Messenger of Death does not
appale us with terrible tidings, and give us a bitter breakfast; that we have
Hearts and Spirits to call upon the God of our mercies in our Families, as an
Antidote against the evils of the succeeding day. When we come into our Shops,
that the rapines of night Villainies has not stripped us naked of all our Goods,
and that we find all our Relations in health and peace when we walk abroad;
that we suck not in Contagious Atoms from the Air; that the East wind does not
blast us; that sudden violent rains in hasty walking do not cool our sweats
into Surfets, or that we hurry not the blood into fermentations for new and
surprising distempers. In vain should we be wary, if holy providence were not
wakeful. That the earth we tread on does not suddenly open its mouth to swallow
us as it did the Rebels in Numbers. Number. 16.32.
That we dash not our feet against a stone, our Shins against Posts, Ps. 91.12
or strain our Ankles in plain ground; that the Tiles or Timber falling from
Houses, or the sweepings of gutters, do not brain us; that mad dogs infect us
not with an Hydrophobia by their venomous bitings; that wild Oxen let forth by
careless and wicked Butchers do not gore us. or Carts crush us, or damnable
Hectors stab us; or that casual arrows, bullets, or stones do not dispatch us.
The memorial of such a mercy stands upon the top of the Free school and
Almshouse at the South end of Islington, Lady Owen
where Iron arrows are planted to signify the gratitude of a poor Milk Maid to
Gods mercy, who upon escape of an arrow that was shot into her clothes, vowed
to build it if she rose to an estate; and at length being raised to the degree
of a Lady performed her vow. We ought to be thankful that Coachmens whips do
not accidentally scourge out our eyes. That in the days of general Trainings or
public Shows strange disasters brings us not to the evenings of our lives.
That meddling with unconcerning quarre's in the ring of a tumult, twist us not
into danger through our own folly; since wise Solomon has warned us, Pro.
26.17.
He that medleth with strife belonging not to him, is like one that takes a
dog by the ears. When we ride that every step is not a path to the grave: that
the Horse stumble not, or the Wagon break not, or the Coach overturn not. That
we sink not into unfenced Gravel-pits overwhelmed with quicksands, overflown
with waters. That Lightnings do not lick up our spirits, or hot Thunderbolts
rend us in sunder. We should reckon our mercies not by miles or hours, but by
steps and moments. When we come to our meals that fitting refreshes, when many
by painful Fistula's pine away into Consumptions, and cannot repose their
bodies into any grateful posture. That we bring appetites to our Tables, and
are not by cares and vexations from abroad rendered snappish and currish to a
tender Wife and sweet obedient Children at home, and our stomachs stuffed with
choler, unfit to crave a blessing or receive it. That we have our lovely Vines
to cheer us and our Olive plants about our Table to soften and sweeten our
spirits; Ps. 128.4.
So shall the man be blessed that fears the Lord. That some of us behold our
Tables spread with furniture from the Air, from the Seas and Rivers, from the
Mountains and Valleys, from the Fold and Stall; nay some with Olears from
Spain, and curious rarities from Turkey, Muscovy, and both the Indies, and
served up in Porcellane Dishes from China, in Silver from America, and Gold
from Barbary, and 12 sorts of wine in Venice glass from Murano, and yet like
Jesurum was fat and kick. That any one of these curious Viands meet not with an
ill-habited Scurvy in the blood, and especially all confused together carry not
thousands from the Table to the Pillow, and thence to the chambers of death.

When at our meals what a mercy that every bit does not strangle us, since
story remembers some to have received their last by a raisin stone, a fly, a
hair. When our daily food passing over the Larynx, the bridge that covers the
windpipe, that it does not choke us, as the rump of a Capon did the Earl of
Colrain. When after meals in our repose, or walking in Gardens or Fields, no
sudden accident attaches us, and spoils Concoction. That when we have eat and
drunk, that we can render our urine and uncover our feet, thousands perish by
stopping the channels of Nature. Let Us daily bless the Lord for Evacuations as
well as Ingestion. It Is wonderful that men's cutting their Hair tends not by
distillations on the Lungs to Consumption, or by letting blood that an Artery
be not cut, as some who have lost their Arms. Or so inconsiderable a thing as
the cutting a Corn does not rankle to death, as in the Lord Fairfax.

When we sail upon Rivers or Seas Oh what mercy that the Vessel founder not,
that the Sands suck us not in, nor the Rocks split us, nor sudden Gusts
overturn us, and wandering Pirates catch us not; that he makes the waves to obey
his word, and the stormy wind to fulfill his pleasure.

When we converse that Pride and Passion do not entangle us, or Captious or
Suspicious tempers do not wrest us to displease or distrust our ancient Friends
or raise new Enemies.

When we sleep that the House do not entomb us by stormy blasts, or secret
failing in the Timber. That fire by careless servants or other latent causes,
does not burn us to ashes, as the Merchant in Lothbury.

That Armies of Weasels, Rats, or Mice, Munster. Cosmog. p. 606.
do not feast upon us, and know out our bowels, as they did to Hatto that
wicked Bishop of Mentz.

That we are not scared by Visions and terrified by Dreams; Job 7.14.
and Satan's Chain let out upon us. It was the case of Job, a better person then
any of us.

That sudden Noise and Alarms of the night do not fright us to awakening, so
hurtful to the Animal spirits. That we can sleep quietly, Ps. 122.2.
that he gives his beloved rest. That some greater persons are awakened by
Music, and meaner by the sonnets of Birds near their houses, could we but
praise him with joyful lips when we comfortably behold the morning light.

Of the innumerable evils these are some few touches, and the innumerable
mercies that instead thereof we enjoy. O that man would learn to praise him for
his wonderful works to the children of men! Ps. 107.8.


Let Us treat a little of the second, he prevention of evils by afflictions,
both the evil of sin and danger. As to sin, we ought to present God as a Father
in afflictions. Prove. 29.16.
An uncorrected child brings his parents to shame. We should shame Religion and
our holy Profession, if God did not often hedge up our ways with thorns, that
we may search out the paths of holiness. Hos. 2.6.
It Is a sweet argument of Divine Love. We weed the Gardens wherein we delight
to walk, file off the rust of useful Instruments and refine the rugged Oar by
the fire, and purge our own bodies from that feculency in the bowels, that
might produce obstructions. We lose nothing but dross and corruption in the
fire. Our Spiritual Physician lets out nothing but impure blood by his
Phlebotomy. Nay sometimes God prevents sin by sin, preserves from fouler sins
by lesser falls; and it proves very profitable to some proud and presumptuous
spirits to stumble into sin, thereby receiving a check to their haughty,
stomachful, and censorious tempers. Such trials and afflictions imbitter sinful
courses. We are dangerously addicted to present enjoyments, and to put
confidence in the arm of flesh, and value the vanities of this Life. Sanctified
afflictions drive us from the World to God, teach us to live by Faith, warm the
Spirit in prayer, and whets prayer into crying, as it did to Moses. We usually
send up faint prayers in times of prosperity, when Halcyon calms are upon our
Tabernacles. In stormy times we fly toour Rock, and mourn like holy doves in
the clefts of the Mountains: we are more mortified to the World, weaned from
troublesome and peevish Relations, relish spiritual motions, and have a sweet
savor of the Promises upon the Souls palate, are fortified against Death, and
prepared for the Kingdom. We learn to bless God for crosses, who makes the
worst of a Christian to work together for the best of a Kingdom. We learn to
make peace, not so much with the Instruments as God the principal cause. For
affliction comes not out of the dust, but drops down from Heaven; and
therefore piously turn the eye and the heart to him that smites. Not to fight
with the Rod, or bite at the Stone, as carnal persons; but to be very humble
and seriously penitent like Hezekiah, who chattered like a Crane under his
sorrows, but went softly, (as in Sackcloth and Ashes) all his days; and (like
David) not only pray for present pardon, Ps. 51.10.
but for a free spirit to walk holily in time to come. No false heart can truly
desire preventing grace, as the sweet Singer of Israel after cleansing and
purging mercy begs establishing grace. That repentance in sickness is always,
sincere, which hungers after grace more truly then it hankers after recovery,
knowing that the end of the Rods discipline is then accomplished.

Lastly, as to danger both temporal and eternal, What Is the Life of Man but a
Sea of dangers? what is the Mercy of God but the haven of deliverance? Every
affliction should be a Memorial of the day of Judgment, and teach men to call
their ways to account, and esteem all to be mercy so he save us at last. Many
by sin bring the affliction in kind, shorten their own days, cut off the thread
with their own Knives, and put out the candle of Life with their own
Extinguishers. God sanctifies the approches of such bitter dangers to a sight
of corruption, and to saving repentance before the dying hour, to such as are
elect according to the purpose of grace. Good men may be judged of the Lord;
may drink of bitter cups, 1 Cor. 11.32.
as the Corinthians were sick, and weak, and slept, for unworthy receiving;
that they might not be condemned and perish with the world. We must learn to
justify God, yea to praise him here for afflictions; for which hereafter we
shall fully glorify him. Our troublesome pilgrimage must be sweetened with songs
of praises to him who crowns our prickles with roses, Ps. 65.11.
and plants our low Valleys with fragrant mirtles, and at length will beautify
our musing temples with Diadems of joy and glory; Ps. 25 10.
For all his ways are like a Fathers, full of mercy and truth, to such as keep
his Commandments and Testimonies.

To conclude: Such is the divine grace, that the bitterest potions of this life
are given to prevent the deadly draught of nhe Stygian Lake of Hell. Nay, in
this day how many of the Saints afflictions have been rises and preparatives
for greater mercys. Patient Joseph first dragged his irons in prison before he
was drawn in Pharao's second Chariot, and adorned with chains of Gold.

The strongest storms often precede the most sunshine calms, and when winds
blow highest they scatter the thick Clouds with greater vehemence. The darkest
calamity of the Church ushers in the most glorious times. It was so in Egypt,
Babylon, and Shushan, and after (the Decumanus fluctus) the tenth persecution
rose up famous Constantine, and so it shall be again. The last stroke of Papal
sury in the state of the Witnesses burial, shall open a door for their rising
and ascent to a Heaven of Church Ordinances, and outward Grandeur never to be
conquered or oppressed more. Out of her Cinnamon ashes shall arise a new and
most Illustrious Phoenix, to fly with delicious Songs through the whole World.

CHAP. IV. The excellency and pleasantness of preventing mercys.
THe Rainbow of the Heavens knows not more rare and delightful colors, then
the rainbow of the Covenant, under which our Savior has placed his Throne.
The beauty of a picture shines in variety: Rev. 4.3.
which sets such a delicious and pleasant luster upon prospects and
Land-shapes, where Hills and Dales, Woods and Plains, Rivers and Seas, Castles
and Cities, and the carcases of ancient ruins and hanging Rocks, are curiously
drawn by the Pencil of nature. Nay the sweet singer of Israel depaints the
Churches garments Ex opere Phrygionico, Ps. 45.14.
like Joseph's Coat with changeable Silks, and the Ps. 68.13. (...) Isa. 54.12.
greens of gold compared with the flowing colors that wave in the necks of
Doves. The Evangelical Prophet and the bosom Disciple build up the Towers of
Zim, the streets and walls of the new Jerusalem with Saphires, Carbuncles,
Agats, and pleasant stones; and lay the pavement of that glorious City with
malleable transparent Gold. There is nothng renders our preventing mercys so
illustrious and glittering in glory as their wonderful changes and successive
varieties in all ages and times of life. When we first hung on the breasts of
our Mothers, we sucked in the sweet nectar of preventing mercy: we drew our milk
out of the milky way in Heaven. Yea, as prudent Physicians cure an infant by a
potion to the nurse, thus has our gracious God by hidden means transmitted
frequent cures to hidden maladies. How has our youth flowed with fragrant
mercies, and riper years smelt deliciously like a Garden of Pomgranates? Cant.
4.13.
How has the goodness of God crowned gray hairs with a wreath of holiness,
honor, and happiness? How have the loving Angels carried some triumphant to
Heaven, who feared their setting in a dark cloud of horror and despair?

Let Us take some turns in this Garden of Eden, and eye the curious walk of
secret, sudden, and various mercies.

1. Secret mercies, whereof some are never fully known in this life; like mazes
and labyrinths and close arbours, which the vultures eye could never discern:
strange and unforeseen deliverances, whereof ensuing providence have made
beautiful discoveries; as Saul and his men went on one side of the Mountain,
when David escaped on the other in the Wilderness of Maon. Some have been
preserved by a Cobweb, others by a Hen laying of eggs, others by shoals of
fish in time of great persecution. When afflictions themselves have been
Seminaries of mercy, and the dark and stormy showers of April have rained down
flowers of savor, end plentiful crops of summer deliverances.

2. Sudden mercies in plunges of distress. When the Church has dreamed of
nothing but drinking the Wine of astonishment, yet awakned at the brink of
streams in the South. How have the Saints been supported, Ps. 126.4.
sustained, enlightened? How have doors opened on a sudden, and Iron shackles
been struck of by Angels, and Jaylors bathed with their tears the prints of
their own stripes? How have the oars struck light in a dark tempest, and the
Ships we sail in ploughed up sparkles from the briny billows of the Ocean in a
stormy night, there being a native fire in salt, from which the rapid motion,
has extracted light? Affliction it self has taught a way to the haven of
deliverance. Nay usually, when we begin to be willing and humble and patient,
to set down by the affliction, and to consider Gods gracious dealings in the
depths of correction, to erect us into some thankful, cheerful, and admiring
thoughts, that it is not worse, that thousands drink of more bitter cups, and
all out of hell is stupendous mercy. Many times the wind of Divine favor
blows from a fresh corner, and our feet are set upon the rock that is higher
then us.

3. New and various mercies. God seldom delivers in the same methods. There was
never the same face of Heaven from the Creation to this day. The aspects,
clouds, and weather do always vary, as the shells on the Seashore, and the
pebble-stones, none exactly alike. No veins on the handback, no lines in the
palm, no features in the millions of faces, no voices from the windpipe, no
gate in the postures of walking, but if curiously observed do differ to
admiration. No temptations, no graces, no afflictions, and no deliverances are
fully conformed to an union. We have new songs for every moment, had we hearts
to tune them. When Gods wisdom takes one mercy away, his beneficent bounty
sends another. When some setting Stars dip their flaming rays in the Western
Ocean, new ones glitter in the East. Never did the same water bubble from the
same fountain: but as God is the inhexhaustible spring of new and amiable
Mercies: So we find he adorns the Out-rooms of the World, and the Chambers of
the Tabernacle of his Church, with the Diaper and Tapestry-hangings of the
curious Needlework of his Providence. Such Wisdom dwells with Prudenee, Pro.
8.12.
and finds out the Knowledge of witty Inventions. All the curiosities of Art,
and the cunning devices of Artificers are from God: the swarthy Plowman
derives his seasons and management of his Lands, Is. 28.26.
Tillage, and Culture from Heaven: The Women that sit at the Wheel, Exodus
35.25, 26.
turn it about by the direction of God, for the Ornaments of the Tabernacle:
The Weaver, the Embroyderer, and the ingenious Lapidary, learnt all in the
School which is above the Stars; Exodus 35.35.
the most admirable of all Inventions have dropped into the Fancy from the
Celestial Intelligence. For what the vain, unthankful world calls casualty, is
a graft upon the minds of Men, cut from the Trees of Paradise. Accident is the
Mother of far more excellent Inventions than Industry. Glass was found out by
the Tyrian Merchants, Polyd. V^r. gil. l. 2. c. 22.
when boiling or broyling their Meat upon lumps of Nitre on the Sands of the
River Belus. Munst^r Cosmogr. l. 1. c. 173, 174.
Gunpowder was found out by a Monk, A. 1354. and Printing by a Soldier, A.
1440. and the Mineral Spaw at Tunbridge by a Page: The purple color by
Hercules his Dog, as it is storied in Pollux, l. 1. c. 4.
and thousands of the like which were pleasant to recite, did they not
over-swell the proper place. And shall we not think that infinite wisdom cannot
always present new and ravishing wonders of Mercies upon the Stage, Tullies
Offices first printed A. 1466. Salmuth in Pancirol. p. 244, and 246.
from him who is unconceiveable in counsel, and as admirable in working? When
we study in this Library, we still find new Lines and new Editions; we sail
upon new Coasts, and see new Stars as in the Southern Hemisphere, and enjoy a
new set of Creatures, and smell at many Leagues distant fragrant odoriferous
Sents; as, of Cinnamon from the Mountains of Ceylon in India; of Rosemary from
Spain; Cedar from Lebanon, that perfume the very thoughts af a Saint; and the
further we travel, the more delicious are the surging Tops of the Hills of
Canaan; and the more we taste, the more surprising sweetness astonishes our
Palates: like the Queenpine in Barbados, that supplies and transcends
expectation with new and rasive savours, and tunes our vocal Instruments for
new Songs to bear a part with the Harmony of Angels for ever.

CHAP. V. Of the Instruments used for conveyance of these Mercies.
WHatever Hand presents our Mercies, or whosoever's Heart was inclined to hand
them, all flows from the grand Original: Every Mercy is the Fruit of the
Thoughts of God. When David was poor and needy, Ps. 40.17.
Gods thinking upon him enriched his Spirit. But Instruments must have their
due place in our respect and reverence, since God honors them. They were
Golden Pipes that conveyed Golden Oil in Zechaery; Zech. 4.12.
Heavens Ambassadors deserve Angelical Salutations; remembering what is due to
Servants without prejudice to Divine Glory; who bends and inflects the hearts
of of men to show that Benevolence, which passes through them as a River
between its Banks, but springs from the infinite Fountain of Divine Mercy. Few,
or no Enjoyments but have their enamelled means and methods of Providence; and
when its Beryl Wheels move toward us full of Eyes and Glory, Ezekiel. 10.13.
we may cry out with admiration of God, O Wheel! Our Health, Beauty, Feature,
Strength, good Name, Estate, Utterance, or any other Endowment of Soul or Body,
are the Product of Divine Love, though second Causes may intervene; for those
very causes have their Creation, Motion, and Direction, and Success from God.
Children are the Heritage of the Lord, Ps. 127.3.
and yet the fruit of the Womb, by his Reward. Prove. 18.22.
He that finds a Virtuous Wife (as if by casualty) obtains favor of the
Lord by the Designation of Heaven. Whoever wishes, he receives those wishes
dropped into his Heart from higher influence. Genesis 24.31.
And faithful Eliezer must be called the Blessed of the Lord, when he knocks at
the Door and brings the Tidings. The Presents which David sent from the Spoils
of Amalek to his Friends, though taken from his Enemies, 1 Samuel 30.25.
yet were given of the Lord. Senders and Messengers may vary, but all comes
from Heaven. God is pleased sometimes to send an Olive Branch by the Hand of a
Dove to Noah; Food by the Mouth of a Raven to Elijah at Cherich, and sometimes
by a Jay to others: sometimes a Star passes before the Zabii, the Wisemen of
the East, and enlightens them to Bethlchem; and otherwhile an Angel is employed
to the Prophet at Rithmah; and many times the Methods of great Mercies are deep
and intricate, and we can never dive to the bottom of Wisdoms Ocean. The
stately River Nile rises from a latent head, and the foundations of Famous
Cities are under ground. The Great and Holy God sometimes stirs up the Hearts
of Relations, most times Strangers, and now and then even Enemies themselves
are turned to help and favor his People. Ps. 106.46.
Rare is that story of a good Woman at Sandwich imprisoned by the Major for a
Religious Meeting, and being asked by him how she would do in Prison being poor?
She replied, I serve such a Master, that rather than I shall starve, I shall be
fed from your Table. The Magistrates Wife overhearing her confidence in God,
sent every day constantly from the Majors house a portion of Meat for about
three Weeks, being the time of her Restraint. So that whatever are the Motives
in the Hearts of inferior Agents, still the Supreme and Heavenly Cause is to
be eyed with Adoration and Worship. Many may unwillingly profit us, we then owe
not the benefit to them, but the great Incliner, the Sovereign Mover of Hearts.
Let us not trouble our Spirits about that question, Quo animo? with what design
their Favors are calculated to our use. Ignoble Spirits may perform some noble
Actions upon a superstitious or vainglorious aim; as to merit Heaven, to gain
applause, to restrain the barkings of Conscience, to stop the Mouth of
Reprovers, and to oblige men to their humors, or some base intrigue or other.
Of all persons, Ministers should be most sagacious, and the Seers of the Temple
must be blind in such Emergencies. When sordid tempers exact difficult
Secrecies for a little pelf, while themselves spend ten times more on a base
lust; like those that fat their Horses for a riding, or their Slaves at Algier
for to sell in the Market at a higher Price: Homines vaenalis animae, that buy
and sell their souls for advantage, and are mere Merchants of all the Benefits
they exert to others. Some Men's Favors are like Crystal Glasses, of a curious
frailty, every. Spider of suspicion cracks them. He that ponders too much upon
the Publican return of his benefits, gratifies the trade of gain and
covetousness, not his Conscience to God, or the genuine good of others. There
be many that take a pride to be counted liberal, when they let fall a few drops
of charity upon famished poverty, and love that the Sun should shine upon their
forward bounty, and make their Cock crow at the scratching out a few Corns from
their lofty Dunghills; that can empty their laden Stomachs into China, Dishes,
and hang Jewels and Pearls, the price of whole Cities, upon their Ears; and
vest themselves with the Tribute of large Territories, and make as great a
noise in scattering their Offals among the Poor, as when the Russian Emperor
blows his Trumpet after Dinner; and all the World must know when they give that
which their high-fed Lap-curs many times refuse. They Will wear Silk Garments
like the Roman Matrons, of such a fine Web, that neither their Bodies are
defended from weather, nor their Chastity from observation. but think much of a
few Rags to cover a poor Lazarus at the Door. God gives them Hundreds by the
Year, and they carry single Pence in their Pockets, or brass Farthings, to buy
off the Clamours of Conscience. But yet such as are inward Enemies to true
Evangelical Charity, shall be Instruments, sore against their will, to preserve
the Soul of the Needy from death and ruin: Wicked and debauched Persons, Prove.
13.22.
shall in the issue lay up Treasures for the Righteous.

But when Instruments act generously, like wise Stewards of the manifold
Talents of Gods Mercies, they are to be highly esteemed, like the Gold Ring
that encompasses an Orient and Sparkling Diamond: They are to be nourished and
cherished like the Doves of Aleppo, to whose Feet the Missives and Letters of
Merchants are tied for speedy conveyance. Ambassadors are Sacred Persons, and
are to be sacredly handled. The very Feet of them that bring glad tidings of
Peace and Mercy, are to be washed and anointed with Oil, and counted beautiful.
There Is a Glory shines upon the Sandals of them who come down from Heaven; and
we ought to crows the Footsteps of the Messengers of Heavenly Favors, with
Branches of Olives; and the persons sent back to Heaven with grateful
Acclamations to the Harps of Joy, to hold in consort with the Host of Angels,
praising the Divine Beneficence.

CHAP. VI. The Beneficial Improvement of sudden and unexpected Mercies.
WOnderful Mercies speak wonderful Language, and call aloud for admirable and
joyful returns. Lessons sung to Shoshannims, the seven-string'd Instruments of
Adoration and Honor. Let Us hear the ravishing Music in these seven succeeding
Chapters, that may be cordial to the very Hearts of Angels.

1. Of the excellency of Love under the fense of Mercies. 2. The Honorable
Duty of Gratitude. 3. The Exaltation of the Divine Name for his Munificence. 4.
The Anatomy and Vnbowelling of Secret Mercies. 5. The Ingenuous meltings for
sudden Sins. 6. The softning Leniment of sudden Sorrows. 7. The Contemplation
of the permanent Mercies in Heaven.
I shall begin with the First, and treat it as the Subject of this Chapter,
what an excellent Frame of Spirit is kindled by the sense of Mercies.

The most noble and generous love is that which streams from Heaven, to
ingratiate the hearts of Enemies by Springs of munificence, to sweeten the
tartest and sowrest tempers; to break Flints upon Pillows, to melt adamantine
hearts in the warm blood of affection, to lead Lions in Chains of Gold, and
tame Hyrcanian Tigers into Doves. Masculine and Heroic Love changes the frame,
and alters the constitution and texture of hostile Hearts. Suspicion,
Suspicions.
which is the very Bane and Poison of Love, is by this Art fermented into a
brisk, volatile, and balsamic Liquor. To stand upon the Guard and watch, to
eye and try, is but a feminine and childish trifling; to subdue others by
kindness, is God-like; to melt the Rocks of Caucasus by flames from Heaven.
Weak and low-statur'd Love insists upon the catch, and so becomes touchy and
waspish, puts forth its captious sting at every buzz of false Flatterers and
Backbiters: Noble Love is like the Ointment of the right hand, Pr. 27.16.
which bewrays it self; like a soft River of Oil that runs down speedily in a
direct Chanel of inclination into the Ocean of enjoyment. He that can command
his Love when attracted by the Magnetic Influence of genuine Friendship, has
but little true love under his Obedience.

Suspicion and Distrust grows upon the Root of a weak Love: Generous and Noble
Spirits had rather be deceived than distrust. True Love is not easily provoked
and thinks no evil; 1 Cor. 15.5.
it bears, believes, hops, and endures all things. To lay heavy load,
upon sudden conjectures, is to tread upon quick sands, and walk among the Irish
Bogs. Such a Friend did not so courteously salute me in the street, did not
invite me among others, brake off his speech abruptly, looked not so pleasantly,
and turned suddenly out of my company.

Suspicion blinds the understanding, and is a Cloud that an evil temper turned
upon the Sun of affection. It cast Eve out of Paradise, and leads fretful
persons into deserts full of Briars and Thorns: It mischieves the owner, and
presents to himself a Cup, to drink up his own Poison. Pro. 5.22.
That Person is held with the cords of sin, and may complain with Eve, The
Serpent within has deceived me. When Men can out-wit the Devil in Policy, and
be too strong for Divine Justice, then they may walk in the shades of this
Fools Paradise. Men never gain by the ill bargain of Suspicion, but at last
their very thoughts will upbraid them with weakness and folly. Deaw not long
Arguments from the slender twine-thread of Suspicion: We need a Dove-like
simplicity, and a benign estimate of every Accident. Words misplaced must not
hurry our raw conjectures into Passions. It Is the sign of an evil temper to
construe the worst, when a fair Gloss may be more sweetly, truly, and decently
given. Believe nothing but what is manifest; use both your ears and your heart
too, before you whet your tongue; and when suggestions once appear to be vain,
chide your too frequent credulity. Be not hasty to conceive an injury, lest you
bring forth a lie; the frequency of self-rebuke through experience will pare
away sudden reflections. Let not little touches and small scratches set you in
a flame of anger. Because your drink is not warm enough, or your servant slow,
or the Table totters a little at Meat, or the Door is not presently shut, to be
in a scurvy Fever of wrath, betrays dirty blood and sordid spirits within.
Because a Flea or a Fly troubles you, or a pot falls, or a pipkin boyls over,
or a glass broken, or children make a noise, or a thing is misplaced, or
ancient people cough, or (as Myndyrides) because the roses in his bed were a
little doubled, to be in a rage; shows a proud, weak, and effeminate Spirit,
deserves the rebukes of silence, on deserting their company as unfit for humane
converse. Some persons have Souls good for little but to salt their bodies, and
exercise the graces of others, and are alive by providence for increase of
wisdom, patience, and pardoning mercy in their Alliances: Like Vermin subtle
to do mischief, and whet men's fancies to devise traps and gins to catch them;
spend their days in trifles to spin perishing Webs, catch Flies, and spit their
Venom.

Let Us turn our eyes from miserable deplorable forlorn Creatures, to him whose
Throne is in the Heavens, and counts it a condescending humility to behold the
Angels. Ps. 113.6.
All his works praise him, Ps. 145.10.
and his Saints bless him. Lets set out the glory of his Excellency, and admire
the operation of his hands with heart and tongue. We are too like the poor
Disciples that wondered at the Marble-buildings of the Temple; Mark 13.2.
are these things fit for a Saints wonder? Lets adorn our time by comparing
Precepts with Providence. The rule of his Wisdom with its product and issue,
and narrowly espy how God glorifies every Attribute in the management of Heaven
and Earth. Providence comments on the Text of Prudence, and delights in Mercy
and Love as the Issue of his own glorious Bowels. What stirred up Divine Wisdom
to plot the mutual kissings of Righteousness and Peace together; but rolling
bowels of compassion toward perishing man? when Angels fell from Heaven
without recovery, yet according to the Multitude of his tender Mercies, [Wombs
full of Mercies] has blotted out our transgressions. Ps. 51.1. Hebr.
Let us be inflamed with Love to God, that sweetly provides for our bodies out
of his Store house from the Air and Woods, from Seas and Rivers, from Hills and
Plains; not only for necessity, but delight and ornament, withholding nothing
from us that is good for grace or glory. But the Masterpiece, the Top, the
Flower of love shines forth in the beauty of Gospel-Mercy. Lets dwell in the
Temple of Meditation upon the infinite Love of God in Christ, till our hearts
he enlarged and amplified with flames of affection, service and praise; when
Divine Love is the Fountain of ours, we shall need no other arguments of bounty
to Saints, than the sweet apprehension of his Love to us. We need no motives
from Plato, Tully, or Seneca, who range up and down the Mountains of Fancy, and
tire their Pens to enforce particular Duties. That one Topic of Paul suffices
us, 2 Cor. 5.14.
The Love of Christ constrains me. That love which is called by Solomon,
Cant. 8.6.
the Flame of God.

I shall enlarge no further than a few points from these 3 Springs of
consideration; Whence we are, what we are doing, and whether tending.

Damascus, and tend toward the pale earth in the caves of Hebron. Nay, we crept
out of the bosom of nothing, and are less than nothing and vanity, to compare
with the Holy one that formed us, Is. 40.17.
and are able to do nothing without his Aid in whom we live, move, and have our
being; Act. 17.28.
and shall such nothings be proud of any thing? What have we that is not
received? and what is received, must be returned to the account of the Heavenly
Donor in Joy and Praise.

Adam drawn to the life by the Pencil of Satan, and sin is inspired into us by
his venomous breath, and inflamed to lust after every red-cheek'd apple of
Sodom; proud of every Fig-leaf, and jet it about in Aprons made of the skins of
Sacrifices, sporting in our own shame, cast down at the wagging of every Leaf:
Guilt makes us tremble at every bush. Rejoice not spiritually in any mercies,
can neither act good nor bear evil; stumble at straws, and shrink at every
silly taunt against God and Holiness, quake at the loss of a few shillings for
any pure Ordinance or truth of Christ. O miserable Man, who shall deliver us!
Had not the Dayspring from on high visited us, we had sunk into the bottom of
woe and misery.

Scheme and Pageantry of this World it whirls away in a moment, and at
judgment are stripped of all, but shame and confusion; what should puff us up
and blow this bladder of pride, which is pricked with the least pin of Divine
displeasure, and we vanish away. Let Us admire and adore free grace, that has
opened a way through the blood of sprinkling into the Holy of Holies, and
always contemplate and apply the magnificent Gift of Righteousness, which
infinite Love has consigned to us, that Mercy and Truth may follow us all our
days, Ps. 23.6.
and we dwell in the House of the Lord for ever.

CHAP. VII. The honorable Duty of Gratitude.
GOD is the Supreme Lord Paramount of Heaven and Earth, and therefore the
highest Homage is due to his Name. All Rivers spring from, and swim into the
bosom of the Ocean. The Sunbeams reflect from the Earth to the Sun again:
Fragrant Flowers perfume the sweet Air, which opens them. All must be received
with thanksgiving; and being thus sanctified, prove double Mercies. Every
enjoyment must turn to improvement: our comforts must be exalted into helps;
the Viatica and Supports of our Pilgrimage while Traveling with
Peace Offerings toward Zion.

We must prevent God by early Praise as well as Prayer: Ps. 57.8. Ps.
60.10.119.147.
The God of my Mercy shall prevent me, sings David; and every Child of David
must prevent God again with his Songs. Jehosaphat delighted God with
Instruments of Music before his Deliverance. 1 Chronicles. 20.21.
Faith must tune an (...), a Psalm of Victory before the Triumph. Praise is the
ingenious Mother of future mercies: As the Virgin Mary sang at Hebron before
the birth of her Son at Bethlehem: Luke 1.46.
O Heavenly Contention between Mercy and Duty!

The Eye of Man has a Muscle, which Anatomists call the Levator to help him to
look up to Heaven: A grateful Muscle! Unthankful persons cut out that excellent
Organ, and corrupt the Chrystalline humor of their memories by tears and
poring too much downward upon their Afflictions. Many men's mercies through ill
digestion ferment into Bane and Poison: Zwelser Append. ad Animadvers. Fol.
1667. p. 67.
As the learned Zwelfer, late Physician to the Emperor Leopold, tells us of a
Noble German, almost slain by the powders of Pearl, Coral, and other Cordial
Species: that which should have cherisht his Spirits, wrought toward a dry
Consumption. Many like Jesurun wax fat with mercies, and grow lean in praises,
and kick with that strength which mercy gives them, and trample on those bowels
that roll toward them; like great men's stomachs surcharged with dainty viands,
grow sick and squeezy, over-eat their appetite, and confound concoction with
various mixtures of flesh and fish and luxurious Sauces; and then complain of
splenetick fumes and flushes: Like Israel quarrel at Quails and make light at
Manna, while qualms and maukish phlegm and bitter choler flings up from their
Hearts. Ungrateful persons are the Grave of mercies, and often cast up their
rotten matter. It Is an Argument of a vicious stomach, to turn wholesome food
into sower humors. Borrichus de Egypt. p. 282. Fol. 14. p. 239.
Hermes after wine took a grain of Mastick or Frankincense to hinder its
coagulation into Tartar: And Arnoldns orders Bdellium to be taken with
Scammony, to preserve the bowels from Ulcers. After Kindnesses we should take
in Medicines against Ingratitude. There be many black instances of this base
and degenerous Temper. Aristotle has many a sinister bend in his Infamous
Scutcheon pourtrayed by Borrichius, but for three most memorable; in betraying
Stagira his Native City, in scorning at Plato his excellent Tutor, and for
dipping his finger in a design of poisoning Alexander his munificent Prince.

Another was that of the lean and pale Brutus, Sueton. in Caesar. c. 92. Plut.
to whom (being found among the bloody Conspiratours in the Senate House)
Caesar replied, (...), What thou among them, What thou my Son? Being deemed his
natural Off spring by Servilia the Sister of Cato.

A third may be that Nobleman, Wigandus in praefat. ad Herb. Borussiae.
who being near death by a dangerous bleeding at nose, was cured with the blood
red Burnet by a German Doctor, but denied him his Reward, because the Herb was
found near his own Palace. Were not others of a more noble genius, it might
shrink beneficence into a Mushrome, and blast the Flower of Love with a nitrous
East Wind into the Dust. Such wretches are like the beastly Capraemulgi in
Aelian, Aelian de animal. l. c. 39.
that suck the poor Goats, and by their venomous mouths shrivel and dry up
their Udders, that they never give milk more. Impudence is the Fruit of
Ingratitude, and genders to all manner of lewdness.

Gratitude is a high piece of justice, and feasts the owner with a joyful
Conscience. A thankful, and cheerful person walk together, and is a grand
Ornament to his profession: The three Graces tread their measures before his
door in Crowns of Myrtle: Chartarius Imag. Deorum, p. 336.
They were formed by Ancient Statuaries in shape of naked Virgins, cheerful and
smiling upon each other, to teach that kindnesses must flow without fraud, with
a candid, Romans 12.8.
simple, and delightful spirit, Yea, Holy Page recommends it when done, (...)
with singleness of heart, with a generous frame, casting no squint-eye, or
nourishing any base aim, either to elevate the crest of pride, or debase others
into servile offices. And this deportment ingener^tes a sweet temper in the
Hearts of Receivers. Love is the Cement of the Universe and humanity is twisted
into unity by kindness and concord. Virtuous Heathens numbered the graces among
their Deities, noting it for a Species of Sacrilege not to return Favors with
an aimiable Gratitude.

The Dispenser of Love should have a slippery memory, but the Recipient should
engrave it on Pillars of Marble and Pyramids of Brass: The Giver should shut
his Eyes when he opens his Hand. Dissimulation without blame, to cheer an
unknown person, or to hide his knowledge; Prove. 19.17.
such a one lends to the Lord, and makes Heaven his Debtor; and surely there is
Treasure enough to requite him: while he that accepts gratefully makes God his
Play Master by Prayer.

If by giving we expect returns, we fit like Publicans at the Receipt of
Custom, and give to our selves what we pay to others: Self-love is never truly
magnificent. To pour out benefits upon persons unknown or unable to return
shows delight in bounty; and the pleasure of Love to see such walk at liberty,
whose Iron bands we have unloosed incognito. A liberal man devises liberal
things like a Prince, Is. 32.8.
and seeks out Objects to exercise friendship, that so great a Grace may never
lie idle. A brave Spirit judges he receives the kindness which he bestows; as
M. Antony said, Whatever I give, that I have. The Europaeans purchase whole
Territories with a few Beads, Knives, and Hammers of the naked Indians: much
more happy who gain an Eternal Inheritance by a few Penies. Such a one bestows
himself, whose Coin comes warm from the Mint of his Heart, and shall be melted
into a Crown of Life.

He that seeks a debtor does but drive a Trade, hearkens to the promise because
of payment: He gives proudly and worships his own ambition, and sacrifices to
the Drag of Covetousness: He deals a Loaf, but full of Grits to break the
teeth; and a Scorpion instead of Fish, to sting the Stomach. Be kind to such as
are hoising sail to the Indies, and send precious Cordials to such as swelter
under incurable maladies; or those that hold out their needy hands in a dusky
even. Scatter your morsels to them that come from far in a Pilgrims Habit and a
transient Staff, Heb. 13.2.
and so entertain Angels at unawares: It Is the ready way to find Treasure
Trove, to enjoy plentiful Crops rained down from Heaven, and Ships blessed into
the Ports from Storms and Pirates. Others spend their unsanctified returns in
vanities, while the bowels of Saints almost cleave to their Backs, and the next
year their credit sinks at Land and their ships at Sea; or find the way to the
French Harbors, while others sail in safe by the breath of Prayer. We may stand
in need of the meanest before the Sun shines again from the Northern Tropic,
and those that scrape in dunghills and rake for Nails in Chapels, may ride in
pomp upon Velvet Sadles before twelve Moons be wained. The Old Man of
Winchester found it by experience, being cast into the depth of poverty by one
whom he had oppressed in youth. Haman may climb the Tree of Justice though
planted for Mordecay; and blind Sampson may see well enough to pull down a
Playhouse upon 2000 Philistines. Who knows what evil may thunder upon the
Earth, and where the Bolt may hit? A scoffing Noble was trod to death in the
Gate of Samaria, 2 K. 7.29.
who had mocked a Prophet, and jeered at the Windows of Heaven but a day
before. Cast your Bread upon the sliding waters, Eccl. 11.1.
which though swallowed in the Sea, return through the Caverns of the Earth
into the same River after many days. A prudent man foresees the evil and flies
into the Temple of Charity, and there meditates upon both fortunes: He reaps at
present the plentiful crops of Peace in the Champain of a good Conscience, and
makes a continual Feast to himself upon the dones let fall to others.

He that gives to Princes and rich Equals, Prove. 22.16.
may come to poverty by out-vying. Such as expect returns are like Merchants in
the Port, Physicians in Cities, and Victuallers is in Camps; and such as sun
their Fancies in the Usurers Walks. They are Traffickers and not Benefactors,
and are often outwitted by Expert Sophisters, who are wonderful officious in
hopes of gain. Like Crows that fit kawing upon an old stump watch dying Cattle
with much ceremony, and with fawning flatteries hop about them till they pick
out their Eyes. But whatever be the frame of the Givers Spirit, the Receiver
must not pry too narrowly into the Patrons Conscience, but make his kindness
the seed-plot of renown.

Happy are those Noble Souls who so give as to stir up a sweet memorial before
God and man. The amiable frame of the Giver out shines the Gift it self, and
cherishes Gratitude in the leanest Soil. Praise is comely for Saints, Ps. 33.1.
2 Samuel 24.23. Mat. 5.45.
especially when men with Ornan give like Princes; when Jebusites act like
Israelites or like God himself, whose Sun warms the House of the Evil, and his
Rain pours down upon the Field of the Wicked. It becomes us to let God hear
from us, when we hear from him, and all his Mercies to turn into Sacrifices. A
thankful Spirit is like a Musical Echo in the Star Chamber of Heaven. Man must
not only be a Concha but a Canalis; Bernard.
not a Shell to retain, but a Chanel to derive mercies. Like marble Basins at
Fountains, when full, run over to others and water the parched Plains. Our
Cornfieldsd must grow for the Poor and the Levite, Deuteronomy. 12.18, 19.14.27,
29.16.11, 14.
as well as to swell our barns and cram our Garners; that others hearts and
faces may shine with the Oil of Joy and Thankfulness both to God and us. That
like the cheared Lark when enlivened by morning warmth, mounts up with singing
out of our sight toward the Suns Chariot, and thanks him with a Sonnet, and
makes him rejoice to run his Race.

We should learn his Lesson, and praise the Fountain of Isreal's mercies at the
dawning day. Scruple not to leave the Rosy-finger'd Morn abed in Tithonus Arms.
Leave the Sun a Sluggard sweating in the watery Embraces of the Eastern Ocean.
We need not the glittering Lamp of Venus to find out the Palace, or knock at
the Gate of Heaven. The blessing of former, the sense of present, and the hope
of future Mercies, should all inflame us. Our Souls from experienced
observations of former Mercies, like expert Astronomers, should predict benign
Configurations before the distilling Influences, and praise him at the dawning
and daybreak of Mercy. Nay, our lives should be a whole Tenor of praises,
since we are hemmed in and compast with kindness. We are laden with benefits,
and Angels encampabout. us in Chariots of fire to protect both us and the
mercies given. We should raise up a Temple of praise with walls ringing Marble.
Every breath we draw in should go forth warn with Anthems. The bloods
Circulation should run round in Songs, like the Hydraulick Instruments of Water
Music; and every Pulse should beat upon the Strings of David's Harp. The
wholesome Herbs should cure our Murmurs, Ps. 148.2, etc.
and all the Creatures of Air, Land, and Water should by our hands pay tribute
of praise to God. The pleasant Rivers should convey our Songs to Paradise, and
in the fragrant Flowers smell the goodness of God. The showers that cool the
Summers heat should inflame our Love, and make our Palm Trees flourish with fat
Dates in the Courts of God. Ps. 92.12.
In Medicinal Baths and Springs we should hang up our Testimonical Crutches,
and write a votive Table. The precious Metals, whose marks above ground betoken
the enamelling of natures Bowels, the divining Rod and skill to dig them and
melt their Oars into plate, should all be formed into Golden Flagons to be
consecrated and hung up in Zions Sanctuary. When the May-Quiristers sing with a
Thorn at their Breasts by night, to allure us from the Thorns in ours, and
delight us when we cannot sleep, or awake us like Princes with the Music of
their Spring Lyries; we should answer their praises of our Holy Mutual Maker
(like the Musician in Strada) with sweeter Elegance, and cause the Nightingale
to fly to us, and pant upon the strings of our Lutes in transcending praises,
and confess themselves conquered; and at the ceasing of our warbling melody,
dye in consort. We dwell in this World as in a sumptuous Palace arched over
with spangling Stars and transparent Saphirs, which fears neither fire nor
falling. Should not we set up Jacob's Pillar, or Solomon's Jachin, and Boaz in
the porch? Yea, let every House be a little model of the Universe; anoint
pillars in memory of protecting and providing Mercies, and consecrate them
daily unto God. Set up Monuments in each Valley of Bacah, and pen Psalms for the
Birth of every favor, and our Right Hands never forget their cunning. He
crowns the year with his goodness; let us compass his Altar with Songs. Let
annual Mercies dictate perennial Melody, and perpetuate his Bounty by graving
every Iota and Tittle of Mercy on the Empiraean tables of our hearts. Let Us
remember God, the Glorious Original of all Enjoyments; and the Gifts of each
Beneficent Hand let us pourtray upon both our palms, to be lifted up to Heaven
at morning and evening Sacrifice; and call upon all Creatures in order from the
Heavens to the meanest Atom in an Universal Diapason of Praise and Triumph in
God.

CHAP. VIII. The Exaltation of the Divine Name for his Munificence; and in
particular for Secret Mercies, in the structure of Man and his Preservation.
DID the Ancient Heathens erect their Hermaea or Statutes of Stone to the
honor of Mercury in Memorial of some casual and contingent happiness; Suidas.
and shall not we anoint Jacob's Pillar with fresh Oil to the true and living
God, with whom all contingencies are determinations of Mercy? Gracious Souls
delight in his precepts because wonderful, Ps. 129.129.
and admire the Ocean of his benefits because unfathomable. Reverence to his
Majesty is the Mother both of Obedience and Gratitude. We cheerfully obey him,
because we love him; and he loves is the more, because we obey him. His love is
the free Spring and the munificent Reward of all sincere services. He excites
and enables us to Holiness, and then crowns us. A genuine Child takes pleasure
in conformity to the Fathers Will, and this Heavenly Father makes them
conformable to his Sons Image. He plants the Spices of Lebanon in our Hearts,
then breaths by his Spirit, Son. 4.16.
walks in his Garden, and eats his pleasant Fruits. A rare Master! that
strengthens his Servants to work in his Vineyard, and then leads them into his
Joy. Mat. 5.21.
There Is no mercy but he helps us to improve as a clue to Heaven: No duty but
he forms into a Ladder to Glory. Whether we eat or drink, or whatever we do, 1
Cor. 10.31.
let us do all to the Glory of God and Christ, who died for us; 1 These. 5.10.
that whether we wake or sleep, we should live together with him. Let Us sleep
to refresh our Spirits for service, and when we awake, let us be still with him.
Ps. 139.8.
He holds our eyes waking to ponder on his Mercies, and watches our eyes
while sleeping, to serve him with more alacrity. We cannot sufficiently prize
that secret Mercy that lodges with us every night within our Curtains. Sleep.
How many fiery Fevers does cool sleep extinguish? From how many deaths does
that brother and Image of death deliver us? Those silver slumbers are golden
mercies: How great a favor, that temperate repast should send up cooling
vapors to the brain to tie up our Senses, while we repose our limbs from
labor? Nor let us pass the lovely Fields in Harvest without remark, when wise
Nature has crowned the Wheaten Ridges with numerous heads of Poppies, to
minister both Food and Physic. Wedelius de Plani p. 17. Hook Microgr. p. 155.
And whereas one ingenious Physician has observed, That the the Salt of humane
Skull; so another curious Searcher has delivered, That the Seed of Poppy
(which causes sleep) is also of an Hexagon, or six-corner'd Figure; and it may
be its Salt may be yet more curious. As if the Atoms of the Fumes of Poppy were
fitted and cized to the Texture and Cells of Man's Noble Capitol. Should we give
a glance at the Eye when waking as well as sleeping, greater wonders would
appear in opening its Humors, Coats, Nerves, Seeing.
and Muscles. And yet further contemplate the goodness of God in these later
days in blessing the world with those perspicacious inventions of unequal
Glasses to help and delight our sight, by Spectacles, Telescopes, Microscopes,
and Chamber-Landscapes. Such exquisite Glasses have so been formed and
polished, as some have conceived they have had a prospect beyond the Stars into
the glitterings of the Empiraean Heavens, to their ravishment and amazement,
and have been carried as it were into the Seat of the Blessed.

Nor less mavelous is the contrivance of the great Architect of Nature as to
the Sense of hearing. Hearing.
With what Artifice are these gristly Portals of the Ears set before and round
about the inward cavity both for beauty and benefit, that great sounds may not
enter with violence, and be defensitives against immoderate heat and cold? And
that musical Tunes, by the fallacy of its circuit, may be received with the
more delightful sweetness: and when entered, what curious Organs are fashioned
within the Drums of the Ear, when the Hammer strikes words, and articulates
them upon the Anvile, and sends its lively Mercurian Messengers to the common
Sensory? That the Oil of a Snake, that quick-hearing Animal should cure the
deafness; and those useful new inventions of the brazen Otacoust and the
Stentorian Trumpet should be presented to us by the hand of Providence; the one
to admit, the other to convey, voices at a great distance?

Neither shall I enter the delicious Field of Anatomy in opening the Sense of
Smelling: Smelling.
How the little spongious Bones, being portions of the Ethmoides, do drink up
the moisture descending from the Head, lest it should be continually dropping
from the Nose; and serve likewise to fence off dust and impure mixtures in the
Air; that when the mouth is shut, it may be purely distributed both to the
Brain and Lungs. Nor shall I treat of the Sieve-like Tablet, or the Mammillary
Processes, which being over-moist by defluxions or rainy Seasons, impairs the
quickness of Sent. Nor may dwell in this Tower of Lebanon, Song 7.4.
where that watchful Porter has his Lodge over the mouth to give warning by
sent, that no unwholesome rank or unsavory Meat may pass within the door of our
Lips; nor intimate further how the quickness and acuteness of this Sent may be
preserved and increased by the smelling of Fragrant Flowers. Arnoldus, de vill.
nova, p.


Should we descend into the mouth and pry into the Instruments of Taste,
Tasting.
we might relish much of secret Mercy in the frame of those Organs. I shall
mention but a few: Bartholin. p. 365.
The Palate has a Coat common to the Gullet and Stomach, whence arises a great
content between them; that so we may preconceive what is delectable and useful,
or what is offensive and inconvenient for nourishment. Arnold. de vill. nov. f.
86. b. and quod been sapit, nutrit. Id. f. 66. a.
For it is well observed by Arnoldus, Vtiliora sunt quaecunque delect abilius
recipiuntur, That Food is most beneficial which is most delectable; if we spice
his Aphorism with a grain of Salt, it is true and savory. Again, the Tongue,
another Organ of this Sense, has a thin porous Coat, that savours may descend
into its fleshy part, which drinks in fumes and vapors from the predominant
humors in the body; Riolanus,
an Index to the learned Physician by its roughness, whiteness, or blackness,
of vicious and peccant qualities in time of sickness. And by the way let us
remember, that under the Tongue and another member not to be named, Nature has
framed a Bridle, to mind us of a memorial restraint of walking, feeding, and
other carnal inclinations. Besides the many excellent uses of this Sense, we
may by savors in some measure discern the virtues of vegetables and many
concretes both simple and compound, to the great pleasure of the expert
Herbarist and Student in the Mineral Kingdom. And to conclude, as this Sense is
impaired and mortified by the Palsy, and some other offensive Diseases in the
Genus nervosum; so it may be quickened by hunger, Arnoldus, p. 16. b.
and cured often by Volatile Salts and Spirits.

Let Us touch a little upon the Sense of Feeling, Feeling.
whose Instrument is the Flesh (not the common, Spigelius, p. 303.
so called) but that which is soft and replenished with nervous Fibers. This
Sense by the several Conjugations of the Nerves, and the fine Spirits gliding
through them, is dispersed over the whole Body; and where ever it is lost, the
use of that Member perishes. So terrible are those Distempers when the Nerves
are obstructed by Viscous and Tartarous matter in knobs, wens, gouts, and the
like; or contracted by sharp and acid Juices, as in Cramps and Convulsions, and
Side-pains or Stitches, or their Tenor relaxed as in Palsies; or the Spirits
within astonished and brought to a sudden sistency without motion, as in
Frights and Apoplexies, which often proceed also from the inordinate use of
Tobacco, Coffee, Henbane,-seed, Opium, Mandrake, and the like, either in
Medicine or by negligent Customs. So that we have wonderful reason to break
forth into the praises of a Gracious God, that so often preserves from
Thousands of Deaths by his wakeful providence; Act. 17.27.
that very Heathens might learn to feel after him, and find out some portions
of the power and wisdom of his Deity. To let pass the Mercurian Medicines, I
mean not the ordinary in Shops, but such as Arnoldus, Paracelsus, and Rhumelius
magnify in these cases to the learned in Physic; I shall only take notice of
a rare Experiment of the Honorable Boil about a blind Dutchman, Boil, of
Colors. p. 44.
named John Vermaasen, not far from Maestricht, who could discern seven several
Colors by the touch of his Fingers if he were fasting, according to the
asperity or smoothness of the surface of the Ribbands. But by what means to
help those Distempers that impair and obstruct this so useful a Sense, I
dismiss to the Learned and Experienced in the Art of Physic.

To proceed a little further in the admiration of God in the curious secret
Frame of Humane Bodies, but particularly the stupendous operations of the
Bowels, and the other great Wheels that move continually for the fabric of
Chyle, Blood, and Spirits. Oh what wonderful Cookery and Housewifery is
exercised by that noble Viscus of the Stomach? Tiling. de fermentatione, p. 58.
how the Relics of the last Meal growing acid prepares a ferment or leaven
for the next, whereby the milky Chyle after the first digestion is concocted,
and from the bowels conveyed in numerous Veins filled with that white Liquor,
Perquet. experim. Anatom. 6.
and dispersed through the Mesentery into a Cystis or common receptacle, and
thence carried up along by the Vertebrae till its poured down into the Heart,
the true and genuine officine of the blood, which a little above it, and before
its entrance, in dissections of Dogs newly killed appears half tinctured, as I
may compare it to Cream dyed with bruised Strawberries. Hence it is communicated
to the Lungs and Liver, and other parts of the body, and after by circulation
in the Arteries is reduced into a finer crimson texture. Here I might insist to
show how incommodious to the body of Man it is to admit of frequent Phlebotomy;
by the loss of Blood, Dropsies, Consumptions, and other formidable Diseases
have their Original; Helmont.
as the learned Helmont has observed, when upon much evacuation of blood for
the Cure of Plurisies such dangerous effects have ensued. It is not here a
season to gather up Arguments from Scripture, Deuteronomy. 12. Lev. 3.17, 10, 11,
13.14. Genesis 9.4.
showing that the Life of Animals runs in the blood, or to manifest that it is
the very Balsam of man's body for the prolongation of life: And therefore with
what care and sedulity the discreet Physician does usually order the letting of
blood; what sign, what vein, what distemper, Burgravii Biolich. p. 86.
what time of the Disease, what age of Life, what habit and strength of
Spirits, what quantity, what day, what hour, what cordials, what care after it;
what observations about Women with Child, how endeavoring to prevent abortion
often cause it, especially when near their time, as is observed by Hippocrates.
I leave these things to be contested about between the learned Galenist and the
experienced Chemist. Hippocr. Aph. 30. l. 5.
And by an Argument from the Cure of many Diseases by the Spirit and essence of
humane blood digested and circulated. I might here discuss how studious, and
sollicitous, and wary, the learned in medicine should be to prepare the blood
of a Goat against Plurisies; and of Sal Prunellae, or other Remedies against
the Quinsie, if possible to prevent the emission of humane blood, since it is
the Fountain of those rare Spirits that are distilled in Natures Alembeck of
the Head, to be the Instruments of Motion, Sensation, and all vital Actions.
There are other great wonders in the curious Fabric of this crazy Tenement of
the Soul, which pose the most equisite in Anatomy: to determine the use of the
Spleen whether to secern the Melancholy; whether it have a secret meatus or
passage into the Stomach; to constitute Helmonts duum virate of life, and what
ferment is elaborated by those 400 Arteries supposed to be in it by that
inquirer of Nature: Or the Cystis Fellea, to drain choler from the blood, and
convey that Saline compost by the ductus biliarius into the Bowels, to carry
off the Excrements; which if it be stopped and obstructed, produces that yellow
Tincture to the body, and gives denomination to the Yellow Jaundice: The
delivery from which Disease is the ground of these Lines of Praise to my
gracious Creator and Redeemer. Or what a rare Engine of the Cribrum or Sieve of
the blood Nature has formed in the Kidneys, to stop that Liquor and let pass
the Amber Urine by the Ureters into the Bladder; which if it be corroded or
eaten through by acid Tunbridge Waters, or other sharp Saline Humors, procures
a mixture of Blood with Urine, and sometimes so large, that life is endangered;
or if it be obstructed by Gravel and consistent Stones, what acute pains
succeed woeful experience teaches: In which case the Aroph Paracelsi, which is a
Chemical preparation of the essence of Saffron, called by them the Aroma or
Spice of the Philosophers, has wrought efficacious benefits. The last and
greatest Wonder in Nature are the Seminal Vessels, composed for the
continuation of Mankind; every of which, with their Balsam of Life contained in
them, deserve a double Volume. One to describe their Texture, connection, and
Use, with the Remedies to preserve from, and cure their Incident Diseases: The
other full of Hymns to our most glorious Creator. But these and the like I
dismiss to Spigelius, Riolanus, de Graef, and others of that Learned Nation;
not omitting that Ingenious Tract of our own Countryman Dr. Smith on the 12th
of Ecclesiastes. Let us cry out with David, I am fearfully and wonderfully
made, Opere Phrygionico, Ps. 139.14.
with curious needlework, of the Divine Hand in the lower parts of the Earth.
Did we but see and search a little into the admirable frame of Man's Body, and
upon what slender Golden Wiers and nice Labyrinths in those Wonderful Passages
in the Clock-work of our Bodies the continuation of Life did depend, we should
be astonisn'd at God's Mercy; and instead of wondering that we live so long,
might stand amazed at living but one minute. For if either the Vessels be
disordered, or the Liquors contained within them, we should soon pass away and
be no more.

Nay, if the five External Senses were every way complete in their Organs and
Spirits; Fernel. de anim. facult. l. 5. c. 3.
yet if the inward Crasis of the Brain be touched, what becomes of the inward
Sensory, which is the Center whereinto all the Rays of External Objects are
brought, there to be judged, exercised, and acted upon by the Imagination; to
be laid up as in a Cell or Promptuary by that great Lord Treasurer of the Soul,
the Memory? Whereof Holy Austin cries out with great admiration of God, Austin
de Confess. l. c. 01.17.
[ Magna ista vis memoriae, nescio quid horrendum Deus meus, profunda and
infinita multiplicitas! etc.] O the great power of Memory! O my God, I know not
what an horrible thing it is! O the profound and infinite variety in it! Behold
what walks in the Fields, what lies hid in the Dens and innumerable Caverns of
my Memory! etc.

These and other powers and faculties of the Soul, though in themselves of
admirably useful, delightful; yet were it not for the constant influx of divine
mercy, might soon be impaired and decay; that men of the highest pitch and
grandeur of parts might soon shrink into mushromes and idiots, and prove
miserable Objects of scorn and pity. But besides their being subject to natural
waste, what he said of death in general may be applied to any sense or faculty
in particular. Mors seni a foribus, juveni ab insidiis; Death stands before the
door to old Men, but behind the door with Traps and Gins for Youth. This would
be very apparent should we enter the Lists of discourse only about the various
Poisons which lurk in all things for the destruction of Man, without the secret
contrivance of such wicked wretches as Pope Alexander the 6th. I shall hint but
a few Memorials in reference to the 4 Elements so called, with which we daily
converse. Not to mention what pits and delfs lie in ambush for the lives of
Travelers in the Tinworks of Cornwall, Earth.
the Mendip of Somerset, or the Peak of Darby; what quaking bogs in Ex or
Dartmore, and in the Crags of Carmarthen, especially when covered with Snow.
But this falling under the conduct of accidental providence, it is more
expedient to mention the frequent use of Antimony, Quicklime, Vitriol, Sulfur,
Steel, Alum, Bolearmenick, Lapis Lazuli, Nitre, etc. appointed for compositions
in most Dispensatories; which oftentimes by their unskilful preparations prove
deadly poison, as might easily appear both by reason and example: And
especially in the use of Quicksilver, which although sublimated into a
Mercurius dulcis, and counted safe by many, and often proves so; yet there want
not great examples of its mortal Venom, and that poor Children find by sad
experience. And this is a certain rule of Helmont about all preparations of
Mercury, Quamdin resuscitari potest est venenum, nec boni viri remedium; That
so long as it can be revived again by Art it is Poison, and no Medicine for an
honest Man to use: And how easy it is to revive Mercurius dulcis, an ordinary
Chemist can determine. But I shall not insist here, nor hint about the Earth,
that the very Soil where Corn grows gives a various Tincture to it, and makes
some more wholesome than others; as may be considered in reference to Grain
produced in Mineral Countries.

Should I amplify about Waters, Water.
it might overflow a Volume. But this Element being truly Terra fluens, Earth
in Flux, is impregnated with the various Salts and Sulfurs that it finds in the
bellies of those mountains whence discharged, and in the Channels of those
Champions where it sports and plays in curious Maeanders and pleasant Turnings:
And therefore according to its differing imbibitions is sometimes wholesome and
often pernicious to humane bodies; Schoockius de cerevisia. Bochart, de animal.
par, 1. p. 292. 2 Kin. 2.19. Untzer. p. 967. Willis. Henr. de Rochas.
and hence it is of great concern in Brewing and all Offices of the Kitchen. For
instance: The Waters about Jericho were naught, causing Women to miscarry. The
Waters among the Alps procure the Kings Evil. The Water of the River Po breeds
the Stone. Those at Watford in Northamptonshire make men bald at 30; and those
at Carleton in Leicestershire induce a wharling in the Throat, Veget. de
remilit. l. 3. c. 2. Juvenal. sat. 13. v. 161.
and generally the stagnant corrupt Waters of Fennes are dangerous by naughty
Ferments for the Pestilence. Such as are taken up at Fountains, are replenished
with the Atoms of that Earth whence they spring; and such as are near great
Cities are not so wholesome, especially when conveyed home by Leaden Pipes, and
landed and kept in Cisterns of the same Metal; Plin. l. 31. c. 7. Vitruv. Lang.
Ep. Albert. de Met. l. 3. c. 4. Majer. Symbol. p. 494.
as Pliny, Vitruvius, Albertus Magnus, Langius, Majerus, and other of the
Learned have observed, that Griping of the Guts, Bloody Fluxes, and Kings Evil,
are tormenting Diseases to such Inhabitants, which I could wish were attended
by the worthy Citizens of London, my dear native City.

If the Earth and Water minister so many inconveniences to the prosperous
Health of Man, Air.
how can the Air be free which is always filled with Vapors and Steams from
both? Whence some Solutions may arise to the questions about the various
Products of different Winds blowing from the Horizon. Why the Nitre of the
North makes the Air so bitter, and the Sulfur of the South so contagious. Why
the East so parching and blasting, being mixed with mineral Atoms from the
Mountains of Germany, Hungary, and Thrace; and in Jewry from the Mine Hills of
Arabia; though there may be other latent Causes intermixed. Are not some places
noxious to the Brain by vegetable Fumes, as Arbours of Night shade, Walks of
Walnut, and Woods of Box? Nay, do not many Animals (where frequent) infect the
Air, as Naturalists have observed, and to name but one for warning sake? Arnold.
It Is noted by Arnoldus out of Avenzoar, that the continual usage of Cats is so
unwholesome to the Body of Man, that it often produces the Phthisick and
Consumption of the Lungs: And so do many Learned Physicians testify by
experience. In Ramsey of Poisons.


But to hasten; Fire.
it may not be unfit to observe that the Air may be much impaired as to
wholesomeness by the very culinary Fires which we use; where scarcity of Trees
forces many to use dried Cow Dung, Turff, Peat, Seacoal, and Canol instead of
Wood. The crude Sulfur and Arsenical Fumes that fill the Air of our city, are
doubtless great causes of the multitudes of Consumptions within those Walls, by
drawing so constantly those corroding Fumes into the Lungs. Not to mention that
the very Body may be much molested by Itches, and Scabs in sitting by Seacoal
Fires; Arnold. siquis, p. 64. b.
and the very Meat that is roasted and Beer warmed by them, is not so wholesome.
Bacon, Not. Hist. p. 202.
Let the Learned Bacon vouch my fears, who affirms, that the vapors of Seacoal
as well as Charcoal in a close Room, has killed many; and stealing in by
little and little, induces only faintness without any manifest strangling. And
to this I can attest with great thankfulness for my deliverance, being forced
to sit in a close Room for a long time in a late Winter, and found evident
recovery by change of Fuel. O what cause have we to magnify the Name of God
for the sweet Air we breath in, and to sweeten it more with the Music of our
Praises; and that all within us should bless his Holy Name. That every Western
Wind with its fresh and wholesome Gales should open the Flowers of
Thankfulness; that every sense and all their Organs? that every Nerve should
strive to string the Harp of Praise: Ps. 139.4.
not a thought in our Heart, or word in our Mouth, but should be known to him
altogether in the Echoings and Resoundings of his Gloey. That our Spiriturl
Senses should be ever exercised in making him their lovely Object, Heb. 5.14.
and his Holy Bosom the Center of all their Songs. Shall the Holy Psalmist lead
the Quire?

Praise him all his Angels and all his Hosts. Ps. 148.1.
Praise him Sun and Moon, with all the Stars of light. The Heaven of Heavens,
and the Waters above the Heavens. The Dragons and all Deeps, Fire and Hail,
Snow and Vapor, Stormy Wind, fulfilling his Word of command; Mountains and all
Hills, Fruitful Trees and all Cedars, Beasts and all Cattle, creeping Insects,
and flying Fowl; Kings of the Earth and all People, Princes and all Judges,
Young Men and Maidens, Old men and Children, Praise ye the Name of the Lord,
for his Name is alone excellent, his Glory is above Earth and Heaven.

Let every bright Lamp of the Firmament prove a falling Star, and worship at
his Footstool. Let the cold Influences of the Moon wax warm with motion in the
Chariot of Praise upon the mighty Waters. Let the healing Balsam of the Sun,
which cherishes the surface of the Earth and its Inhabitants from Pole to Pole
inflame every living Creature with his Glory. Let the Sea roar, and the fullness
thereof: Let every River wash the Pavement of his Temple, Ezekiel. 47.1.
and run under the Threshold of his Sanctuary. Let the savage Lions hasten, and
the ravenous Eagles fly to his Altar and pant to expire in its Flames. Let all
the Spices of India and Arabia perfume the Mansion of his Honor. Let all
Minerals, Rocks, and Mountains, pour out streams of Oil to attend his
Sacrifice. Let all the Vines of Lebanon, Eschcol, and Sibmah thirst to empty
their blood-red Liquor for Drink Offerings. Let mighty Aetna, Vesuvius, and
Hecla cast up their flaming Bowels upon his Hearth in Zion, Isa. 31.9.
and turn all his Sacrifices into ashes. Let his Priests be clothed with
Salvation, and his Saints sing aloud for joy, for the Lord reigns. Let the
whole Earth rejoice, and the multitude of Isles be glad thereof. Let the Holy
Angels answer from Heaven with their Silver Trumpets, Glory be to God in the
Highest, peace upon Earth, and good will to Man; whose grand employment should
be to study, discern, and applaud the Infinite Love of God in all his Mercies,
which in a few words shall close this Period.

David's Harp, or an elegant Complication of two figures, the Anaphora and
Epistrophe together. O give thanks to the Lord, Ps. 136.1.
for he is good, his Mercy endures for ever, That as the Name of God in our
native Tongue is from good, so our Souls should spell the nature of his
goodness, and every passage of his Providence.





Ps. 73.26.
A Saint may perceive it by the suddenness, sweetness, soul-calming quietness
of a word within, consonant to the word without; and encourages a Saint to
carry every new Emergency upon the memory of former experience in a Chariot of
Love to Heaven. That no sudden accident knocks at the Door of our Hearts or
Houses, but we as suddenly knock at the Gate of Heaven. If any tentation, new
motion, or weighty affair surprise us at unawares, we instantly carry it
through the Roof of our Closets into Heaven, and then our Spirits are in a holy
calm, as gracious Rebekah found it, Genesis 25.22. Prove. 15.24.
knowing that the sudden desires as well as the set Prayers of the Righteous
shall be granted. And now it is high time to conclude this Chapter with God; its
whole Scope being to recount some portions of his manifold mercies, and to
adore him for all his bounteous beneficence to us; who is the only first
Spring, and principal Mover and Conducter of all the Kindnesses we receive from
Men, being his Instruments, Servants, and Ordinances.

CHAP. IX. The Anatomy of Mercies.
FOR the Higher Advancement of Divine Goodness in all our Enjoyments, and to
learn that excellent Lesson of Godly Contentment in all Estates, it were
expedient to peruse, consider, and unbowel every mercy that comes down from
Heaven. We have little reason to expect any when we remember our inability to
merit, unskilfulness to improve, our ingratitude in slender returns of the
least Benefits wherewith we are laden every day. It Is mere free grace that
showers down Kindnesses upon our barren, murmuring, and repining Spirits. Did
we but refresh our memories with the many thousands better than us who are yet
below us, Ps. 37.1.
we should never fret at the prosperity of the wicked, that are above us. In
what a pleasant Paradise might our thoughts expatiate, did we beautify our
Meditation with the prospect of the Flowery Medows interwoven with Crystal
streams, and the gentle rising Hills crowned with lovely Groves, more delicious
than those of Woodstock? when we contemplate the various numbers, curious
methods, amazing circumstances, the unexpected ends, and surprising designs in
the Lawnes and close Walks of Mercy. When we pore upon sins, pry too curiously
into afflictions, grieve too smartly for imbitterments by Relations, and toil
our Spirits with the losses and crosses of this Life; we disquiet our selves in
vain, and are too subject to mutter at every little disappointment and
inconvenience. We augment our troubles, prolong our miseries, and run upon the
brink of danger to charge a Gracious God foolishly. Let us then turn our eyes
into the Anatomy-School of Mercies, and cut open the Inwards, and spend a
diligent view on the curious Situations and various turnings, and smaller
Arteries of every Divine Favor; and holding up hands with Holy Jacob, Genesis
32.10.
proclaim our unworthiness of the least of mercies; and while we are musing
what might comparatively be esteemed the least, as that we have a Being, and
Life, and draw one Breath of Air, the Original conducts us into his Courts with
praise and gratefulness, (...)
Katonti. I am lessened in mine own eyes before every mercy; the least of which
should humble and lay us low in the sight of God. What am I, and what is my
Fathers House, that the great God should cause to great faithfulness and truth
to shine before us, and lighten our Path to Glory? The School of Salerne writes
of the Body of Man, [Ex tricentenis decies sex quinqueque venis,] That it
consists of 365 Veins, one for each day of the Year. To be sure there is not
one particular Mercy but yields matter of Contemplation all the days of our
Life. We should cut open the Root, climb the Branches, smell the Flowers, and
taste the Fruit of Divine Love in every Mercy.

O rare Employment, when we ride, or walk, or sit, or lie waking in the Night,
Ps. 77.5.
to ruminate in the days of Ancient times, and run over the state of the Church
from Genesis to the Revelations, and compare our case with any of the Saints of
old, and work our hearts into praises, as David often begins his Psalms with
mournful Elegies, and concludes with joyful Ecstasies. As the Ancient Church
sprang in Egypt, past through Paran to Sinai, and at length sat under their
Vines in Canaan. So every Saint enters his life with a Tragedy, but ends in
Heaven.

Bashan should sleep under the shadow of a small Acorn, and the sweet-sented
Trees of Lebanon in a petty Berry. What vast Crocodiles of Nile break Shell
from a small Egg? What Rivers of Fire, the first little sparks of Sulfur, do
kindle from the bowels of Aetna? What little distaste at first overthrow mighty
Empires at last? and what great Estates and Dominions start out of little
casualties? The grand Ottoman Empire arose first out of the Flight of Mahomet,
and Darius by the neighing of a Horse rode into the Throne of Persia. One
glance upon a poor captive Maid brought Esther to a Kingdom, Haman to the
Gallows, and Israel to deliverance. David brought Cheeses to the Army, perhaps
in the same Bag wherein he carried stones to fling into the Forehead of
Goliath, and in the same brought back his Head to Saul. Nay Saul himself, when
seeking of Asses, found a Holy Prophet and a glittering Diadem. The magnificent
Kingdom of Solomon was almost all quite rent from his Son Rehoboam by a few
harsh inconsiderate words to his People. A Dream hurries Joseph from Canaan to
Egypt. and a Dream hands him out of Prison into Pharaoh's Chariot. 2 Kin. 7.6.
A mere rumor saves Samaria from Famine, and a Kingdom from ruin. Ezekiel. 38.10.
An evil thought in the Heart of Gog in the later days shall bring the Turkish
Armies into the Mountains of Israel, and there to a fatal slaughter in the
Valley of Harmageddon.

The motions of Hearts are sometimes infused, but always conducted by God.
Sacred Story derives from Heaven the kindness of Abimelech to Abraham, of Laban
and Esau to Jacob, of Ruth to Naomi, of Boaz to Ruth, and Jonathan to David.
When others think of kindness to us, Ps. 40.17.
let us imitate David, It Is the Lord that thinks upon me, and forms those
thoughts within their hearts. This should calm our Spirits, when a former
Friends heart is alienated by rash admissions of false suggestions, or when any
faithful Jonathan expires his Spirit into the bosom of God. It should not be
lost what Hobson, the late noted Carrier of Cambridge, said to a young Student
receiving a Letter of the sad tidings of his Uncles decease (who maintained him
at the University) and weeping bitterly, and reciting the cause of his grief,
he replied, Who gave you that Friend? Which saying did greatly comfort him, and
was a sweet support to him afterward in his Ministry. The ever-living God is
the Portion of a living Faith, and he can never want that has such an Ocean.
He that turns the Hearts of Kings like Rivers at his pleasure, turns all the
little Brooks in the World into what scorched and parched ground he pleases.

Jacob had the Seed of the Promise in his bosom, and carried it to Padan in
Mesopotamia, and 20 bleak Winters must blow over him before he comes to set one
foot upon his Rich Inheritance. Joseph's Feet were hurt in Irons, to fit him to
tread more delicately in the King's Palace at Zoan; and when the Lord's time
was come, Ps. 105.18.
by the same stairs which winded him into the Dungeon, he climbs up into the
next Chariot to Pharaoh's. Few can bear great and sudden Mercies without pride
and wantonness, till they are hampered and humbled to carry it moderately. Many
heads run round in a maze of folly, if their haughty stomachs be not well
cleansed with the Wormwood-wine of adversity. The prints of the Babylonian Iron
fitted the Neck of Manasseh to wear a Chain of Gold, and the weight of his
Fetters pressed down his Knees to Prayer. Some are forced to stoop like Camels
and take up their Loads, and trace many a weary trot in a sandy desert, and
drink their own Tears to slake their thirst, lest they should kick when
Provender-prick'd with prosperity. Such insolent Spirits, like Beggars suddenly
advanced on horseback, will ride most tyrannically on the backs of others,
because never made to bite on the Bridle. Did not wise providence in great
mercy to their Souls, by breaking a Leg or an Arm, break their Hearts, the
Earth were not able to bear some proud, impotent, insulting Rufflers. Wise, and
wary, and well-advised persons remember that the Wheel is always turning, and
that they who have been low may below again. Solomon had seen Servants on
Horseback, Eccl. 10.7.
and Princes walk on foot upon the Earth. Bajazet was a mighty Emperor,
commanding a great and puissant Army in the morning, and shut in an Iron Cage
by night. And Valerian the Roman Prince that ruled from Euphrates to the
Atlantic Ocean, was made a Footstool for Sapor King of Persia to ascend on
Horseback, Matthias Hist Romans p. 263. Ex Agathiae, l. 4. Goth. Eccl.
and at last had his Skin flead off, and his Body seasoned with Salt, and
perished miserably. Let none boast of to morrow, for who knows what bloody Rain
may follow upon a red evening. It has been reported, that a Learned Doctor of
Oxford hung up his Leathern Breeches in his Study for a Memorial to Visitors of
his mean Original. The truth I avouch not, but History tells us of Agathocles,
who arose from a Potter to be King of Sicily, and would be served in no other
Plate at his Table but Earthen Ware, to mind him of his former drudgery. 'Twere
well if some would remember whose Shoos they have cleaned, whose Coals they
have carried, and whose Money they have borrowed, and deal gratefully with
their Creditors, Fox Martyrol. vol. 2.
as the good Lord Cromwell did by the Florentine Merchant in the time of Henry
the 8th, when Woolsy like a Butcher forgot the King his Master. 'Twas otherwise
with Holy David, who being in Kingly dignity, Ps. 78.71.
graciously calls to mind his following the Ewes great with young, when now
feeding the Sheep of Israel. His Golden Scepter points at his Wooden Hook, and
he plays the old Lessons of his Oaten Pipe upon his Algum Harp, and spreads his
Bethlehem 'Tent within his Marble Palace on Mount Zion.

There be profound Mysteries of Mercy in the deep of Affliction, and golden Oar
is often dug from the dark Caves of restraint, and great deliverances slide
into us upon the streams of Sorrow. God sometimes sets our Corn fields on fire,
to enlighten our path to himself. Storms in the Voyage to Tarsus drive Jonah 2 Samuel 14.30.
quite back to Nineveh. He shuts our Shops, that we may open our Souls to him.
Many break and are undone here, that they may be made for ever. A cracked
credit heals a Shipwrecked Conscience. Their Coin is melted by a London Fire,
that the Heart may not trust in uncertain Riches; and a melted Heart is more
worth than a Kingdom of Bullion. Naked Job when scraping his Boils on the
Dunghill, was clad with the rich Array of Humility, and his Ruby Botches
glittered with patience, and became a more honorable Person than in Purple
among the Elders at the Gate of Aezia. Earthly Riches take wings and fly up to
Heaven to receive a new disposal, Pro. 23.5.
and Heavenly Riches fly down and make a happy change. When poor and sordid
Spirits are listed up by a yellow Muckhill, Is. 4.6.
God is pleated to sink their Ships by a southwest wind, that they may learn in
their old Age to swim naked to the Rock of Ages. When Estates flow into men's
Chests, and their aflections ebb from God; if good in the main, no wonder if
shortly their Ears tingle with a rousing Hurrican, and a Moth of envy and
reproach eat up their credit, and a Worm sent to gnaw at the Root of their
Substance. Many blustering Storms split carnal hopes, that in broken planks of
mercy they may recover the port of happiness.

David, but in a very crooked and winding way according to the Stations set
down by Moses. Ps. 107.7
The cloudy Pillar gave them many a weary turn to chastize their crooked
hearts. Their Journey took them up 40 years, which might have been performed in
passing over but 92 Miles from the Border of Egypt to the Southern City of
Canaan: For Pelusium or Sin in the Land of Sinim, the last City of Egypt, was
distant but 92 Miles from Rhinocurura or Nahalmizraim, Is. 27.12.
the first City of Canaan, on the brook in the South of Simeons Tribe, called
the River of Egypt in Scripture; as appears by the Itinerary of Antonine the
Emperor, which at 10 Miles a day, considering so vast a multitude, makes but 9
days journey to arrive at the Land of Promise. Yet in what vast wanderings to
and fro in that howling Wilderness did they roll about? Four several times they
were commanded to turn about. First, Exodus 14.2. Numb. 33.7. Numb. 14.25. Deuteronomy.
1.40. Deuteronomy. 2.3. Numb. 14.34.
from Etham to Pihahiroth. Secondly, from Mount Horeb to the Mount of the
Amorites. Thirdly, from Zinkadesh by the Amorite Mountains, quite back again to
the Red Sea. And Fourthly, from the Red Sea northward again; besides other
Special Turns according to the various Stations in the Wilderness to bear their
Iniquities, and know Gods Breach of Promise, which though failing to them that
believed not, and so first brake with him; yet was fulfilled to a tittle with
their Children, whom the murmuring Fathers had consigned to be a prey in the
Desert.
The posterity of those Repiners were taught better manners by the Briars and
Thorns of Sinai. We never carve well for our selves, when we snuff at the
portion cut out to us by the Hand of God. The way to our old Lovers is hedged
up with merciful thorns, to turn us into the right way to the new Jerusalem.
Austin. Confess. l. 9. c. 9.
Austin says of his Mother Monica; She had learned the Lesson of a Virtuous
Wife, not to resist her offended Husband, [Non tantum factor, sed ne verbo
quidem,] Not by an unseemly word, much less in carriages. How much more
obsequious behavior owe we to the Father of our Spirits, that we may live in
his love; and to that Heavenly Husband of all gracious and meek Souls, to gain
his delight in our persons by resembling himself? Then out of seeming
discouragements we may draw real and experienced comforts, Is. 12.3.
and out of the deep Wells of trouble the Waters of Salvation and Joy. As the
Woman of Canaan by our Lords calling her a Dog to try her Faith, proved her
self to be one of the lost Sheep of the true Israel, which he came down to find.

We must behave and quiet our selves like weaned Children under all Ps. 131.2.
the tossings and tumblings of their Mothers. Holy contentation and lowliness
of Spirit must hush all the proud whimperings of our minds in the hour of
Trial, till we become like little Children, if we would enter the Kingdom of
Heaven. Jacob served for a Wife, Hos. 12.12.
and for a Wife kept Sheep in Aram, says the Prophet; though by an unkind
brother was frighted thither, and by an hard Uncle was hurried back, by
untoward Children forced from Shechem, and by a threatening famine compelled
into Egypt; and all to this end, that God might nourish the People of Shem in
the Land of Ham, to prepare them for the Milk and Honey of the Land of Canaan,
at that time the possession of Ham's Posterity.

Joh 25.6.
yet it is our duty and his tribute, our homage and his condescending savor to
accept it. The 3 glorious persons did glorify each other before all worlds,
and do still. The Son was always rejoicing before the Father. Prove. 8.30.
The Son prays, Father glorify thy Name; and a Voice from Heaven answers, Joh.
12.28.
I have both glorified it, and Will glorify it again: And the Son prays, Joh.
17.5.
That the Father would glorify him with that Glory which he had with him
before the World was. And speaking of the Holy Spirit, he says, He shall
glorify me; Joh. 16.14.
yet he is pleased to set forth his Name, that we should ascribe the Honor due
to it. Ps. 29.2. Ps. 50.23.
He that offers praise glorifies him. To this end ought we to observe what
wisdom shines in contrivement, what power in management against all opposition,
and what mercy in finishing and landing such a Favor in our Bosoms. So that
when we little dream such an Affair can come to pass, it suddenly surprises us
with admiration and astonishment, by unspeakable Mazes and winding Labyrinths
without our trouble; that as we now stand still and see his Salvation, so we
may all our lives sit still and solace our Spirits with the curious Embroidery
of Divine Providence. We may say as Naomy to Ruth about Boaz, Ruth 3.18.
Sit still, for the man will not be at rest till he finish the thing this day.
Resignation of our concerns to the Wisdom of God should cure all anxious and
querulous thoughts about Events and Issues. If God design such a Mercy, all the
Powers on Earth cannot hinder it; and if it be against his secret Will, all the
Princes on Earth cannot further it. Yea, if never so near to attainment, yet a
trifling surmise shall blast it. Follow the conduct of Providence by the Lamp
of the Word, and this, Ariadnes's Thread will lead through all secret and dark
turnings, into the pleasant Fields of Enjoyment. This consideration, as it
should stay our Spirits in reference to all outward Mercies, so more especially
as to eternal. Where Election has pitched an eye of Love, the Hand of Mercy
will certainly guide to Heaven, If an elect Vessel could be imagined to be in
the center of the Earth, the very Bowels of the Earth should open, and a Golden
Chain of Mercy be let down to draw up that Soul into the Center of Heaven. I
knew a Holy man, Mr. Christopher Hewling, who living in a profane Village in
the Forest of Dean, had a Godly Minister sent thither on purpose to convert
him, as that Reverend person professed himself: For he was there but a little
time, I think about a year; and as soon as my Friend was converted, the profane
people rose up against his Ministry, and chased him away. Not unlike a more
glorious Instance of our blessed Lord, Joh 4.4*
who (the Spirit of God says) must needs go through the Province of Samaria,
that he might convert the poor old Woman of Sychar or Shechem at the Well of
Jacob. How should we admire God, who is often pleased to go out of the ordinary
way of Providence, to bring some into the way of Paradise!

place, the methods, the means, the straits and exigencies, the persons, and
speeches, and thoughts, of heart are transcendent in contributing to, and
producing of admirable ends and issues. Genesis 22.14.
In the Mount will the Lord be seen. When the Psalmist's Feet had well nigh
slipped, Ps. 73.2. v. 24. Ps. 66.11, 12.
yet was continually, with God, and held by the right hand of his Counsel till
received to glory. He brings us into the Net, causes men to ride over our
heads, and carries us through fire and water into it wealthy place. When the
Oil scarce wets the bottom of the Cruse, and the Meal spent from the Barrel,
then comes the Prophet with a Miracle. 1 K. 19.6.
When Elijah was faint under a Tree at Rithmah, then comes the Angel and bakes
a Cake for him with Juniper Coals while yet asleep, and awakes him to eat it.
When Moses, lay crying in a Cage of Bulrushes upon the River Nile, instead of a
Crocodile to devour him comes the Daughter of Pharaoh to relieve him, and nurse
him up for a King; nay to pay his own Mother for nursing her own Son. We should
nourish sweet thoughts of God, when afflictions minister sharp to Sense. We may
be nourished by the Meat from the Eater, and suck Honey from Flowers that grow
on Thorns. God has ordained varieties and successions in all. The Night, the
Storms, the Winters and Wilderness of a Saint, shall end in a glorious Sunshine
day, and an everlasting Somer in Heaven; that so in the midst of all anxious
and perplexing thoughts within us thy Comforts may delight our souls. Ps. 94.19.
It Is a double word or a quadrate-root in the Hebrew, and signifies to play or
sport with delight and excessive Joy, (...)
and is used by the Prophet Esaias to note the exuberant felicity of the Church
in the later days, when she shall be dandled and danced over and over upon the
knees of prosperity and mercy. Is. 66.12.


Sennacharib was sent to correct and not destroy his people; Is. 10.7.
howbeit he meant not so, but to cut off Nations not a few. Stay, says the
Lord, shall the Ax boast against the Hewer, the Saw shake against the Handler?
Let the Staff know it self to be but wood. For yet a very little while and mine
indignation against Jerusalem shall cease, and mine anger shall end in the
destruction of Nineveh and Babylon. When men determine, they must ask leave of
God, or else they shall suck the Venom of the Cockatrice Eggs which themselves
have laid. Like that infamous Pope, Baleus in Alexand. 6. p. 485.
who was himself poisoned with the same wine he had prepared for his Cardinals.
Joseph's Brethren meant his ruin, Genesis 50.20.
but God meant it for good to save much people alive, to nourish his Father
just 17 years in Egypt, the same number that he was nourished by his Father in
Canaan, and to lay the foundation of a People that should be the ruin of
Egypts Armies. Ps. 37.6, 7.
Rest in the Lord, and wait patiently for him, and he shall bring forth thy
Righteousness as the light, and thy Judgment as the noon day. Jam, 5.11.
Ye have heard of the patience of Job, and seen the end of the Lord; he is very
pitiful and of tender mercy. Although my house be not so with God, 2 Samuel 23.5.
says David; yet he has made with me an Everlasting Covenant, ordered in all
things and sure. Let Us finish this Chapter with some Inferences.

Zeph. 2.3.
Seek the Lord all ye meek of the Earth. A meek Spirit is of a praying and
thankful frame.

Mat. 8.26. Mark. 6.48.
Christ comes and treads the boisterous billows into a smooth plain under the
Foot of his Command. Who can divine what infinite wisdom is doing? who knows
what errand a flight of Snow, or a clap of Thunder, or ashower of Rain, is sent
upon? When a Gentleman once riding furiously was stopped by a terrible storm, and
forced into a Smith's Shop; demanding of him, for what particular use some of
his mechanic Tools might serve? He replies in a chaff, He knew not: Then says
the good man, How much less can you tell for what ends the wise God may send
this forcible Rain from the Clouds! Judge. 5.21.
A Lion was once forced into a Pit by Snow, and perhaps many a life saved, and
the valor of Benajah tried and proved. 1 Samuel 12.10.
Samuel obtained a Victory upon the Philistines by thunder. 2 Samuel 23.20.
Great Rains from Heaven overflowed the Banks of Kishin, and swept away the
Canaanites into the Gulf of Destruction.

Blessed Lord, I beg to have, and see, and taste thy love in every mercy. Nay,
to discern that every cross is the fruit of fatherly Love, and every
deliverance sweetened by the straits and pressures which turn the answer of
prayer into an experience to fortify faith. If then we are instructed by
former escapes to carry our Cross to Golgotha with our Lord and Simon, we shall
certainly rise from Mount Olivet to a Crown in Heaven.

CHAP. X. Repentance of Secret and Sudden Sins.
THE Divine Visitation, by secret, sudden, and unexpected Mercies, lays strong
Bonds and Obligations upon us to repentance and watchfulness against secret
sins. They are always in the light of Gods countenance to discern, Ps. 90.8.
and ought to be in the light of our Conscience to prevent. David sets a
president to hide the word within our Hearts, Ps. 119.11.
to preserve from hidden offenses. Set up the strict Judicature of Conscience
upon heart inquiries, to testify both thy sincerity and gratitude. He that
always makes conscience of secret duties and secret sins, is a sound and
sincere Christian. A good conscience is a continual feast, and makes a cheerful
Christian: Pr. 15.15. Pr. 15.13. Pr. 17.22.
And a cheerful heart does good like a Medicine, and places a man in a Paradise
of peace and delight. One of the most dreadful roarings in Hell will most
probably flow from the neglect of the warning voice of conscience upon earth.
That Is the Salamander which lives in perpetual Flames, and stings like a
Scorpion both with head and tail; looking backward upon ill-spent life,
scorning the rebukes within, and forward upon endless and remedyless misery.
What makes men so fearful here at the noise and alarm of any temporal judgment
without, but guilt within? As Juvenal mourned over the Varlets of Rome in his
days, Hi sunt qui tripidant and ad omnia fulgura pallem
Cum tonat, examines primo quoque murmr coeli.
At every flash of lightning they wax pale,
When distant thunder rumbles villains quail.


O happy Man that makes peace betimes with that inward Viceroy, Sueton. lib. 6.
c. 48. Commertar. Schild.
before the thunderbolt overthrows the luxurious Table, and strike the Cup out
of his Hand, as it did to Nero! Obey the faithful counsel of Conscience now,
and he will prove a faithful friend at death and judgment. Let him be thy present
Counselor, and he will be thy future Comforter. He that is sound at Coar needs
fear no searching. Whosoever has judged himself already, may with peace and
comfort expect the judgment to come. 1 Cor. 11.31.
Upon sincere scrutiny of thine own Spirit, thou may with some Holy
Confidence lift up that gracious Prayer, Ps. 139.23. Ps. 19.12.
Lord search and try me, and cleanse me from secret sins. In the close, renew
holy covenants, purposes, and resolutions with God, Col. 1.11.
and in the might of his glorious power to perform. If thou find thy heart thus
sincerely engaged in the Court of Conscience, to condemn and arraign thy self,
to ponder and consider thy ways; hence will arise a Fountain of unfeigned
repentance under the Threshold of this Tribunal, as in Ezekiels Vision: hence
thou may conclude that thy sins are pardoned; and a Christian may surely
know it by these Signs.



Ps. 103.1.
by pouring peace into the Conscience, and subdue iniquity victoriously, Mic.
7.19. Ps. 19.12.
that no sin shall have dominion over him.

Secret tears for secret sins are an excellent sign of an Holy Heart, and a
Healing Balsam for broken Spirits. God well understands the Language of half
words interrupted with sighs, and interprets them as the Steems and breathings
of a broken Heart. My groaning, says David, Ps. 38.9. Ps. 69.5. Ps. 69.6.20.
is not hid from thee. And as all our foolishness is before him to cover it, so
is all our heaviness to ease it; and therefore shall our Souls praise and
please him more than a Bullock with young Horns and Hoofs upon his Altar.
Bochart. de animal. vol. 1. col. 944.
Holy mourning keeps out carnal sorrow, and produces spiritual Joy. It stirs up
the Heart of a Saint to beg preventing grace, which no false heart can perform
without secret reserves. This inward sorrow prevents open shame. God will never
give up such a soul to be trampled on by spiritual Enemies, who are already
humbled by themselves. In Saints humiliation there is a door opened for secret
hope, because of the precious promises that are plighted to it, and especially
of preventing future Sin by strengthening grace. Jam. 4.6.
For as the Love of God is the Fountain of all true repentance, so it is the
attractive of more incomes of divine Love to the Soul. According to our Love so
is our Faith and Trust in God, and according to our trust such is our freedom
at the Throne of Grace. Trust in him, Ps. 62.8.
and pour out your hearts before him, pour them out like water in joyful tears.
For when the stone in the heart is melted by mercy, the eyes will issue like a
fountain of tears. (...), Good men have melting Spirits. It Is a branch of the
Covenant, Ezekiel. 36.26.
and a fruit of the effusion of the Spirit of Grace. It Is asserted by the
Learned in Chemistry, that no Menstruums are so powerful as Sulfureous and Oily
Liquors to melt down the hardest Minerals: To be sure there is nothing like the
Oil of Mercy so potent a Solvent for an Iron Heart.

A true Holy Soul takes up his time within, and begs the presence and
assistance of the Spirit: He principally labors at inward corruptions, to hack
down that cursed thorn and stub it up by the Roots. He judges himself for
secret iniquities, because God being a Spirit, has a special eye upon the frame
of Spirits. Not the issues of the Tongue and vaunting of High Seize is
pleasing in his Sight, but the Spiritual issues of a humble Heart. God abhors
that person who wallows in hearts defilements, and much more if he has a Golden
Tongue tipped with Hypocritical Eloquence. The numbers of heart sins as to their
kinds, are many; as to their acts innumerable. Yet an Israelite indeed is
continually bending his Bow, and shooting forked Arrows into their bowels. Such
are inward anger, pride, envy, revenge, earthiness, sloth of Spirit, security,
unthankfulness, unpreparings of heart for Holy Communion, and the like. I might
spread forth the odiousness of some of these inward Sins, and lay open the
sources and springs of many outward enormities, which break out into the life,
but shall surrender that Province to Moral Philosophy, or rather the Divine
Ethics of Solomon, to cure these inward corruptions; and advise all Christians
to beware of the first motions and conceptions of the Heart, to set a guard
against sudden Tentations, and to startle at the first occasions to sin.

A gracious person may be surprised and fall suddenly among Thieves that lurk
behind the Bushes. Occasions.
Nay, very holy men, unless wonderful wary, may be quickly tript up by sudden
Questions and unexpected Emergencies. Who knows the subtilty of sin, and the
deceitfulness of his own heart? Take heed of answering quickly, and send up
sudden Ejaculations to Heaven before you reply to a weighty and doubtful
motion. Ps. 106.33.
Abraham fell twice in the case of Sarah. Moses spoke unadvisedly with his Lips
at the Waters of Meribah. Asa was too quick with the Prophet; and Jonah was
inflamed by sudden anger when the Sun scorched his head, and the Worm his
Gourd; fretful passion burnt his heart into adust choler. Good Hezekiah was
suddenly lifted up after a humbling sickness: And holy Josiah was too
precipitant in the case of Pharaoh Nechoh. Slippery places may fling up the
heels of great Giants, and little tentations may overthrow well-grown
Christians. A sudden short Gust in a chopping Sea may overset a stately Ship
when all her Top-Gallants are out, if not very well Ballasted.

Strength of grace and powerful assistance are known by sudden onsets. To save
credit, or stop a loss, or divert an inquisitive temper, puts many a good heart
to a venture. If God withdraw, and guards be asleep, we may be blown down by
the breath of a silly Maid: As poor Peter fell sorely, and broke his face upon
the Pavement in Cajaphas's Hall. They do ill that put snaring questions and
interrogatories; but they do worse who watch not a trapping tongue. Deliver a
Saint from sudden exigencies, and he will do well enough ordinarily as to any
deliberate sin. Our Mother Eve was caught by a question, lost a whole Paradise
of Fruit trees by a tempting Apple. David by an enchanting glance at Jerusalem
kindled a flame, which had almost blown up his Kingdom: And what straits he was
in at Maon, and Engedi, and Ziglag, his trembling Harp does tune it in mournful
ditties. Had not Joseph been strongly supported, his black Egyptian Mistress
had smutted his Soul and slain his chastity. We are too ready for sudden fear
to join issue, and betray our Souls before we can recover our Spirits.

Blessed is the Man who fears always, Pr. 28.14.
and treads gently that he may walk securely. Can a man take Fire in his bosom
and not be burnt? Take heed of sparks, to avoid flames* Beg pardoning grace for
former slips; renewing, strengthening, and preventing grace against future
invasions. Take heed of security after prosperous victories. Cyrus the Persian,
and Harold the Saxon, lost their lives in a new Battle after a late Victory.
Upon great success sound your Trumpets in the Valley of Humility. God never
seals assurance upon a proud Spirit; Is. 66.2.
he looks smile-ingly on the humble, and the contrite Soul that trembles at his
word. Maintain secret communion, and heavenly strength will maintain your
ground. The brighter the light of communion shines into the Soul, the clearer
will a Saint see into the dark corners of a filthy heart, and keep his garments
pure, and wash off his daily spots in the Laver of repentance. Every prayer
must have its sighs, because every day we contract some blemishes. Delay
estranges God, and makes a Spot to sink the deeper.

Asclepiades the great Physician of Bithynia said, It was the Doctors duty,
Cells. de r^med. l. 3. c. 4.
[Vt tuto, celeriter, and jucunde curet;] To cure his Patients safely,
suddenly, and pleasantly. Celsus adds, [Fere periculosum est nimium, and
festinatio, and voluptas;] That haste and pleasantness are mostly dangerous.
Repentance, if sound, is never too swift; and the more bitter its potion, the
more pleasant in Issue. Repentance that is hurried must be repented over. Much
filth requires soaking showers. To set a Bone too hastily, may induce a Callus,
and doubles the sorrow to break it again for a right placing. Be not earnest in
time of affliction to use inordinate means to speed deliverance. Jacob was too
nimble in bending his Knees for his Fathers Blessing, it cost him 20 years
exile, and a shrunk Sinew before he obtained it fully from the Angel. Stay Gods
time, and the Mercy will ripen more kindly. Somer Fruit will rot before Winter,
and such as are green gathered are windy and griping. Beasts that struggle in
the Net are more entangled, and impatient Birds by fluttering in the Twigs,
Birdlime all their Feathers and stick the faster. It Is no wisdom to eat the
Iron Bars with Aquafortis, and break Prison unadvisedly; he may leap to the
Neck in the Castle-ditch and sink in the Mire, or bruise his Bones in the
Foundation-jettings for an Almanac in his old Age. Ps. 6.2.
Though David found some marrow in his vexed Bones, yet upon change of weather
the aches brought Sin to remembrance. Our troubles will end more auspiciously
when Angels are sent from Heaven to open the Iron Gate as they did to Peter,
and lead him to the house of prayer. Thou may know when God intends a
Salvation, the Shackles will fall off easily, and the Gates will fly open at
night; and strange opportunities shall set thee in the Churches State, Ps.
126.1.
who was like them that dream, when God turned her captivity like streams in
the Sandy South.

Let every gracious Soul wipe off his sliding Tears with the hand of Hope. Rev.
18.5. Ps. 56.8. Ps. 108.4.
Though his Sins have seemed to reach to Heaven, yet his repentant tricklings
are laid up in bottles within the Heavens, and the Divine Mercies are
infinitely above the Heavens of Heavens. Let thy grateful returns kneel before
the Throne of of Grace in secret, firm Resolutions against Secret Sins, to
prevent them, for the Honor of his Holy Name, who now lades us with Secret,
and will crown us with Open, Mercies.

CHAP. XI. The Leniment or Mitigation of Sorrows by pondering on Sudden
Mercies, and the Sanctified Fruit of Afflictions.
HOW brittle and uncertain is the State of all things? nothing under the Sun
that is constant and permanent. What various Events confound the Counsels of the
deepest Politicians, every Age demonstrates. Confidence of future prosperity,
because a man stands upon the Pinnacle of honor, is a token of the extremity of
Folly. Between the highest fortune and the darkest Gulf of misery, a day
sometimes does not intervene. Dan. 5.30. Xenoph. Cyrodad. l. 7.
Belshazzar carousing in the Temple of Belus with the captive Flagons of
Jerusalem in the day time, was the very next night found drinking off a deadly
Cup mixed with his own blood. He that stands on the top of the Wheel may justly
fear a whirling precipice. Physicians observe, That persons in the height of
health are often nighest to some dangerous sickness, and need preventing
Physic; while such as are in a recovering state are a great deal safer. When
the Sun is in his Meridian Glory, then he begins to decline, and after the
darkest time of night the morning Star begins to glitter out of the East.
Sudden vicissitudes ought to render men cautious, and let the proudest Nimrods
take heed of being imperious. When Gales are very benign to the Sail, yet the
Keel of a Ship may be near sharp Rocks and swallowing Quicksands.

What Is matter of caution in prosperity, should be comfort in adversity. Qui
jacet in fovea non habet unde cadat, One fallen to the ground has no further to
fall; his next turn is to rise. Former experiences of Gods wonderful Mercies in
wonderful straits should stay and erect the Spirit in hope of future
deliverance. The Lion and the Bear comforted David against Goliath. 1 Samuel 17.34.
Receipts of former sudden Mercies may obviate our present Sorrows, and heal the
breaches of sudden Afflictions; especially when we consider them as Trials of
Patience, Whetstones of Fortitude, and Preparations for Service. Every Storm
escaped adds to the prudent Mariner dexterous skill to work his Vessel in
succeeding Tempests. The Memory of Evasion in the Adriatic Sea, fortifies his
Spirit to hope a better issue in the Atlantic Ocean. Virgil.
[O passigraviora, dabit Deus his quoque finem;] We have born greater brunts,
and God may give a happy event to these. It Is truest of a Saint, all whose
Storms do but hasten him to, and land him in Heaven at last. Mean while all his
sufferings are Heavenly Gifts, Phil. 1.29.
and all his troubles are sanctified in order to a Halcyon Calm. If God smites,
it is with a healing hand, Hos. 6.1.
and when he casts down he revives us again. It Is said by Arnoldus that famous
Physician of Villa Nova near Barcelone, Arnold. f. 305. b. de simpl. c. 426.
that an Incision with a Golden Knife never swells. And Serapion asserts, that
Cauteries made with Gold raise no bladders, and are quicklier cured. The most
cutting afflictions do but let out heart corruptions, and the Instrument it
self brings a present cure. When God brings his People out of the Furnace, the
dross is lost in fumes or in the Cople, and their persons come out shining like
pure Gold, and God will say of them, It is my Golden people refined by the fire
of affliction. Zech. 13.9. Poterius, p. Boil of Colors, p. 413, and 415.
They are like the Bononian Stone, that after calcination in the fire shines in
the darkest night: Or like that wonderful Diamond mentioned by the honorable
Mr. Boil, which being briskly rubbed, would send forth a glimmering light
almost like a Glowworm. The Graces of Saints are never more resplendent than
in times of adversity, and their succeeding growth is most apparent. Husbandmen
say, that Thunder showers make Grass to grow that we may almost see it; by the
sulfureous Rain and the Sunshine following it shoots amain. Let Us beware of a
lowering Spirit, when clouds of affliction gather, Ps. 65.11.
which drop fatness into the Soul. Those Sinners are most healthful that have
many Aprils, and the ground most fertile that drinks in the later as well as
former rain. Let afflicted persons remember, that continual Sunshine scorches a
Land into barrenness; and many a good Soul looses much of its verdure and
greenness by fair weather; and that our Heavenly Father always takes his Rod
into the hand of Love, and when he whips his dear Children, it is with Twigs cut
from the Balsam-Tree of Judaea, though it smart and wheal, yet it quickly
cures. If the North wind blow boisterous and bleak, it makes a Saint to keep
his Garments close that men see not his shame; Rev. 16.15.
and besides, it may turn in a moment. Numerous instances occur of sudden
troubles, and of as sudden escapes. Every Church and Nation, every Age and
Person, ring aloud these changes. Some hints of happy Evasions in deplored
cases in Physic may succor hope in like Distresses.

A Patient having taken a Decoction of Liquorish, Arnold. f. 343. b.
etc. vomits it with a fright; but upon search, the unwash'd strainer was found
to have been newly used with Hellebor, and the scare was over. Another having
drunk up a decoction of Maidenhair, vomited very terribly. To satisfy the
Physician upon strict inquiry where 'twas gathered, the Attendents found the
Carkase of a Toad just by the place where it grew. A third had almost lost his
Eyes by an Ointment administered to preserve them, received answer; that the
Preparer had powdered much Verdegreese the day before, part whereof was
casually mixed with it. A fourth laboring under a Flux, and no Medicine
prevailing, the Physician found out he used Water from a Cistern newly
plaistered. The last to be named was deep in a Hectic, and lay in a new whited
Chamber, and grew worse till removed. To warn Physician and Patients to be
careful what persons they employ in preparing Medicines, and what Ingredients
they use, and what Circumstances may attend. Upon such twine threads hangs the
Life of Man, and by directing providence many sudden and notable escapes.

It Is related of one so struck with fear in a Dream, Arnold. f. 28. b.
that his Hair turned gray. Of another under the Duke of Alva's Tyranny (as I
remember) who was all white in one night under fear of Execution. And another
being Lame at worship in a Church, the Popish Soldiers rushing in to murder,
forgetting his Crutches, ran away; and his Spirits being briskly agitated by
the fright, received the perfect use of his Limbs. Sudden unexpected
deliverances drop down from Heaven. When Daniel was letting down into the Den,
the Angel flew down faster and stopped the Lions Mouths before the Prophet came
to the bottom. Sometimes Holy Persons are not presently and fully delivered,
yet meet with sustaining help. Our blessed Savior, though not delivered from
the Cross, and its Issue till the Resurrection; yet while he fainted under its
weight in the dolorous way, met providentially with Simon of Cyrene to aid him,
and inward support to strengthen his Spirits. O happy Simon! How often might
Christ from Heaven help him afterward to bear his Cross upon Earth. To the
upright rises light in darkness, a beam in obscurity. Ps. 112.4. Is. 58.10.
Genesis 22.13.
Suddenly, like the Vision in a mountain of Thickets and Brambles. When
Abraham's Knife was up, the Angel's Arm came down, and ventures the gashing of
his hand to save the cutting of Isaac's Throat. Jeremy is cast into a miry
Dungeon by some of the Courtiers, J^r. 38.10.
another Courtier as suddenly helps him out. Jonah in a stormy Sea was cast
into a Whales Belly, and by a sudden storm in the Whales stomach was cast out
upon dry Land. Exodus 14.10.15.1.
The Children of Israel stood crying and roaring upon one shore, and in a few
hours were dancing and singing upon the other shore of the Red Sea. 1 Samuel 30.4.
David weeps at Ziglag till he could weep no more, and then tires himself after
Amaleck, overtakes, overcomes, overturns, and gets such a noble Spoil; that he
who even now was but a needy Captain of a few Outlaws, sends rich presents to
his Friends, taken from the Lords Enemies. So that he who had spent his tears
in Sorrow, finds a new rivulet of tears streaming for joy. Ps. 30.11.
Thou have turned our morning into dancing, and we became like men that dream.
Ps. 126.2.
When thou turnedst our captivity in Negeb, the barren sandy Desert in the
South of Judah.

The Churches State in this life is mixed, Rev. 12.1.
while under the Moon it is changeable; but when clothed with the Sun in John's
Vision, she will be i^lustrious, and tread the Moon under her Feet.

The Church has a time to sing the Song of the Lamb more melodiously than the
Song of Moses. Rev. 15.3.
Moses his Song was a mixed Song; there were Amorites to conquer after the
Egyptians were sunk in the Mighty Waters. After songs of deliverance come the
bitter waters of Marah and new Elegies. The Church sings that Song upon Earth,
but this Song of the Lamb in Heaven, where no more troubles.

The Church in Apostolical times had a Sea of Glass as clear as Crystal, Rev.
4.6.
wherein to see their faces and wash their spots: 15.2.21.1.
In Antichristian times of persecution, a Sea of Glass mingled with Fire. They
enjoyed pure worship, but attended with fiery trials. But in her Heavenly state
there shall be Sea no more. A State of perfection needs no more washings for
communion in glory.

Here God wisely mingles comforts and crosses to keep us in a holy awe of sin,
and to encourage us in spiritual Services. We contract much dust and soil from
worldly company, and need washing and purging every day, whereby to save our
selves from this untoward Generation. Act. 2.40.
Israel had lain among the pots in Egypt, and needed scouring in the
Wilderness, that the Thorns of Sinai might fetch the Onions of Egypt out of
their squeazy stomachs. Nay, Gods people enjoy not only successive, but
temporary mixtures: For in the midst of sorrows arises spiritual joy to support
and quicken, and in times of prosperiry are exercised with spiritual sins and
heart-sorrows to humble and keep them steady. Nabal and Haman (like other
wicked wretches) were either all joy or all sorrow, and by turns overwhelmed
with both; 1 Samuel 25.36.
their hearts were as light as a feather, or else sunk like lead. Let Us beware
when fatned with mercies, lest we kick with Jesurun; and when were are brought
to the salt waters of Marah, lest our imbittered Spirits fret against the Holy
One of Israel; while we proclaim our anger against instruments, let us take care
that our clamours reach not the ear of God himself. Men often mask their
impatience at God under color of shooting at others miscarriages. We may
grieve under afflictions, and carry our sins by prayer to Heaven for pardon,
and our troubles to the Mercy-seat for relief. I poured out my complaint before
him, Ps. 142.2.
says David; I showed before him my trouble. Mourn we may, Ezekiel. 7.16. Is.
51.20. Songs 2.14.
but murmur and mutter we must not. Mourn like Doves without Gall in the Clefts
of the Rock, but not toss the Horn and roar like wild Bulls in the Net, full
of the fury of the Lord.

When we have mourned meekly and patiently for sin, Mic. 7.9.
and born the Indignation of the Lord, we may look up for mercy till he plead
our cause, and execute judgment for us, and say, fiducially, God's our God,
which is often the last stroke upon David's Harp. Does God choose us for his, Is.
48.10.
and choose us in the Furnace of Affliction, and refine us, but not with Silver,
non quasi argentum, not as if we were pure Silver already before refinement,
but in the midst of our dross and faeculency, to make us bright for
Temple-service; then let us take him for our gracious and watchful Refiner, and
reflect his Love back again to Heaven. Choose him before all the Angels in
Heaven and the sweetest familiars on Earth, Ps. 73.25.
and then all afflictions will work kindly, when the Fire of Love and the Fire
of Affliction melt the Soul together: and as the flaming beams of the Sun
extinguish our Kitchen Fires, so the heat of Divine Love will damp and put out
the sense and smart of all, and the most fiery trials here below. Let but a
Saint recollect his thoughts, that there is excellent reason why God afflicts,
and as the waters cannot, Song 8.6.
so neither the fires out burn the vehement flames of Divine Love, (...)
called by the Wise Man the Flame of God. [Succurrat non tantum quid patiamur,
sed quid fecerimur.] Senec. Ira. l. 2. p. 33.
Remember what we have done as well as suffer, said the Spanish Moralist.
Compare our merits and sufferings, and then our unworthiness and mercies
together, and we have little reason to complain, since there is less reason why
we should draw a breath in the Land of the Living. Lam. 3.39.


Mercies flow from the innate Bowels of God, Judgment is his strange work. Is.
28.21.
Kindness flows from the Divine Essence more naturally than streams from a
Fountain or beams from the Sun, but sin and affliction is rooted in us.
Justify God in all, and that will extinguish, murmurs. 1 Cor. 11.30.
Sometimes there is a particular cause for affliction, which though many times
latent, is always just. Let Us search and try our ways, Lam. 3.40.
and turn unto the Lord.

Ask the inward Viceroy, and he will tell thee. As Clocks strike clearest in
stormy times, so does Conscience in the hour of Judgment, though we top and
clog it never so much in the fair weather of prosperity. Would thou know the
plain truth, hearken what thy heart condemns and smites; for in the hearing of
a searching Sermon sometimes Affliction it self points at its relative sin.
Adonibezek deprived of his Thumbs, Judge. 1.7.
could tell upon his fingers the 140 Royal Thumbs which he had cut off. Is a
dear Relation taken, consider thy sins both in it and toward it. Si res angusta
domi; If poverty pinch, remember abused plenty and careless expenses. Does God
withdraw his shining face, it may be thou have grieved his Spirit, and
therefore he grieves thine most righteously. Have thou cooled and quenched his
Heavenly Motion, wonder not if he stop his ear at thy cries, and at length
leave thee to coolness and deadness of heart. Rev. 3.16.
Thou art lukewarm in his cause. Grumble not at Laodiceas Portion to be spewed
out of his mouth. Art thou puffed up with parts which are but gifts, Gods, not
thine; repine not if others prick thy swollen Bladder with the pin of infamy.
Want of pity and relief to thy Brother, reaps just unkindness in time of
straits. Censorious persons must run the gauntlet patiently, and a lashing
Tongue needs a Launcet to let out its Salt and fiery Blood; or may be pricked
with Pins, as Fulvia dealt by Cicero. Cassius l. 47. p. 331. d.
Angry persons often meet with sturdy matches as good at fifty cuffs as
themselves. It Is usual for men to be measured by their own bushel, and for
froward affronts to meet with divine requital, unless for sins of daily
infirmity, sudden tentations and disorderly provocations from others. Then, to
mourn, watch, and pray, is a Saints Armor, and go to Heaven with Elthu, Job
34.33.
that which I see not teach thou me.

A gracious Soul not stung in Conscience by former miscarriage, when he sails
in a Storm calmly ponders that a milder Gale may breath from the South, and
better days may come: He may as suddenly be drawn out of, as cast into the pit.
The rattling Hailstones may be melted by a warmer Sun, and a dark thundering
night may end in a bright morning to cherish his vital Spirits. [Junge nigra
candidis,] as Bernard, Bernard. Epist. 78. f. 195. b. Songs 2.12.
Set black by white, and clouds by clear, and winter by spring, and remember
the singing of Birds will come, when bitter and deadly Gourds are in the Pot, 2
K. 4.44.
Elisha may come with a handful of Meal and cure both taste and danger. When
bitter afflictions fill a Cup to the brim, cast in the fine flower of a
Sanctuary offering, and pardon will come, and mercy will fly down with silver
wings and a shining countenance from Heaven; and then the ravishing sense of
divine love will extinguish all discontents from earthly sorrows, Nothing can
be very sharp on the back of a Saint, when Gods Love sweetens his heart. We are
as we love; if worldly, then earthy love and earthly losses break an earthy
heart; if holy and spiritual, then treasures, pleasures, and affections, all
suit and center in Heaven. And what affliction can make him miserable, whose
heart's above it? Every Saint does gradually arrive to a Masculine, Heroic,
Angelical Spirit.

Be patient then, Romans 8.28.
and things will work together wonderfully for the good of such as are called
according to purpose. When we pore upon the down-end of the Cross we are ready
to faint, as if it could never be pulled up: As the Romans dismayed at an
inauspicious Omen, when their Eagle Ensign could not be haled for a March. But
let us consider the upper end reaches Heaven, and the same Hand that fixed it
can rear and raise it at pleasure. And remember there is an appointed time for
every Trial, months and days, that it cannot pass: Though the Waves toss
themselves yet cannot prevail, Jer. 5.22.
they roar yet cannot tumble beyond the Sandy Banks opposed by an Omnipotent
Arm. Israel came out of Egypt the self same night according to the Promise of
430 years to Abraham. Exodus 12.42.
Affliction is the Churches Physic, and will certainly work cum summa
euphoria, with great success and ease. Earthly Physicians often complain of
Ineffectual purges; but here, stay a while, and the Event will issue happily:
When affliction makes us jealous of sin, it begins; when sick of sin, when
hateful to it, when holy resolutions rise against it, then it works to purpose:
When we see the depth of Corruption in the Floods of Affliction, Romans 5.3.
it is then sanctified, and the Love of God is shed abroad in the Heart.

Afflictions are known to be sanctified when sin begins to wither, Affliction
sanctified.
and is in part mortified. The rust is filing off, when persons begin to shine
in meekness, humility, and patience, and accept correction; when discontented
fumes are scattered, and the Thorns of fretfulness are burnt up. Oh how pliable
and capable of gracious impressions, when the Wax is melted by the fire of
trouble: Take heed then of being rough and furious again when danger's over.
Ask Pharaoh, if this be not the fruit of a proud and hard heart?

Again, 1 Timothy 2.8.
it is then sanctified when it whets prayer to lift up Holy Hands without
wrathful revenge and despondent diffidence; when it deadens the Spirit to
worldly enjoyments, and crucifies the heart to carnal vanities: Gal. 6.1.
When it renders us compassionate and tenderhearted, forgiving and forgetting
injuries, remembering how ourselves were tempted; when it sweetens Heaven and
prepares the heart for a holy departure; and while here, makes us ready for
service in every good work, knowing that all shall end well with a Saint; when
every tear shall be turned in an Oriental Pearl to adorn his Crown in Glory.
Are such great Mercies sown in the furrows of affliction, and suddenly wax
green even in the winter and under cold blasts of adversity? With what
submission and expectation of issues should we behave our selves under the hand
of a Wise and Holy Father? Set Faith to work in its Heavenly Employment of
thirsting for Christ, Rev. 21.6. Is. 45.22. Joh. 6.35. Joh. 1.12. Songs 8.5. 4
Pet. 5.7. Luke 23.46. Heb 3.14.
of looking toward him, of coming to him, receiving of him, leaning upon him,
a casting the cares of our Souls into his Bosom, and commending our spirits
into his hands: and after all in fainting times, cast not away the beginning of
your confidence, but hope to the end, Phil. 1.8. 1 Cor. 1.8. 1 Th^s. 5.24.
since he will perfect what is begun to the Day of Christ, and confirm us to
the end. From reflection upon Faith, if careful of Holiness, in due time will
rise assurance by beholding our Faces in the Glass of Promise, when the Soul
has been sometime nourished by the sincere Milk of the Word; at length it may
take off the Cream of Joy and Assurance, 1 John 3.19.
which lies in persuading the Heart of the Love of God: So that a sound
Christian may arrive to this Heavenly Pitch by discerning the true Acts of
Faith, and the lively workings of it in times of troubles; by the growth of the
fruits of the Spirit in times of Tentation, and a vigorous conflict against
Sin, with success, and by the immediate Testimony of the Spirit of God,
witnessing with our Spirits that we are the Children of God. Romans 8.16.


These things have I mentioned as preservatives of the Heart in the Floods of
many Waters, and as preparations for sudden mercies; which will season the
Spirit to bear up valiantly in our present stations and qualify for
emergencies of future Joys. For when the Soul sits down quietly under hatches
in a present storm, and buckles to it with an even frame, light arises
suddenly, shines illustriously, and beautifies the Soul with joyful and abiding
Deliverance.

Let Us conclude this Chapter with a Memorable Story of Mr. Leverton's Escapes
in his West India Voyages, contracted out of the Manuscript of my good Friend
Mr. Chapter Morton, which thirsts for light; to show what wonderful methods God
sometimes uses in bringing out of deep and amazing distresses.

This Gentleman putting to Sea from the Isle of Sr. Christopher in a French
Frigate commanded by Monsieur de Voe of Rochel, after a fortnights sail fell
under a dead calm in the vast Atlantic Ocean. Victuals being almost spent,
they stinted each person to 8 Spoonfuls of Pease and one pint of Water in a
day; till at last they grew black with famine, and their Backs and Bellies
shrunk together. Twice a day he prayed with and fed them with Spiritual Food;
they hung upon his Lips with greedy attention. They had much Manna though no
Corn, and streams of Honey though little Water. The French, though Papists,
expressed their affections with briny Tears, and beating their famished Trunks
with loud cries [ Mon Dicu, mon Dicu; My God, My God.] Cleanness of Teeth
sharpened their Appetites to the Bread of Life. At length they kept a Solemn day
of Prayer, when every day was a continual Fast. Duty ended, a Lad from the
Topmast-head descried a Vessel, and Heaven sent a benign Gale, which soon
brought them together: She proved a Bermudas Merchant to their excessive joy,
which took in Mr. Leverton with his English, supplied the Rochellers wants, and
so they parted.

Upon conference, the chief Person in the Ship being the Governor of Bermudas,
tells Mr. Leverton that that their Ship came newly from England, and at her
arrival fell in between two Rocks. To get her off they took out their Guns and
heavy Wares. The next Tide rises with a violent Storm, while most of the Seamen
were ashore, and hurries them among the liquid Floods, where the French found
them, on purpose to bring deliverance at the end of prayer. After that, a fair
Gale conducts them safely to Bermudas; where they who had embraced the Throne
of Grace in their absence with Holy Hands, now embrace their Friends with happy
Arms, and entertain them joyfully, who had been both carried out and brought in
by Prayer.

Here we have a French Calm at Sea, awakened into a Breeze for a Haven
Enjoyment; and an English Calm in Haven rouzed into a Storm for Sea-adventures,
and both excited by Prayer. The French have a storm within the Ship, though a
calm without; and the English have a storm without, to bring to the former a
calm within. O the vehement power of Prayer that raises storms and quells the
boisterous Waves at pleasure! Here Is a Ship full of Provision hurried out to
the Main to fetch famished Orators to the Harbor of Plenty. What manner of Man
is this, Mark 4.41.
said the Disciples of our Lord, that the Winds and the Sea obey him? O
invincible Faith! O Sovereign and Imperial Prayer, that command both Calms
and Storms. Master, carest thou not that we perish? Mark 4.38.
cries Prayer. Christ delights to be awakened by his Holy Spouse, and lays
Storms asleep. Christ always sails in the Ship of Prayer, and though this Pilot
be asleep, yet he steers safely, he sees the hidden Rocks and secret Shelves,
and needs no Star nor Compass. He knows the Mystery of Longitude, and wants no
Tables of the four Planets attending Jupiter, or the Spots of the Moon, or
Minute Watches to give the Distance of the first Meridian. But who can measure
the Length of his Love to the Church, Ephesians. 3.18.
or fathom the Depths of his Wisdom in manifestations of his Love? He fins the
Sails of the Churches Ship with prosperous Gales to bring her into safe
Chambers. He turns Calms into Storms to obey his Churches cries, Ps. 107.29.
and raises the Waves of the Sea, (to invert the Psalmist) that Saints are glad
because of a Storm, to bring them to a calm Haven. O happy Storms that drive
the Saylant Church to Heaven! O happy Heaven that enjoys a perpetual, an
everlasting Calm!

CHAP. XII. The Centemplation Mount, or the Permanent Mercies of Heaven.
MOSES and XERXES took a view of their puissant Armies, the first from a
Mountain in the Plains of Moab, Deuteronomy. 3.25.
the other in the Plains of Abydus. One rejoiced to see the Land of Canaan and
the goodly Range of Lebanon, extending 40 Miles in length, which Israel was now
ready to possess. The other wept that his burthensom bulk of Barbarous Nations
within a 100 Herod. l. 7. p. 401.
years would raise so many heaps of Bones, or tumuli slightly turft over, where
on Death might stand and blow his Trumpet of Triumph. Saints have but Jordans
Valley to pass through into Eternal Joys; while others wasting their precious
time in vain designs suddenly, slip into eternal woe. Saints militant after
many a sharp Combat enter victoriously into Paradise: And although some may
encounter with Fainting, Drooping Qualms, yea it may be, set in a Cloud; yet
what an ecstasy of spirit will surprise them, who after many Labyrinths and
Mazes of trouble unexpectedly enter the ravishing Glories of Heaven! The best
may labor under fears and tears, but one hour there makes amends for all. When
these Mists will be scattered in that Radiant Morning, and all Tears washed
away in those Rivers of Pleasure, which run through the Streets of New
Jerusalem.

Here the Inhabitants of the Earth build, plant, travel, sail, and fight upon
an Atom. The whole World is but an invisible point to the external Unequal of
Heaven, and all its Inhabitants like the small Dust of the Balance, Is. 40.15.
or a drop perishing from the Bucket; nay, less than nothing, less than vanity.
The smallest Atom that rejoices in the Sun Beams at a Chamber Window, far
transcends the whole Globe of Earth and Water, if a Man were imagined to stand
in one of the fixed Stars, it could not be discerned by the most curious
Glasses; nay, if one stood in the Sun, this circumference of about 21000 Miles
could not be discovered. For if the Sun be about 167 times bigger than this
Earth, Gassend e Ptol. in Epicur. p. 784.
as some Astronomers have determined (while others enlarge the Suns Diameter to
to much vaster extension) and yet appears to us not to exceed 32 Minutes of
such a Degree, whereof 360 measures the Circumambient Line of the Ecliptic,
being its Race round about the Heavens: Then the Earth must needs shrink into
the visibility of a few seconds or less. Nay more, some have conceived by
calculation, that the whole Orb of the Earth's supposed motion about the Sun,
who is very probably the Center of that Planetary Vortex, as the Cartesians
call it, wherein we subsist, is but a point to the Systeme or Sphere of the
fixed Stars; and that if the Earth and all its annexed Beings were utterly
annihilated, it would not be wanted, as being comparatively so insiderable a
Particle of the Universe. Plutarch. de placitis. l. 2. c. 13.
Heraclides and the Pithagoreans held every Star to be a World.

What a smoke and smother do miserable Mortals raise about a petty Kingdom?
when Geometrical proportion may prove a Molehill to be vastly more considerable
to the earth, than the Earth is to the Empyraean Circumference; then may an Ant
shine upon a straw a more glorious Emperor than we imagine.

If then the inferior Pavement of Heaven, if the out Offices of the starry
Chambers be so magnificent, what is the Chamber of Presence! that are those
Supercelestial spaces, Mat. 13.43.
where the Saints shall shine like so many Suns in the Kingdom of their
infinitely Blessed Father? Let Us a little contemplate the glorious State of the
Saints after the Resurrection, as far as we with sobriety and submission in
this our Valley-state may inquire into those deep Mysteries by light from the
Holy Scriptures.

Act. 3.21.
that Day of the Restitution of all things. They shall be as excellent and as
perfect as Adams created in the vigor of youth; as perfect as Christ's, who
suffered and rose in the strength of his years. Into that Sarctuary above, Rev.
1.6.
where all shall be Kings and Priests to the Father; no lame nor impotent
person, Lev. 21.23.
no crooked or maimed, no blind or deaf, no dwarf or child, none blemished with
redundancy or deficiency of limbs, shall be admitted to sacrifice the
Everlasting Praise. But all the Holy Ones of God that dyed under such
inconveniences, shall be raised without spot or wrinkle; as the Spouse in the
Song; Thou art all fair, Song. 4.7. Phil. 3.21. (...)
my beloved, there is no spot in thee. For the Bodies of our Humiliation shall
be like unto his most Glorious Body. Blind Isaac shall grope no more, and Lame
Jaakob shall halt no more: Withered David shall need no cherishers, and
Solomon's Ecclesiastes shall weep no more Elegies over the Hoary head, and
Palsy Hands, and the Trembling Legs of stumbling Age. Then all the inward
senses of Fancy, Imagination, and Memory shall flourish in a perpetual Spring.

Cassiopeia, A. 1572, etc. Whatever may be determined in these points, yet it is
most true of the glorified bodies of the Saints, Act. 13.34
that they shall remain incorruptible. 1 Cor. 15.42.
They shall neither hunger nor thirst more, nor be subject to the Influxes of
Heavenly Luminaries on digestive matter. Rev. 7.16.
Here we feed upon and drink in the materials of Corruption: But there neither
Sun nor any heat shall light upon them, which are the great Fomenters of
Corruption in purifying subjects.

3dly. the Saints shall have glorious bodies. The Apostle opposes (...), 1 Cor.
15.43.
Glory to (...), Dishonor: Want of Beauty renders the Body uncomely or
dishonorable. Three things make up a perfect Beauty; (...), Symmetry, (...),
Genuine Color, and (...), Vivacity, when the Spirits fill the Face with a
lively vigor and a cheerful brisk Alacrity. There will be no more bleak,
meager, fixed Visages; no more livid, leaden, blew, and pale; no more white,
wan, or greenish Aspects, but as the Angels are represented like Young Men with
sprightly and orient Countenances. Mark 16.5.
Some say the Luster of Adam's Body drew the Creatures in Paradise to gaze upon
his Beauty: How much more will they admire him hereaster, if they shall remain
as Spectacles of Divine Wisdom; Romans 8.21.
when the Exquisite Joy, running like Nectar in his Spirits, shall beautify
him with most attracting Aimiableness? when he shall play upon his Celestial
Harp, like an alluring Orpheus, and all the Animals of the Woods and Mountains
shall tread his Musical measures? When the Saints shall shine transparent like
Moses from Mount Horeb, or as Christ in the Vision to Habakkuk with Horns, Hab.
3.5.
i. e. with Beams flaming from his Hands; Dan. 12.3.
or as that glorious Triumvirate in the Mountain of Tabor. Then shall all the
Senses sparkle in their (...) or transcendent Vigor, to render Heaven most
delicious, when their Eagle Eyes may pierce into the Centres of all the
Luminaries, and their quickened Ears shall pleasantly air the Melodious Music
of Legions of Angels.

Olivet at his pleasure, and appeared to Stephen and Paul when and where his
Heavenly Wisdom thought meet. I need not here insist upon the nature of Gravity
as a quality existent in heavy Bodies, but rather as a force impressed by a
Magnetical Attraction of the Earth: So that whatever body is without or beyond
the Atmosphere of the Earth, knows no further gravitation or ponderosity, but
may walk at liberty in the Etherial, Regions; so that it is no incongruity to
conceive, that Luminous Bodies being freed from the dark clogs and impediments
of grosser matter, as the Saints Bodies being like so many Stars, and fit for
motion, may walk on the Sea, in the Air, and within the Heavens at pleasure; if
these concretes shall then abide. 2 Pet. 3.13.
Neither shall they be touched with any weariness more, receiving a continual
afflux of spirits from the beatifick Vision; and shall hence evade to be of
immense strength, insomuch that some have fancied them to be of ability to
transplant Mountains, nay the Earth it self, without the Engines of Archimedes:
Like the Celestial Intelligences that do circum agitate the Heavenly Bodies of
the Stars. Ps. 103.10.
For they shall be like to Angels, who excel in strength.

Ps. 104.23.
but shall be supported, quickened, and enlivened by the Emanations and
Impressions from the Soul; and these Spirits influenced by Everlasting
Inundations from the Spirit of Christ, the Head of the Mystical Body. The
Sheaths of their Bodies shall not waste or wear out, Dan. 7.15.
or be cut in pieces by the two-edged swords of their Spirits. We faint, and
are soon dispirited by continuance even of Heavenly Duties. Our strength is not
that of stones, Job 6.12.
nor our flesh of Copper. Our Animal Spirits here in the Valley are grosser and
more unweildy, than our Bodies shall be in the Mount of Glory to motion,
agility and delight in Spiritual Objects. [ Spiritualia erunt, Austin. de civ.
l. 14. c. 22.
(says Austin) non quia corpora esse desistent, sed quia spiritu vivificante
subsistent;] Our Bodies shall be Spiritual, not that they shall cease to be
bodies, but shall be sustained by a quickening Spirit: And during the
persistency of that Spirit which is of immortal Lineage, they shall continue
with an indissoluble Union.

1 Cor. 15.53.
which is a degree of excellency beyond incorruption, because the external
sorce of sword and fire, of water and pressure, may destroy that Body, which
otherwise has no internal principle of dissolution. So that though there were
granted such a Noble Balsam of Life as the Adeptists glory of their Elixir, yet
would it not avail against External Invasions. But here our Gracious God has
brought Life and Immortality to light by the Gospel purchase: 2 Timothy 1.10.
Here it is appointed for oil once to dye: But there, Heb. 0.27.
Statutum est non mori; It Is a statute Law in Heaven, Rev. 21.4.
there shall be death no more, nor sickness or pain, those warning Canons,
those presaging Bells, that ring the loud Lectures of Mortality. There will be
no Titans to raise any Babel Towers against those sublime and solid Mansions.
When once the Saints have dipped their Bodies in the River of Jordan, and gone
into Canaan, they are beyond the story of Achilles, invulnerable and
impenetrable all over. Rev. 22.2.
The Leaf of the Tree of Life is tasted as soon as ever they come within the
gates of Paradise and is Medicine for without as well as within; 1 Pet. 5.4.
and the Chaplet or Immortal Crown which they wear in Heaven is formed of the
Leaves of that blessed and everliving Tree.

Copula, the connexive medium between them both: For clear, serene, and joyful
Spirits will nimbly circulate through all the Nerves, to associate in the
Council Chamber of the Brain, where the Animal Soul sits as Queen Regent on the
Glandula pinealis, the Pine Kernel, to dispatch her winged Ambassadors. There
will be no inflammations, adustions, or corruptions of Blood, but all perfect
sanguine without impure mixture, no infected Air, no seculent Food to alienate
the state of Complexion. All the Humors will stand in aequilibrio, in exact
poise to a Grain: No inconvenient objects to surprise, irritate, or discompose
the Spirits to the least alteration.

The Old Philosophy held nothing to be in the understanding but what was first
in Sense; which if universally spoken, is but a Fable. For what are the connate
and concreated notions of the Soul urged by the Platonists? And what are those
spiritual infusions poured into the Hearts of Believers from Heaven, Job 32.8.
and 38.36. Eccl 2.28.
but clear Evictions that that Soul can act independent from the Body?. But how
much more when they shall be enthroned in Glory; 1 Cor. 15.28.
when God shall be all in all, and the Soul shall be drawn into more immediate
contemplation of God? Corporeal Species are in vain to suck and draw in the
Marrow of. Incorporeal Objects, when the Understanding and all its Powers shall
equal, if not transcend, Heaven it self in purity.

Rev. 3.5.
of his Divine Communications and influences into the Soul: They shall behold
those streams of the Rivers of light: They shall be able to discourse with
Angels without Interpreters; the Language of spirits shall be familiar. That
Phrase so frequent in the Hebrew Original of Scripture of God's speaking to the
Heart, Hos. 2.14.
which is here sometimes sweetly perceived by Saints, shall be then explained.
The gentle Voice which Austin heard in the Garden by Milan, Confess. l. 9. c. 12.
that melted him into tears, and from whence he dates his. Conversion, shall be
then more audible and more intelligible. Then, what is now one great portion of
misery in our lapsed state, that we so little understand the nature of our own
Souls, that Christians run to Heathen Oracles to know what is (...), and the
first Act of an Organical Body, and such Barbarous obscurities, shall be hurled
into the Ocean of Oblivion. Then we shall see the Face of our own Souls in
Glasses of our own Polishing. Here we see (...) in a Riddle, 1 Cor. 13.12.
(...) Hesych.
in a dark saying; and those that would expound the soul confound it more. If
they had stepped with Endymion, they had dreamed more pleasantly. Butthen the Eye
of the Mind shall know no humor but Chrystalline; the Retina shall be a
capacious Net indeed to cast over the Ocean of the Universe. There will arise a
most perfect Union between the understanding, will, and affections, and no such
Combats about them, as some nice Quidditarians assign. There will be no
inferior Appetite to suggest or abstract from its refined Notions.

Ezekiel. Ez. k. 1. and 10.
Such a fullness of excellency that swallows up all sinful emulation and envy.
Saints shall know with better satisfaction what are the Dimensions of the Love
of God in Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 3.19.
which will so adequately fill the Soul, that the Body shall require no
sustenance, but the Ambrosian Food of Divine Love and Glory.

Who could have imagined the Soul of a Man could have been Hypostatically
united to the second person in the Glorious Trinity? so that as he is the Son
of Man he is said to know the Thoughts of Men, Mat. 9.4, 6. Act. 17.34.
to forgive sins and to judge the world. To to glorious an extent can
Omnipotent Power exalt the Soul of Man by union to the Deity.

Luke 20.36. 1 Cor. 13.8.
like to the Holy Angels, who draw not the Water of Knowledge out of the deep
Well of Inferences and long Consequences. This manner of gathering Intelligence
per discursum shall then probably vanish and perish, and be extinguished by
that Meridian Light of Eternity. Here we argue by premises ex concessis
ignota. We lay down Maxims, Positions, and Theorems; take some data and
postulata, and deduce mediums from several common places of Arguments: As if we
would search out the Nature of a Star, an Animal, a Vegetable, or Mineral. We
argue, if we can, a priori, from its Causes and component Principles; or, a
posteriori, from its Effects, and Properties. For instance in Antimony, when we
consider its Sulfur, its Salt, its bloud-red Oil, its Phlegm and Vinegar, its
Faeces or Terra damnata, having opened it by Chemical Anatomy and other.
Methods, we may infer something, though but rudely of its Nature: Or when we
observe its Power in several Effects, and Experiments, in cleansing the Blood
from Leprosies and Scorbutical Infections, or the Head and its Nerves from
dizziness, swimmings, and paralytical or waterish resolutions of the Tone of
any its curious Engines by its Volatile Tincture: We conclude its powerful
virtue in Physic, though as to the modus operandi, the Methods and Manner of
its influence, we are still at a loss.

But alas! an Angel has an otherguess Knowledge by an intuitive speculation
into the profundity and depth of its Nature, without Argument or Process of
Medicinal Trials; which Method of ours is but a mean, low, and crazy
inquisition, and subject to foul Errors.

But in that Angelical manner we may deem, that the Soul shall arrive to that
high dignity of penetrating into its Objects, by intuition far beyond what
Adam, or Noah, or Solomon ever attained. What pleasant work will the Material
Beings (which may then survive. the fatal Fire) administer to the Souls
Contemplation in that happy Pitch, 2 Pet. 3.12, 13.
whereby to glorify and honor the infinite wise Creator of all? When as these
things which we now handle by sense, and the dwindling light of the Soul like,
a Rush-candle in this Night of ignorance, being the Objects of our laborious
and erring speculations, are but middle beings between thousands transcending
these in Magnitude and Glory, and such innumerable minute essences, vastly
beneath us as to our power of inquisition, as the others are in sublimity
beyond and above us. So that it may be questioned, whether the Majesty of our
infinitely to be adored Maker will in that day shine forth more radiantly in
the Heavens, and other stupendous portions of his Workmanship for greatness or
the unspeakable curiosity of Nature in the lesser Fabrics, which sink beneath
our observation for excess of littleness, which the Acumen of our Eyes are not
able to discern.

Besides these, upon what immaterial Objects may we (a little) imagine shall
the Soul then feastits Paradisian Faculties? Such as may entertain our thoughts
with sacred wonder, and sit down in the dust of astonishment, that their
unconceiveable varieties will fill up the capacity, and run beside the august
and comprehensive Spirits of the Cherubims; and yet the Saints shall have and
enjoy some cognizance of these transcendent pleasures.

Heb. 2.16.
For he took not upon him the Nature of Angels. Joh. 17.22.
And our Blessed Lord prays that the Saints may be one, even as the Father and
the Son are one: They shall constitute one mystical body with the Son in a
purer and closer Union than possible in this wilderness state. The Hypostatical
Union of Christ to the Deity is of a sublimer nature than the most Glorified
Creature can unfold: For the Angels do (...), stoop and pry into the Mystery of
the Golden Mercy-seat, 1 Pet. 1.12.
and were fixed in that place continually to abide; and therefore the Cherubims
in that Emblem were made of one piece of Massy Gold together with the
Mercy-seat, Exodus 25.19.37.7.
to show not only the standing of the Elect Angels by the virtue of Christ's
Mediatorship, 1 Timothy 5.21.
but also to indicate that they could never exhaust and drink in the Knowledge
of the Mystery of that Union, Mat. 18.10.
though they are constantly beholding the Face of our Heavenly Father. Yet
still this Mystical Union implies a Glorious Approximation of the Saints to
Christ in some similitude with Christ's Union to the Deity: Joh. 17.12.
For the Glory which the Father gave unto Christ has Christ given to the
Saints, who are blessed in Heavenly Places in Christ, and shall sit down with
him in his Throne, Ephesians. 1.3.
as he is set down with the Father on the paternal Throne; Rev. 3.21.
and as all Judgment is committed to the Son, so shall Saints also judge both
the World and Angels. A glimpse of this Glory in this State shines into the
heart from the Spirit of Christ dwelling in Saints. They that are joined to the
Lord, Paul says not, shall partake of, but, are one Spirit, 1 Cor. 6.17.
and thereby in an unspeakable manner become Partakers of the Divine Nature.
Yet we must ponder on these Deeps with sacred caution: For this Mystical Union
is infinitely distinct from Hypostatical. The Spirit of Christ, as he dwells in
the Head though in a more eminent manner, yet so he also does intime pervadere,
enter into the Essence of the Souls of Saints: and this Inhabitation may be
embleme^ by the Rational Souls dwelling in the Animal Spirits of the Blood. But
in Christ the Head he dwells fully, and in the Members according to distinct
measures and proportions. Col. 2.9. (...).


Again, the state of the Soul shall be admirable, that has no bottom, which
Heaven it self cannot sufficiently expound to a finite capacity. We shall see
him without the Glass of Reflection by Argument, as here, inferring his Divine
Power and Godhead from the Works of Creation, and without the Magnifying Glass
of Ordinances, to help the weakness of our spiritual senses, and without the
Perspective Glass of Faith and promises. They shall behold his Face, 1 John
3.2. Rev. 22.4.1 Cor. 13.12. Joh. 14.8. Exodus 33.20, 23.
and know as they are known. Philip's desire of having the Father shown shall
then suffice indeed; when glorified Saints shall enjoy what was denied to
Moses, not only to contemplate the Being of Beings, but as the Causality, the
Fountain, and Principle of all Essences; yea and comprehend with all Saints by
the Spirit the unlimited, Ephesians. 3.16.19.
unfathomable Love of Christ, and be filled with all the fullness of God; and
hereaster conceive more how the three infinite Persons stand in relative Glory,
and enjoy more ample light as to the Sons Eternal Generation, and the Spirits
Divine and Everlasting Procession. They shall drink of the River of Light that
flows from his Essence. Here upon Earth we behold the Sun at a distance, but
cannot mount up to walk in those Mountains of brightness: But then the Church
shall be clothed with the Sun of Righteousness. Rev. 12.1.
There was of old a little spark of Glory in the Temple; Ps. 27.4.
and Holy David desired to see that beauty which shined in the Sanctuary: But
Oh what perfusions of Glory shall animate the soul in Heaven, when it shall be
illustrated with the morning knowledge of Angels. We may justly wonder at the
ravishing delight of those Holy Spirits, wherewith they are nourished to
ever-springing and soul-fustaining Ecstasies in their Ministration before him,
and studying the beautiful Volumes of his Essence. Saints shall see him as
distinct from all Creatures, and unvailed of all Relation, and yet take
superlative pleasure, in that all the Excellencies in their God are in him as
an Everlasting Father; and he that sits on he Throne shall dwell among them,
Rev. 7.15, 17.
and the Lamb in the midst of the Throne shall feed them in the Pastures of
Glory, and lead them to Living Fountains of Water.

In that day it is likely they may understand more of his Eternal Counsels of
Election, Creation, Redemption, and Salvation, then now; and dive into the
Ocean of his inscrutable Providence, and walk among those Coral Rocks and
Mines of Pearl that now lie hid in the great Deeps. It Is no small advantage to
this withering old Age of the World to reflect upon the Passages of all
successive Generations both before and since the Flood, both before and since
the Incarnation of our Blessed Savior. It Is a Cordial to refresh our drooping
Spirits in this sink and sullage of times, to recall the state of the three
Worlds in Peter, 2 Pet 3.6, 7.
and to gather Maxims for direction in difficult and stormy Deluges. To revolve
the Prophesies, and their fulfillings as to the rise, growth, decrease, and
fall of the 4 mighty Monarchies in Daniel; and to observe that when they
touched upon the Church the Apple of his Eye, how then they began to totter and
decline to ruin; and thereby to encourage us as to the fatal Destruction of
all the Adversaries that shall arise till the Glory of the New Jerusalem. That
all the Toes of Daniels Image shall as certainly be broken in pieces as the
Head and Shoulders, Dan. 2.35.
the Legs as the Breast and Belly, and the Statue shall become like the Chaff
of the Somer thresning flowers, which the Wind shall carry away and no place be
found for them; and the Stone that smites that Image shall become a great
Mountain, a Glorious Kingdom filling the whole Earth. But these, though such
Illustrious Fruits of the Eternal Counsels of God, are small things in
comparison of what the Saints shall see perfectly in the Mount of Glory. Then
the reasons of all the motions of the Wheels in Ezekiel conveying the Chariot
of Cherubims shall shine as bright as the Wheels* themselves: Then they shall
admire at Heavens Reasons of state, for all the Intricacies, Perplexities, and
afflictions of the Church in all Ages and Nations, and the Foundation of the
glory which then shall follow. Then shall the saints behold an object which
shall transform the Subject of the Spectator into the same refulgent Glory, to
be like him as he is: 1 John 3.2. Ps. 34.5.
As they in the Psalmist were enlightened by vision, and the longer they behold,
the optic Nerve of the Soul will advance stronger into the depth of
Intellectual beauties, 2 Cor. 3.18.
and be changed from Glory to Glory.

Yea when their countenances shine beyond the Sun in his strength, they shall
sit down in the Kingdom of their Father at a Glorious Supper, where blessed
Angels shall attend the great Lord and Bridegroom of his Church. They shall
drink abundantly, Songs 5.1. Hebr. Mat. 26.29. Rev. 2.9.
be inebriated with new Wine, and eat of the Tree of Life in the midst of the
Paradise of God, alluding to that of Eden in the State of Innocence.

While the Learned dispute about that Trees real existence in nature, Danaei
mund. antiq. p. 31. Ep. Augustine. de civ. l. 13. c. 21. Junius, etc.
though hid from mortals in the Regions of Mesopotamia; while others fancy it
to be the Imputrible Cedar, and that a first Ens or Balsamic Oil may be
extracted from it for prolongation of Life; Helmont. Grembs.
while they argue, let us determine that Saints shall then seed upon the (...)
that Tree of Life, Is. 65.22.
the Lord Jesus himself; when the union of our nature in and by him to the
Divine shall communicate to all his Mystical Members Eternal Life not only by
donation, but influence. The Jews affirm, Joh. 10.28.
that Manna tasted to the Palate of their Fathers, according to every ones wish
and sancy: However that story stands, we are certain that in this Bread of Life
the very desires and wishes of Saints shall be transcended. It has not entered
into the Heart of Man to conceive what is prepared for them that love him. 1
Cor. 2.9.


When I awake, says David, i. e. in the Resurrection Morning, I shall be
satisfied with thy Likeness. For in the Presence or Face of God will be fullness
of (...) a word used for the Exhilaration of the Spirits by Wine. Ps.
17.15.16.11. Judge. 9.1^. Eccl. 10.19.
For infinite Grace and Glory will shine from the Light of his Countenance.
Rivers of Eden (or pleasure) flow at his Right Hand for evermore, Ezekiel.
47.7.12. Rev. 22.1.
to nourish the delicious Trees of Paradise for Food and Medicine, whereby to
preserve a Glorious Immortalily in the Life to come. In that Triumphal
Coronation and Nuptial Feast, there will be satiety without cloying,
satisfaction connex'd with longing, a continual enjoyment of the same delights
without fear or sense of deprivation.

Tibi deserit hesper Olympum, No evening shadows shall darken these Olympian
Mountains: Saints shall never rise from that Festival Table, Is. 35.10. Rev.
7.17.
but everlasting Joy shall set upon their heads and hearts, and the everlasting
Father shall wipe away all Tears, yea, the spring of Tears out of their Eyes.
There King Solomon will sit down with all his Glory in that day in the gladness
of his Heart: Song. 3.11.
There will be present the everlasting Comforter abiding with the Saints for
ever. Joh. 14.16. Rev. 22.17. Heb. 12.22.
The Spirit faith, Come, as well as the Bride. There will be an innumerable
company of Angels, Luke 24.4.
in their Gorgeous Attire of white and shining Raiment, and Crowns of Gold upon
their Heads. Rev. 4.4.
Oh what a glittering show will stand round about the Celestial Sapphire Throne!
Whenas one Angel in his magnificent pomp and splendor were enough to
extinguish the Sun and all the bright Lamps of the inferior Heavens. Rev.
21.23.
There will be the whole Congregation of the First born from Abel to Enoch,
from Noah to Abraham, from Moses to Samuel under the waving Standards of the
Tribes of Israel, solacing in each others communion. Lazarus talking in the
Arms of Abraham, and beloved John once again asking questions in the Bosom of
Christ. The persecuted Thessalonian Brethren shall be the Joy and Crown of
Rejoicing to Holy Paul at that day in the presence of Jesus Christ. 1 These.
2.19.
Then, the Refusers of the Head-stone of the Corner shall see the Ancient
Patriarchs in the Kingdom of God, Luke 13.28.
and themselves thrust out. Then shall Moses and Elias prosecute their ancient
Discourse with our Blessed Lord, all the Disciples hearing, Mark 9.7.
upon a higher Mountain than Tabor; and no Cloud to over-shadow more.

At that Banquet there will be Music that will hold a Confort and Symphony
with all the Powers of the Soul. All the Dorick and Lesbian Strains are but
discords and ungrateful scrapings to those Heavenly Amphions, whose Harps and
Voices echo against the Chrystalline Jasperwalls of the New Jerusalem. Rev.
21.11.
When all the Prodigal Sons shall come to themselves, and taste of the Fatted
Calf. What ravishing Songs shall amaze the Spears, and the 7 Sirens of Heaven?
Plato in Macrob. de somn. Scip. l. 2. c. 3. Max. Tyr. ser. 21. Luke 2.8, 13.
Ps. 22.22. Heb. 2.12. Rev. 14.3, 4.
when the Heavenly Intelligences themselves shall sing Glory to God in the
Highest, and the Shepherds of all the Churches shall be present. When the King
of the Church himself shall begin the Psalm, and sing aloud in the midst of the
Congregation above, and all the undefiled Virgins shall follow, playing with
Harps and answering with Voices to the New Song of the Lamb before the Throne,
and the 4 living Creatures (in allusion to the 4 Cherubims in Solomon's Temple)
and the 24 Elders, representing the 24 Orders of Priests. Though none can learn
this Song but who are redeemed from the Earth, yet it is composed, and laid
before those Heavenly Spirits by the Pen of the Beloved Disciple. [ Blessing,
and honor, and glory, and power be unto him that sits upon the Throne, Rov.
5.8.
and to the Lamb for ever and ever.] And while this Song is melodiously
answered by the warbling Harps, the joyful Guests are entertained with fragrant
Odours, perfuming the Celestial Mercy-seat, and the Spiknard of the Gardens of
Zion, of the Forest of Lebanon, sends forth its delicious Smell as the King of
the Church in all his Royalty sits at his Table in Glory. Song. 1.12.


But alas, who can reach the Luster of that day which will amaze Angels
themselves? It sinks our Spirits to think of Eternity: it is a bottomless Gulf
to the thoughts of most raised Souls. But as we cast our selves here by Faith
upon the Heart and Love of Christ, so must we rest in his Love to fulfill all
his glorious Promises, Zeph. 3.17.
and capacitate the Soul for these Accomplishments.

But before that august and resplendent day, which will sit upon the Throne of
Magnificence, we must remember and ponder seriously upon the awakening Trumpet
of the Archangel at his own appearance, Job. 5.28.
when the Bodies of all the Saints in order to these unmatched Enjoyments shall
be raised out of their embalmed dust, where they lay perfumed by the Spices of
their Lords Sacred Body: Is. 26.19.
Which Doctrine of Resurrection to life, not only the Holy Scriptures amply
confirm for a Foundation of Faith, but there are some no contemptible
sentiments of the same in many varieties of Nature. Every Morning utters it,
and every Spring revives it: Every Trumpet over the new Moon proclaims it, and
every emersion of the Planets from under the Suns combustion darts a Beam upon
this notion. Every Insect that starts from the corruption of dissolved Animals
is no ignoble Emblem. Any Metal or Mineral calcined and revived by a proper
menstruum yields us a pleasant specimen. Not to enlarge upon those rare
experiments, which the learned Chemists style by the name of the Trees of
Philosophers, some whereof are represented both in Gold and Silver, French
distill. p. 181.
and one in Copper first corroded by Aqua fortis, and revived into Sea green
branches, like Coral growing in a G1ass by help of the Liquor of Sand or Pebles
I have sometimes shown. This curiosity is more exquisitely set forth in
Vegetables, Borrichius contr. Conring. p. 36^. Borelli. observe. p. 325. Beck.
experim. p. 244. Quercitan de herm^^. p 293. Libav. syntag. arcan. chymi^. l.
1. c. 22. p. 48.
as the Learned well know by the Writings of Borcllus, Borichius, Beckius, and
others, to whom the inquisitive may repair. Give leave a little to enlarge on
that story in Quercetan, of a Polonian Doctor, who had above 30 Glasses
hermetically sealed, wherein were the Ashes of so many Plants, as the
Mary-gold, the many colored Poppy, the Rose, etc. chemically prepared (it may
be after the manner of a Clyssus as they term it) wherein lay hid the
Tinctures, Spirits, Salts, and Oils of each Vegetable; and at the request,of
Visitants would set the gentle heat of a Candle under any Glass, and by and by
the Plant would begin to rise into a Stalk, Branches, Leaves, and then present
a double-flower'd Rose, as if it were a Corporeal, but really a Spiritual Idea,
and yet endowed with a spiritual essence; and wanted nothing to give it the
complete assumption of a solid body, but committing it to the impregnating Salt
in a fit and congenial Earth; which upon withdrawing of the warmth would slide
down gradually, and sink into its former chaos in the Glass. The truth of which
Story I leave to the faith and veracity of that grave, learned, and experienced
Writer; not busying our thoughts too much with these faint resemblances, nor
with imitation of those people in Herodotus, who entombed their Friends in
Glass, or of the Egyptians who embalmed with Myrrh and Aloes, etc. or that
ingenious fancy of Kerkring, Kerkring, see in Morhof'' Epistle to Langelot, p.
50.
to invest the body in Amber; while we by a steadfast faith rely upon the word
of our adored Creator, not doubting but Infinite Power is able to persorm what
Infinite Wisdom contrives, and Infinite Faithfulness has promised to
accomplish.

Let us with Holy Peter look to, and hasten after this Glorious Day, 2 Pet.
3.12.
and labor to be found in their number who makeup the unspotted Bride of
Christ, and daily study to prepare and adorn our Souls for that Festival
Triumph; to have our Loins girt, our Lamps burning, Zach. 4.14.
and our Vessels filled with holy Oil from the two anointed ones that stand
before the Lord of the whole Earth, Rev. 11.4.
the two Witnesses that dispense the Sanctuary Oil for the Candlesticks of the
Church; Mat. 25.6.
that so at the great cry at midnight, Behold the Bridegroom, comes, go forth
to meet him; 1 Cor. 11.7 Pro. 12.4.
As a Holy Wife is the Glory of a Holy Husband, and reflects the Graces of his
Heart in the Glass of her Pious Life: If he be gracious, she is likewise, and
becomes his Glory by reflection: His excellency shines in her deportment, like
the Moon deriving all her nocturnal beauty from the Sun; E^e. 1.14.
so must Saints shine by the comeliness of Christ. And as a Gracious Husband
labors to change his Spouse into his own Image and likeness by kindnesses,
precepts, and example, that he may take the more delight in her person: Ps.
45.10.
So does our spiritual Solomon change the hew of his Egyptian Queen, to deem of
things and persons as her Lord and Husband judges, and frames her Spirit to
delight in doing his Will and Pleasure, and take the highest solace in
obedience, to enjoy a heavenly freedom mixed mith aimiable and joyful reverence:
He roots out of her heart all changeable affections and worldly fancies, and
hankering longings after the fond fashions of Shechem, Genesis 34.1.
and all carnal inclinations to the Daughters of Canaans Lineage, and all the
beggarly humors of the besotted world, and to pass by with a Holy scorn all
the pitiful Pageantry of this perishing and fading life, and rise to a mean
estimate of the Baubles and trifles that inchant a carnal Heart. At length she
arrives to a noble and generous judgment; counting all but dung and dross that
she may win Christ. As her Prince of life was crucified by the World for her
Redemption, so she begins to be crucified to it in token of conformity to him,
and at length becomes all glorious within. She takes down the Pendants of
folly, Ps. 45.13.
and hangs all her Jewels within. Her Pearls and Diamonds are the gracious
Sermons and dying Prayers of her Holy Lord; they hang at her ears, Songs 1.13.
they lie between her Breasts all night. Her clothing is of the Gold of Ophir
made with Needlework of diverse colors, Judge. 5.30.
twined by the Daughters of the New, Jerusalem. The 12 precious Stones in the
breast plate of Aaron are upon her Heart. She is Holy like him, and goes about
doing good with the ornament of a meek and quiet Spirit, with a Crown of
Carbuncles of flaming love to Christ upon her Head; and thus reflecting the
Glory of Christ here, is preparing and fitting for fuller visions and brighter
reflections of Glory hereafter.

Here Is nothing but noise and confusion in the dust and smoke of folly. This
World is like the Sea in Habakuk, Hab. 1.14.
where the great Fish swallow the small; storms and pirates, rocks and sands,
shipwrecks and new furprizing dangers every moment. Let Us long and pack up for
our best and sweetest home; looking upon every secret Mercy, every joyful
income of the Spirit as so many earnests of glory, as so many bent tokens put
in hand to secure Heaven. Let Us draw off and wean our affections from sublunary
vanishing Vapors which perish in the very use. Carnal persons in their heights
have but a wordly Heaven, and Saints while here in their lowest depths, by the
Sunshine of divine Favor, have a sweet portion of Heaven here upon Earth. Oh
what a Heaven shall they have in Heaven it self! Here though sometimes deep in
the mire of affliction, yet when conscience sings it is fair above head, still
traveling toward Zion. Since our natures are changed like a Cion or Graft
inserted into the Vine of the Church, we shall in due time be transplanted to
Paradise.

Strengthen assurance by perseverance, and both by the promises to each, and
mix prayer with Praises. Our Harps must always sound while our Sacrifice burns
on the Altar. Every day adds to the treasury of evidence. Like laborious Bees
increase your stock from the flowers of Scripture, and the Honey of Assurance
will sweeten every Prayer, and cheer persevering grace, and enliven the strings
of praise, till we come with Harps in our hands well tuned to the Gate of
Heaven. Let our chaste Souls be a Garden enclosed to Christ: Our eyes, ears,
Song. 4.12.
affections sealed and shut up from worldly communion. Hearken, O Daughter, Ps.
45.10, 11.
and forget thine Egyptian people, and thy Fathers house in Zoan: So shall the
King of Glory greatly desire to see and enjoy thy beauty, for he is thy Lord,
and worship thou him.

Some Passages to be inserted in page 26. which through a casualty did happen
to be misplaced.
AS that Person in Bisseter Market, who having a piece of Bread in his Mouth,
and turning suddenly to answer a question while the Bread was swallowing, was
immediately choack'd; and though he survived about two or three days, yet no
remedy prevailed.

Remarkable was that providence of a poor Tailor at Reading choked with a bit
of Mutton, having wished it to himself as he was eating, if he had stolen the
Stockings whereof he was accused: Which story is set down in the Register of
one of the Parishes of that Town.

A sudden accident also besell Colonel Rossiter, endeavoring to crack a
Plum-stone, (as I am informed) brake a Tooth, and thereby lost his Life.

I would not let pass two or three stories more of signal providence as to
sudden accidents.

There lived some time since in Grassechurch-street LONDON, a Vintner Mr.
Fowler by name, who playing with his little Child abed received a scratch of a
Pin: First it rankled and cost him a Hundred Pounds-under design of cure; but
at length his Arm was cut off, and shortly after lost his life.

There happened also a notable memorial of Divine providence upon a Child in
Bishops-gate Parish (where sometime the good hand of God was pleased to use my
poor labors in the honorable service of the Ministry:) This little Child
looking up through a wooden case to a ponderous Jackweight; in that very moment
the Weight dropped down and killed it.

I have also received intelligence of a Person worthy of credit, that a Woman
having a very fair Hand molested by a Wart, and submitting to the skill of a
Surgeon at Thomas Hospital in Southwark in order to cure: But the sore place
began to be angry at the improper Medicines and Festers, and shortly receives
from his hand the cure of all her Diseases.

To end with a comfortable story: My good Friend Mr. Chapter Morton then at Sea,
and yielding to the advice of a Ship-Chirurgeon to lay the Lapis Infernalis to
eat down a Wart; his Arm swelled very dangerously, but the Lord delivered him.
So true is that saying of Paracelsus, That the greatest Wounds may issue
prosperously, and little Scratches may end disastrously; since the Keys of Life
and Death are in the Hand of God.

FINIS.
Books printed toy and are to be sold by, John Hancock, at the Sign of the
three Bibles in Popes Head Alley in Cornhill.
TWelve Books lately published by Mr. Tho. Brooks, late Preacher of the Gospel
at Margarets New Fishstreet.
1. Precious Remedies against Satan's Devices, or Salve for Believers and
Unbelievers Sores; being a Companion for those that are in Christ or out of
Christ. 2. Heaven on Earth: Or a serious Discourse touching a Well-grounded
Assurance of Man's Everlasting Happiness. 3. The Unsearchable Riches of Christ
held forth in 22 Sermons. 4. Apples of Gold for Young Men and Women: Or the
Happiness of being Good betimes. 5. A String of Pearls: Or the best Things
reserved till last. 6. The Mute Christian under the Smarting Rod, with
Sovereign Antidotes against the most miserable Exigents. 7. An Ark for all Gods
Noah's in a Stormy Day. 8. The Crown and Glory of Christianity, in 48 Sermons on
Heb. 12.14. 9. The privy Key of Heaven: Or a Discourse of Closet Prayer. 10. An
Heavenly Cordial for such as have had or escaped the Plague. 11. A Cabinet of
choice Jewels, or a Box of precious Ointment: Containing special Maxims, Rules,
and Directions in order to the clearing up of a Man's Interest in Christ, and
his Title to all the Glory of another World. 12. Londons Lamentations.
The Godly Man's Ark, in several Sermons. To which is added Mrs. Moors Evidences
for Heaven. By Edmund Calamy, B. D. at Aldermanbury.

Christ's Communion with his Church Militant. By Nicholas Lockyer.

Sin the Plague of Plagues, by Ralph Venning.

A true Narrative of those two never to be forgotten Deliverances, one from the
Spanish Invasion in 88, the other from the Hellesh Powder Plot, Nov. 5. 1605.
By Mr. Sam. Clark.

The Accurate Accountant, or London Merchant: Being Instructions for keeping
Merchants Accounts. By Tho. Brown, Accomptant.

Short Writing; the most Easy, Exact, Lineal, and speedy Method that has ever
yet been obtained, as thousands in this City and elsewhere can from their own
experience testify. By Theophilus Metcalfe.

Also a Book called a Schoolmaster to it, explaining all the Rules thereof.

A Word of Advice to Saints, or a choice Drop of Honey from the Rock Christ.

A Copy Book of the Newest and most Useful Hands, with Directions for Spelling
and Cyphering.

Bridges Remains: Being eight choice Sermons. By the late Reverend Mr. William
Bridge of Yarmouth.

A Disswasive from Conformity to the World. Also Gods Severity against
Impenitent Sinners. By Henry Stubbes, Minister of the Gospel.

Vennings Remains, being the substance of many Sermons. By Mr. Ralph Venning;
prepared by himself for the Press a little before his Death.

The Poor Man's Family book. By Richard Baxter.

Luthers 34 special and choice Sermons.

Comae Berenicis, or the Hairy Comet; being a Prognostic of Malignant
Influences from the many Blazing Stars wandering in our Horizon.

Gospel Love, Heart Purity, and the Flourishing of the Righteous: Being the
last Sermons of that late Eminent Divine Mr. Joseph Caryl.

The Young Man's Guide to Blessedness, or seasonable Directions for Youth in
their unconverted estate. By R. Matthew, Minister of the Gospel.

Causa Dei, or an Apology for God; wherein the Perpetuity of Infernal Torments
is evinced, and his both Goodness and Justice defended. Also the Nature of
punishments in general, and of Infernal ones in particular, displayed by R.
Burthogge.

The Legacy of a Dying Mother to her Mourning Children; being the Expiences of
Mrs. Susanna Bell: Published by Tho. Brooks.

King James his Counterblast to Tobacco. To which is added a Learned Discourse
touching Tobacco by Dr. Maynwaring; wherein Men may see whether Tobacco be good
for them or no.

Strength in Weakness; being a Sermon preached at the Funeral of Mrs. Martha
Brooks, late Wife of Mr. Thomas Brooks, Minister of the Gospel. To which is
added some experiences of the Grace and Dealings of God, observed and gathered
by a near Relation of the said Mrs. Brooks.

An Excellent Cathechism, by the late Reverend Mr. Jeremiah Buroughs.

A Discourse of Christ's Coming, and the Influence which the Expectation thereof
has on all manner of Holy Conversation and Godliness: By Theophilus Gale.

The Shepherds Legacy, or forty years experience of the Weather.

The Young Man's Conflict with, and Victory over, the Devil by Faith: Or a true
and perfect Relation of the Experiences of Tho. Powel, begun in the fifteenth,
and continued till the seventeenth year of his Age.

Theological Treatises; 1. Production of Man's Soul. 2. Divine Predestination.
3. The True Church Regiment. 4. Predictions of Messiah. 5. Christ's two
Genelogies. 6. The Revelation revealed. 7. Christ's Millenary Reign. 8. The
Worlds Dissolution.
By Robert Velvain.

Christ's certain and sudden Appearance to Judgment; by Samuel Malbon.

A brief D^scription of New York, and the Places thereto adjoining, with
Directions and Advice to such as shall go thither; by Dan. Denton.

A Cry for Laborers in Gods Harvest: Being a Sermon preached at the Funeral of
Mr. Ralph Venning: By R. Brag, Minister of the Gospel.

Christian Directions, showing how to walk with God all the day long; by Th.
Gouge.

The Young Man's Guide through the Wilderness of this World to the Heavenly
Canaan; by Tho Gouge.

Conscience the best Friend upon Earth, or the Happy Effects of Keeping a Good
Constience; by Henry Stubbes.

Patience and its Perfect Work under sudden and sore Trials.

Orthodox Paradoxes Theoretical and Experimental, or a Believor clearing Truth
by seeming Contradictions: With an Appendix of the Triumph of Assurance over
the Law, Sin, World, Wants, etc. To which is added, The New Command Renewed, or
Love one another; with Ten Rules for the Right Understanding of Scripure; by
Ralph Venning, A.M.

An Awakening Call from the Eternal God to the Unconverted, with Seasonable
Advice to them that are under Convictions, to prevent their miscarrying in
conversion; by Samuel Corbyn, A. M.

Now in the Press a Rebuke to Back sliders, and a Spur to Loyterers, published
to awaken a Sleepy Age; by R. A. Author of Vinditiae Pietatis.

FINIS.

