THE ALL-CONQUERING GENIUS OF THE Most Potent, and most Serene PRINCE JAMES II.
KING of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, etc.

DISPLAYED IN A HEROIC STANZA Occasioned by HIS happy Accession to the Crown.

Whereunto his annexed A CONGRATULATION to both their MAJESTY'S, By way of an
ODE, exciting the Nymphs to perform their Duty as usual at Hymen's.

By T. R. d. L.

LONDON, Printed by John Harefinch, in Mountague-Court in Little Britain. 1685.

Horatius de Art. Poet. -- Tulit eloquium insolitum facundia praeceps
Vtiliumque sagax rerum, and divina futuri,
Sortilegis non discrepuit sententia Delphis.
To His Most Excellent Majesty JAMES the II. KING of England, Scotland, France
and Ireland, etc.
Dread SIR,
IT IS not a flattering Muse, appears before your Sovereign Throne; for she pays
her devotion to Your Majesty's Royal Person, rather than to Your Fortune. Her
Theme is Your Princely MIND, exceeding the Pythagorean World-supporting
Intelligence; by the Conduct of which Pilot Your Triumphant Argo, did at last
overcome all dangerous Gulphs and Creeks, smoothly gliding into the harbor of
a Fleece, far Richer than that of Colches. In a word, it is not the Handmaid,
but the Mistress I adore, even Your Majesty's All-conquering Genius, which by
its Regular stedfastness, is able not only to Triumph over Fortune, but also to
make it.

True it is, my Vein is shallow, not being embodied in the more luxuriant
Channel of Your British Parnassus; yet, since it breaths Devotion, I am apt
(upon that score) to think, it shall not prove unwelcom; because it will,
though proceeding from the sandy and barren Pile, help (in some measure) to
bear up, the Sovereign Ark of Your Majesty's, unquestioned Grandeur. Perhaps.
she cannot promise to this Divine Fabric (for a support) a gold-streaming
Hydaspes; yet she shall appear to flow as Loyally, as the Palm full of Water,
presented unto mighty Cyrus, by you famous Persian Peasant; being poured out at
the brink of Your twice-surrounding Ocean, by

Dread Sovereign, Your Majesty's most dutiful and most faithful Adorer T. R. d.
L.

THE ALL-CONQUERING GENIUS OF THE Most Potent and most Serene PRINCE JAMES II.
KING of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, etc. In a HEROIC STANZA, etc.
I.
AND now does JAMES, in spite of Envy reign,
Swaying his Scepter peacefully: If Art
By false Reflections; outward show does gain,
The end shall show, 'twas but a Mimick part.
II.
The Standard of his PRINCELY course, was MIND
Ruled not by Chance, but Virtue and the train
Of Silent Patience; which in Him refined
Did Fates and Fortunes poisoned darts disdain.
III.
Thus rises David, thus great CAESAR climbs
To Scepters Glory; Thus an Ark depressed:
By stormy Waves, unto Ararat swims;
Though to the Eye, with pregnant Sayls not dressed.
IV.
For (...) by Judgment being over-sway'd
Will shrink, and be discarded from its Rule,
Yea all the Trenches it, against it ^ai^'d
Must prove a Bubble, and an empty Tool.
V.
And if this, sometimes held in lesser bowels
Whose active Lump, made Monarchies to start!
It doubtless, must take place in Princely Souls,
Where Jupiter, displays his chiefest Art.
VI.
No wonder then, that by His constant Wit
Great JAMES or'came all Storms which Athens could
Blow on Miltiades; or that HE hit
The White, without the crimson streams of blood.
VII.
His Soul Divine, did laugh at Men's device
And Peace contrived, when they were most for War:
Their Practices, not them, it did despise
From Fierceness them, and not their Rights debarr.
VIII.
Like Jupiter, when Giants mountains heaped
To chase him out of his immortal Denn,
HE from their boiling blood, no vengeance reap't
But only turned it, into milder Men.
IX.
Ingratitude, could not His Mind exclude
From the Interest of theirs: Yea, tho they were
Busy, by Fancies People to delude
(Thus that Astraea, left her mortal Sphere
X.
For grief and just disdain: When Chattam groaned
For her Preservers spotted Laurel: When
The Chain of Tames, her Darling's fate bemoaned)
He only strove to make them milder Men.
XI.
And being great, He clemently was tame
When Fierc'ness He could use, He was but calm:
With goodness HE did varnish Envies Frame
Thus, to its Biter, Gilead drops Balm.
XII.
Hence Angeronia, is now cut off
From fair Volupia's Altar, where she stood
Too long: And, justly is, by Charon's staff
Conveyed for ever to the Stygian Flood.
XIII.
For tho great Jove, a Diamond string did make
To knot both Joy and Sorrow; He did find
A means whereby this Gordius to break;
Greater than Thracian; JAMES'S Princely Mind.
XIV.
By this the Chain is cut; by this HE sways
His ancient Scepter; And declares He will
Press narrowly, His Predecessor's ways
Supporting, Church and State established, still.
XV.
And now black Malice, what can thou presage?
Thy Fears are vain! a KING has spoke; Recall
He will not! Spend thy force and teeth of rage
On thy Pragmaticks; But let HIM be All.
XVI.
None can conceive a Change, as matters stand,
But those, that would stir up Cadmaean bowels;
And coveting the Fatness of the Land
Instead of Salt do harbor miry Souls.
XVII.
JAMES does not scatter painted words as Thou
Who Protheus-like, do but for Interest change:
He, to all Circes Men, proclaims Adieu!
And next to Conscience, does his Impire range.
XVIII.
He hat's those Flatt'ries, Alexander praised;
He hat's a Posture, molded out of frame,
And scorns Religion by Reflection raised,
Nay does reject it, from his Diadem.
XIX.
He for Obedience to his Crown does look
And knows; it can with the inward Acts agree
Of Conscience; which, as yet HE never shook
Nor will a Rise to any for it be.
XX.
Permitting Pallas to spread into Streams
Distinct in Taste and Nature, in each Vein,
If she but pays due tribute to the beams
Of Jupiter, and lets Him steer the main.
XXI.
Thy Peace, is the only Prize of all his toil,
Thy Fame and greatness, is his only Thought;
These, by new Fashions, He will not turmoyl,
He knows, such Blessings, are by Concord wrought.
XXII.
Hence, Loyal Heart, in such a PRINCE rejoice,
Who leaves thee free, both right and left: whose eye
Does scorn a Changeling: Be glad in thy choice,
Permitting others, to dream of their skies.
XXIII.
These that will gape at shadows, are but vain:
Stick thou to Juno; And persuaded be
Whatever, mischief, breeds a scatred brain;
Thou Wilt escape the clashings of old Centaury.
XXIV.
For JAMES is good, His like, no Age did know;
Yea, though Heavens would the golden Age restore,
A better PRINCE, they never could bestow
On Earth, nor bless it with a richer s^^^^^
XXV.
And now, great PRINCE; My Muse to Wishes turns
Short of Thy Worth; yet take them as they come
They Are true: My Soul, with clear Devotion burns,
Albeit Thy Splendour, does my heat benum.
XXVI.
Let Thy Triang'lar Kingdom be a Ring,
In circular Proportion always spread:
Till Lillies spin: And bowing to their King
Inammel fearly, Rosy RUBIES bed.
XXVII.
Hence let Archimedes above, contrive
That none thy pleasant Circle may outdare,
But; if to show his powerful skill he strive,
Then, of a Circle let him make a Square.
XXVIII.
Let not Narcissus, think Thee void of Power,
For Jupiter, will by a single stroke,
At thy request, shake Legions in an hour
Of British Hearts, from old Dodona's Oak.
XXIX.
If quiet was the charm of some; It Is not
Thy Mind, to wear a Crown at such a rate:
An active Soul has fallen to Thy Lot;
Thy Conquests, and Thy Arm, shall make Thee great.
XXX.
Undaunted England is now trained to bear
The Toyls of Mars, and to improve their Arms
To make the Cont'nent, tremble at Thy Spear,
And make their Rocks, to shrink at Thy Alarms.
XXXI.
Methinks I hear Thy Warlike Captains shout,
I hear the Britain Lions fiercely roar,
I see the Martial Wheel now turned about,
And German Eagle, by Thy help, to soar
XXXII.
When Thracian Fields, shall be but chasing Plains,
Then shall Great JAMES'S ammunition ground
Become a Martial Camp; His fatal chains
Shall bring his Captives, more than string'd; for, bour'd.
XXXIII.
Great JAMES is known: His Valor many felt,
His Courage shook both Sea and Land: His Spear
Made Belgic Lions, trembling heart to melt
Like Butter in the Sun, for Pannick fear.
XXXIV.
Yea Lillies fainted without JAMES his hand,
And were defended by His Sovereign Steel,
Why may not they be now brought to a stand
And be transplanted, like Navarra's Wheel.
XXXV.
And when Thy Trumpets sound, Thy Lions roar,
Thy Drums are beating on the Continent
Let fair Lucina, be on the English Shore
And morning Rainbow, by Lucina sent.
XXXVI.
Let the first bring PRINCES from the HESPERIAN Rib;
The second, Plenty on Thy pleasant Land:
Let HIM, whose Royal Cradle was a Crib,
Unto them both, their Watching-word command.
XXXVIII.
Till Time expires, let not Thy Empire fall,
Let JAMES his Hand all stubborn Giants shake,
His Triumphs, may have then a Funeral
When Water, Sky and Earth by flashes break.
XXXVIII.
Thus, long live JAMES and MARY great! Let Fame
Cry loud Your Grandeur, Riches and Renown;
Till Jove conveys You by the milky stream
To Caesar's Soul, and Ariadne's Crown.
AN ODE Inviting the Nymphs to congratulate the Accession to the Crown of
England, Scotland, France and Ireland, of their Most Excellent Majesty's, JAMES
the II. and MARY His Royal Consort.
I.
YOU smooth Neptunian Daughters, come to shore,
We wait on you; and do allure
Your high Ligurian Pile.
Let not swift Ganges, by his golden store
Keep you secure,
Nor PO, by whirlings, discompose your file.
II.
Tread on a breast, sweet Nymphs, and bring the Lyre,
You must strike up a charming Tune,
For JAMES and MARY are
New-marry'd: Therefore Candor do inspire
Into the Moon,
And let Latona's Offspring keep the Rear.
III.
They Married are unto a Threefold Crown,
A threefold Hymen therefore sing;
You Will here with Roses meet,
Nor will the Thistle tear your Numbers down;
And Ireland's string
Will make your Harps in harmony run sweet.
IV.
But when you are past the Pyrenaean Hill,
Bring each of you a Lillies stalk,
They hither do belong:
By this exploit you will all Pretenses kill,
And freely walk
In Thames's bed, and sing an endless Song.
V.
Repeating always, Long live Queen and King,
Of England, Scotland, Ireland, France,
Great MARY and Great JAMES,
Let Caesar dare a Pompey; let His String
Make Cockrills dance,
And let Sequana bow to mighty Thames.
FINIS.

