Notes of the EVIDENCE Given against the Lord Howard of Escrick To the Grand
Inquest of the Hundred of Edmonton and Gore in the County of Middlesex; Taken
by Sir Charles Lee their Foreman, and agreed to by all the rest of the Jury,
who offered to subscribe their Names as an acknowledgment of the Truth of them.
Mr. Smith's Evidence.
HE heard Mr. Fitz-Harris say to Mr. Everard, That he could give no further
Instructions that night; for that he was to go that night to Knights-bridge,
and when Mr. Fitz-Harris was gone, Smith asked Everard whither Mr. Fitz-Harris
was gone that night? He said, he was gone to the Lord Howard of Escricks House
at Knights-bridge; And further says not.

Mr. Everard's Evidence says, That he asked when he should complete his
Instructions? Fitz-Harris told him, That he could not do it that Night, nor the
next Morning, for that he was to go to Knights-bridge that night, or the morrow
morning; and afterward told him, he was to go to the Lord Howards of Escrick
at Knights-bridge; and Fitz-Harris came the next day toward night, and
completed the said Libel, and corrected it in several places: And Mr. Everard
says, at the finishing of this Libel, Fitz-Harris gave Everard directions to
take the Quaeries out of a Printed Pamphlet called, The Intercepted Letter to
Roger L'Strange, and to insert them into the said Libel.

Mrs. Fitz-Harris says, She saw the Lord Howard at her Husband's Lodgings
(some short time before her Husband was made Prisoner) deliver a Paper to her
Husband, and said, They were notable Heads; and withal said, That when those
things were put in order, the People would rise, and then they would seize the
King, and keep him until he had passed the Bill of Excluding the Duke of York,
and settling the Succession upon the Duke of Monmouth. And says, (reading the
Paper left in her Husband's Chamber by the Lord Howard,) she remembers these
Expressions in that Paper; As it was the undoubted Right of the People to
oppose a Popish Successor, so it was to oppose a Possessor that would follow
evil Council, and not be ruled by his Parliament: At which time Mr. Fitz-Harris
called for a Pen and Ink* and told his Wife that he had promised not to deliver
that Paper in that hand; and she asking whither he was going? her Husband
answered, He was going to Mr. Everard's Chamber to have that Paper drawn up.
And before the Lord Howard went out of Mr. Fitz-Harris's Chamber, Mr.
Fitz-Harris asked the Lord Howard what he should do for money? to which the
Lord Howard replied, Let me alone for that: And that within a day or two her
Husband brought home the Libel to his Wife, and read it to her; upon the
reading of which, she asked him whether Everard had drawn that Book out of
those few Heads? her Husband answered, Yes; for that Mr. Everard was a man of
Parts.

Mrs. Terrisha Peacock says, that being in her Masters Chamber, or
Dining Room, she found the Lord Howard in the Dining Room, and saw the Lord
give her Master a Paper, and told him it was a notable thing, and bid him read
it; and said, If this were once Published about, the People would rise, and
then we will seize upon the King, and keep him, until such time as he passes
the Bill, concerning the Exclusion of the Duke of York; and settle the Crown
upon the Duke of Monmouth; And Mr. Fitz-Harris asking him what he should do for
Money? The Lord Howard said, Mr. Fitz-Harris should have enough within a Week;
and she says, he gave it for his Wife to Read; and after she saw her Master
Copy it out; and asking whether he would come in to Dinner? He answered, he had
earnest business at Gray's Inn, whither he was going.

This was the true Evidence given before Us Gentlemen of the Grand Inquest,
June the 21. 1681. Charles Lee. William Blucke. Jos. Beale. John Nichol.

This is a true Copy of the Original Paper.



LONDON, Printed for S. Carr, 1681.


