THE RAVENS Almanacke

Foretelling of a Plague, Famine, and Civil War.

That shall happen this present year 1609. not only within this Kingdom of
great Britain, but also in France Germany, Spain, and other parts of
Christendom.

With certain remedies, rules, and receipts, how to prevent* or at least to
abate the edge of these universal Calamities.

LONDON Printed by E. A. for Thomas Archer, and arto be sold at his Shop in
the Popes-head-Pallace nere the Royal Exchange. 1609.

To the Lions of the Wood (the young Courtiers) to the wild Buckes of the
Forest (the Gallants and younger Brothers) to the Hearts of the field, and to
all the whole Country that are brought up wisely, yet prove Guls: and are
borne rich, yet dye beggars: the new English Astrologer dedicateth his Ravens
Almanacke.
O You Lions of the Wood! (you young Courtiers) that are kept warm under the
wings of Princes and Kings of Christendom, well may I call you the Lions of
the Wood: for this year of 1609. shall you range up and down the woods,
Pa^ks, and Chases, which were left unto you by your ancestors, full of tall
trees: that stood like so many a^medmen to defend your noble houses from
falling, and your Country from the cold storms of winter: But now I say and
prophecy it (with a Rauen-like voice) that like Lions robbed of their y^ung,
shall you go up and down madding and raging to see your ancient honors
defaced and the memory of your forefathers buried as it we^e (so far forth as
the cruelty of these latert deuowring days could reach unto) even under the
roots of whose stat^ly Oaks, whose glories they* raised to a full height, but
now have their heads hid beneath the earth. The property of a Lion is to fear
a Cock; So likewise shall you this year (if not be afraid) yet be loa^h to
hear the vo^ces of Me^cers, tailors, haberd a sher^, Sempsters, etc. who like
Cocks, will (I gather by the rules of my Art, stand crowing betimes at your
Chamber doors for money. And like a Bell-man (with papers in their hands) watch
to strike you down with heavy and unconscionable Items. Gather your selves
therefore together in herds, and like Lions indeed fright them with your
subtle looks, or else like Elephants carry whole Castles on your backs, and
furnish those Castles with good store of gold and silver, so will they be
affraide to assault you: let not your strength or courage lie altogether like
the Lions in your tail, but rather in the pawe: Stretch forth that boldly, and
whatsoever it faste^^ vpp^n (albeit it should be a whole Lordship, yet let it
not go till you have torn it in sunder, and made it more level then
Salisbury-plaine: and O you the wild Buckes of the Forest (I mean the
Gallants and younger Brothers of this or any other kingdom) look that you
p^eserue well the horns of that abundance, left unto you by your scraping and
careful Fathers, least they tall into the hands of Vsu^ers (who c^mmo^ly are
the keepers of your Lands) as forfei^s, or rather (as their fees) make the
pales of their parkes where you run hye: that neither you breakeout of them,
nor others break them down, and so sctter you. Suffer no rascal dear to
run amongst you, that is to say, no Pandars, Buffons, English Guls, nor
Parasites: bear up your hea^s bra^ely, and not too proudly, for I find by the
coniu^ction of some planets, that this year many of you (...) hunted by
Marshalls men, Bayliff^s and C^tch-poles: and that some will be d^iuen to take
soil in the bottomeles ^uers of the two Counters, they will so hard^ be
pursued either by Gray hounds of that bre^d, orelse by Flee^e-houndes, whose
feet (...) swift and sent as good. I find likewise that a number of you will
fall into certain toiles, which shall be pitched day and night for you by
certain greedy hunters called Punckes: they are not much differing from
witches, for they take upon them sometimes the shapes of beasts, and being
amongst your heardes are struck in steed of D^es, but they prone barren Does,
yet are they of the nature of Dogs, and more nimble then Norfolk tumblers, and
more eager then blood-houndes, if they have their game before them.

(O you likewise the hare^ of the field!) that is to say, the Pun^es and young
Frye of the L^we, to you among the rest does my Raven open her bill: listen
therefore to her ominous voice, for she prognosticateth that many plagues will
fall upon you. Read you only the Dogdaies of this Almanacke, for when the
Sun enteret^ into Leo, and that is in the middle of the year, and out of
Term time, you shall find it will be exceeding hot walking up and down
Fleetstreet or Holborne, especially for those that all this last Christ^uas
have given out in Cheapeside amongst the Mercers, that they must be Reuelle^s.

It is threatened also by those caelestiall influences, that work no^ in heaven
for nothing, that you will this year by reason of certain bitter frosts which
shall drive you to drink burnt sack, rather desire to plead at a Tavern
bar, and wra^gle for a reckoning, then at a Westminster bar, and wear your
Gowns thred-b^re, by should^ing one another about Clients causes, and that yet
notwithstanding you shall so ply the cases of the common Law that you shall
no^e as well in term time, as in the vocati^n, till you have no feathers left
on your backs, howbeit I note and find it w^itten by an old jewish Rabben,
that you shall be lusty enough for all your sweating and moilings and so full
of hea^th, that you will scorn to keep your beds, but for more security* put
the brokers of Long lane in trust to keep them for you. I read likewise that
you will be so (...) with vain glory, fantasticallitie, Pride, Bragatisme,
Apishnes of wit, Rediculous Manners, swaggering and a thousand such byangles,
that you will be glad to leave all form, (like a Hare being frighted with the
ye^ping of a kennel of hou^ds.) Besides it is quoted by the best-Star-gazars,
and (...) egregiously weather-beaten to this science, ^oth as I remember,
consta^ly affirm it, that Little ton (for all his lay^e), shall in Mi^haelmas
Term next, be not only thrust out of Commons, but being found lying poorly
(in a plain suit of Sheepes-skin) upon a Stall, shall not be worth six pence.

As for you that are to be my quarter Patrons, or the fourth shares in this my
dedication, you that are the meet sons of Citizens, who never heard any
musicque but the found of Bow-bell^ you that al your lives time scarce travail
to Gra^esend, because you are sworn to keep within the compass of the
freedom: You whose wits rests only for two ways, money, and to bear offices
in the parrish. I place you in the latter end of this preface to the Ravens
calendar, though you deserve to stand like Dominicall letters (at the beginning
of every week in red, because you a^e of the golden age, or rather you are
the Golden number to 1609. Yet give me leave to tell you that this year will
bring many miseries upon your heads, yet shall it happen well enough to many
of your fraternity, because even when those storms are upon coming, which
by all Astrogicall predictions must happen, you will be sure and so wise, as to
hide your heads, and not put them out a doors. Beware of combinations,
conspiracies, and copartnerships, knit amongst your selves for the surprising
of Plutus the God of ^iches: for let the league be never so strongly tied, yet
it is thought that at the least four times in the year ^ome of you will
break.

To bring which stratagem the better to pass, I mean that of undermining,
breaking in upon you, and blowing you up, I find that not only Co^rtiers but
^lso Captains and your best men of war, will never give over till they be
great in your books and when you have put most trust into them, then will they
get the gates of the City, issue bravely forth to save themselves, leaving
you to the me^cy of your cruel even i^e, Serieants and Creditors.

Thus have I drawn a pair of Indentures. quadrupartite betwe^ne you my
worthiest and most openhanded Patron^, sealing you up all four together, in
the bonds of my l^ue. I bestow upon you this first chicken of mine, hatched
out of my Astronomicall braine-pan: and because every Almanacke makes as it
were a Stage Play of the year, dividing it into fourepartes, or rather plays
the executioner with it, by cutting it into quarters, To each one of you do I
therefore send a quarter: climb up then and behold what nest my Raven has
builded (this year 1609.) But carry the minds and manhood of true Patrons,
neither suffer any critickes to pluck off her feathers, nor offer you unto her
that indignity your selves. And thus because much foul weather is toward (if
any Calender tell no lies) and that I am loath to have you stand in a storm, I
bid you farewell, dated the 1. Ides of the first month of this first great
Platonicall and terrible year. 1609.

^. Deckers.

THE Ravens Almanacke.
The Dominion of the Moon in Man's body. Aries The head and face.
Gemini Arms and shoulde^

Leo Heart and backet

Libra Reins and lines.

Sagitari the Thighs Aquarius ^egges.

Taurus Neck^ and throat. Cancer. Breast stomach and Lunges. Virgo ^uts and
belley,

Scorpio secrets and bladler,

Caprico nus the knees.

pisces The Feet.



AT the beginning of every Almanacke, it is the fashion to have the bo^i^ of a
man drawn as you see and not only ^aited, but bitten and shot at by wild
beasts and m^nsters, And this fellow, they that lie all the year long (that is
to say, those that deal with Kalenders) call the Man of the Moon, or the
Moons man, or the man to whom the Moon is mistress But how rediculous a shape
do they bestow upon the silly wretch? he stands as if he had been some
notorious malefa^or, and being stripped stark naked, to go to execution: do not
those Roundels hang about him, show like so many pardons, tied to the parts of
his body with Labels? or rather does he not look (when he lies along) like a
thee^e begd for an Anatomy in Surgeons Hall, so many Barbers figured in those
beasts (slashing and slycing, and quartering and cutting him up, truly he
does.

But why (in the name of the moon, and the rest of the Planets) do both our
Neotericall and the more antique Astronomers, publish every year in print,
that every man's body dwells thus at 12. Signs? Is man such an ass that he
cannot find his own self without ye help of so many signs? or were there
none but tradesmen in the world, when Almanacks were first invented? for all
men know, that Noblemen, Gentlemen, and those of the best and foremost ranckes
in any commonwealth use to dwell at no sign at all: much labor therefore me
thinks might be saved by the Printers every year, and much cost by the
Stationers, if they would cross this poor creature out of their books. For
what Cuckold (unless his horns hang too much in the light of his wit^ will
not swear that Aries (which signifies a Ram) does govern the head? Is he not
thereuppon in mockery, or rather to put him in mind of the points of the
Ravens Almanac (called a Ram-headed Cuckold? And what Butchers wife, (nay almost
what Butchers Dog) or what gamster that loves the Beare-garden, but knows that
Taurus (the Bull) dominieres over the neck, yea, and sometimes breaks the neck
of the strongest Mastiffe that sets upon him? Will not the least Fishmongers
boy assure you (either in lent or in the open times) that Cancer the Crab, is
very good meat for the breast, Stomach and ribs: else wherefore should our
Letchers buy them up so fast? And I pray ask any Wench if she once ariue at
thirteen, if Virgo (the Uirgin) bear not a great stroke over the bowels and
the belly? As for the secret members, it may well be said that Scorpio (the
Scorpion) has to do with them because many times in the year they are bitten
as it were with the stings of Scorpions, for their evil doing. And wisely did
the Moon appoint (in the lowerhouse of heaven) that Capricornus the Goat,
should govern the knees of Gemini^ for the Goat being of all Beasts most
letcherous, it is a morrall, that those men who run after nothing but wenches,
must (by course of nature) be brought on their knees. Now that Gemini (the
Twins) have a hand over the arms and shoul^ers, (either of man or woman:)
every woman that has had two children at a b^rth, or every countri^ Nurse
that has given suck to a couple at one time, will I am sure testify. Then
does Leo, the Lion rule the heart and back: the meaning of which is, to make
men ashamde of cowardice, whose hearts are no bigger then chickens hearts: But
what Gr^cer, Silkeman, Apothecarie, or any other that handles the Scales of
City Justice, but can swear, and all the world knows they never swear but
truly, that Libra, the Balance, holds the measure of the Reins and Loins: for
if, those members have not their full weight, all the body paies for it. As
for the Things, over which Sagitarius the Archer, carries sway, any Fletcher
in Grub-streete, or any that ever shot in a Long-bows, either at Buts or at
Pricks, will if the case were to be decided, stand to the proof thereof. The
Legs are next, and that those are gouernd by Aquarius, the Waterman, any
Sculler, whose legs get his living by a Stretcher, will not deny it. We are now
as low as the feet, whose steps are guided by Pisces, the two Fishes, any man
that walks into Fish-streete for a fish dinner, knows the morrall of that.

And thus have I shown unto you the right natures and meaning of these
Celestial governors, according to that true and new doctrine of the Science
Astroiogicall, whose mysteries have been for the good of this year 1609.
revealed to me: and therefore do I request you my Countrym^n especially, for
whose benefit I have made only this privy search amongst the Stars, to
account al other quarterings of man's sinful body, as barbarous and butcherly,
and the rules that teach how to do it, frivolous and rediculous.

The twelve months of this year. 1609.
NOw if I fought under the coulors of vulgar Astronomers should I strike up my
drum, and lead into the field the 12. months, marching in single File one
after another, every month wearing in his Cap, insteede of a F^ather, four
vnha^some rymes, teaching men when to eat hot meats, and when to drink n^w
wines with every gull (that has money in his purse, and hunts out any (...)) can
do^ without a Calendar.

Then should eu^ry month have his followers, some of them being thi^tie in
n^mber, some ^1. only one (by ^ailing into decay, or else because he keeps
but a cold house, keeping but 28. And amongst these Seruingmen or retainers,
should I give you the names of the Geutlemen who go in red, and wea^e
Dominicall Letters on their winter and Sommerliueries, as badges to disti^guish
their month from the rest: but scorning to have a hand in g^^uding such base
c^llours, suffer me to carry up your thoughts upon nimbler wings, where (as if
you sat in the most p^rspicuo^s place of the two-penny Gallecy, in a
playhouse) you shall clearly, and with an open eye behold all the parts,
which I (your new Astrologer) act amongst the Startes, and those are these:

The worky-daies of every month this year, shall not be kept as they have
been in years before: for by means of certain disease that are likely to
reign amongst tradesmen, as the lazy evil, the Letharg^e, which is a forget
fullness of our own estate: dizines of the head, (caused by the fumes of good
drink) and such like: Men of occupations shall in spite of order or the rules
of Almanacke-writers, turn wor^y-dayes into holly-da^es: yea, and women shall
this year hold holy days in such base contempt, that though their husbands
do then shut up shop, and utter not their wares, yet shall the wives fall to
work in their secret Chambers.

Amongst Gentlemen that have full pursses, and those that cry trillil, let the
world slide, the week shall run out so quickly and so merrily, that on the
Satterday ^orning it shall be hard for them to tell whether the day that went
before were friday.

The same loss of memory will fall upon many that shall go drunks to bed: but
to those who shut themselves up in Counters and other places of dear reckning,
because they hate the vanities of the world, And to those that shall be whipped
either with French birch, or be struck with any English disease, the shortest
day in winter shall seem more teadious, yea, and indeed shahllaue more hours
thyn Saint Barnabies day, which is the longest in the year: The sundaies, (as
if it were Leap years) shall b^ a number be leaped over, so that a blindenes
falling into their eyes they shall not for four or five, or sire mone^hs
together, be able (by the help of those that make the best waters to reco^er
sight, or to cure sore eyes) to see a Church, but shall be struck with such
Megrims and turnings of the brain, that instead of going to Church, they will
(if my Art fall me not) stumble into ^ ^^uerne. The Dog days will all this
year reign thrice, or twice every week at least, and that very hotly, but
their soarest rage will be about the Beare-garden.

As touching the r^sing and setting of the Sun, it will be more strange this
year then ever it was: for albeit he shine never so brightly in our Horizon
yet there are certain persons (and those no small fools neither) that shall
not have power at high noone to be^ol^e it. The Moon (like a Bowl) will keep
her old byas, only she will be very various in her influence: for as well
men as women shall be more mad in the other quar^ers then in that wherein
are played such tricks by the Midsommer Moon.

I have a months mind to travel thus through the whole year, but the glass
which time bestows upon me, being not ^ed with many hours, I must he^re
hoyst up new Sails, and discover (as it were four several countries) the
four Seasons of the year.

A Description and prediction of the four quarters of the year. 1609.
Of Winter.
VVInter, the sworn enemy to Summer, the friend to none but Colliers and
W^o^mon^ers: the f^^st-bitt^n churie y^ hangs his nose still over the (...) dog
that bites ^^uites, and the devil that cuts down trees, the unconscionable
binder up of Uint^ers Faggots and the only consumer of burnt Sack and Sugar:
This Cosen to death, further to sickness, and brother to old age, shall not
show his hoarie baldpate in this climate of ours according to our usual
computation, upon the 12. day of ^ecember, at the first entering of the Sun
into the first minute of the sign Capricorn, when the said Sun shall be at
his greatest South Declination from the Equinoctial line, and ^o forth, with
much more such stuff then any mere Englishman can understand: no my
countriemen, never beat the bush so long to find out Winter, where he lies
like a beggar shiuering with cold, but take these from me as certain, and
most infallible rules, know when Winterplomes are ripe and ready to be gathered.

When Charity blows her nails, and is ready to starve, yet not so much as a
Watchman will lend her a flap of his freeze Gown to keep her warm: when
tradesmen shut up shops, by reason their frozen-hearted Creditors go about to
^ip them with beggerie: when the price of Sea-cole rises, and the price of
men's labors falls: when every Chimney castes out smoke, but scarce any door
opens to ^ast so much as a maribons to a Dog to gn^w: when beasts ^ie for want
of fodder in the field; and men are ready to famish for want (...) in the
City: when ye first word that a Wench speaks at your coming into her Chamber
in a morning is, Prithee send for some fagots, and the best comfort a Lawyer
heates you withal is, to say, what will you ^giue me? when old men and their
wives divide the holy bed of marriage; When gluttons blow their P^ttage cool
them: and Prentices blow their their nails to heat them: and lastly when the
Thames is covered over with ice, and men's hearts caked over and crusted with
cruelty: Then may thou or any man be bold to swear it is winter.

Now because I find in the Ephemerides of heaven, certain unlucky Critical,
and dangerous days set down, whose foreheads are full of plagues, and under
whose wings are hid other dismal miseries, that threaten this Region: It shall
not be amiss if first I open the bosom of Winter, and show unto you what
diseases hang upon him.

I find therefore that.12. great and grievous plagues, shall e^pecially fall
upon the heads of this our English nation: and those are these, viz.

1. Saint Paulus plague is the first, yea, and one of the heauiest, and that
is, when a man has never a penny in his pursse, c^edit with his Neighbors, nor
a hole to hide his head in: alack, how many poor people will lie languishing
of this disease? how many that have bowling Alleys, nay, how many that walk in
the middle I Will of Paul's in reasonable good clothes, will be struck with
this plague? it is hardex to reckon them, then to reckon up the Uertues of a
woman which are without end.

2. Saint Chads plague is next, and that is, when a man that travels has a
long journey, a tired horse, and little money: this plague threatens many poor
Yorkshire Clyents, and, unless they keep it off with their hooks, some
welchmen.

3. Saints Benets plague is the third, and that is, colde-cheare, hot words,
and a Scoulding wife: many Cobblers will be subject to this disease, but not lie
long for it, but every day be of the mending hand, marry it is thought their
wives will prove worse and worse.

4. Saint Magnus plague is next, but not altogether so dangerous as the former,
and that is, when a man is rich, enioyes it but a while, and leau^s a fool
behind him to spend it: It is doubted that some rich Citizens and others
cannot escape this plague.

5. Saint Tronions plague steps into the fifth place, and that is when a man is
old in years, yet a child in discretion: when his wife is a drunkard, and
his daughter a Wanton, and his Servant a pilferer, this plague is expected to
fall upon brokers, their bodies being subject to much infection, and their
consciences to corruption, So that it is thought Lord have Mercy upon us will
stand on most of the doors in Houns^itch and Longlane, and that people who
love themselves, will shun those places and those persons, as being able to
poison a whole City.

6. Saint Bridge^s plague is likely to be very hot, and that is, when a
Maideis ^aire and has no portion, of ripe years, yet troubled with the green
sickness, and longs for a husband, yet nobody woes her. This plague of all the
rest, though it will spread far, yet will it prove so mortal, because those
that shall be struck with it, have a trick to help themselves.

7. The wives plague follows in the seau^nth rank, and that is, when a woman
has a husband y^ is very poor, yet Iealious young, yet a hasty fool.
Seruingmens wives is thought will die of this disease or if not dye yet lie for
it a long time.

8. The Black plague is when a man has much to pay, little to spend, and an
unmerciful Creditor: this black plague will fly over into the Low Countries,
and sorely trouble our English Soldiers, who feed upon prouant, and take
more care how to wipe of Oes in chalk, the^ to win a town from the enemy.

9. The Friars plague, is no holy Plague, but a hollow plague, and that is
when a man sees or smells good cheer, has an excellent stomach, but knows not
how to get it: if any complain of this sickness, it will be the Guard, and
those that are the bare attandants at Court, or else such as walk snuffing up
and down in winter euenings through Pye^corner, yet have no silver to stop
Colon.

10. The devils Plague is one of the most damned plagues of all, and that is,
when a man is married to a wanton, must be beholden to his enemy, yet dares
not be revenged. The tokens of this plague will stand thick upon a number of
young banck^outs, who have had dealing with Courtiers.

11. The Horn plague is too well known, and so comm^n, that albeit it be
incurable, yet none can dye of it: that ^^ing plague takes a man first in the
head, and he ^ickens of it, that is a Cuckold, a Wittall and a Suff^agan: In
verrie many parishes will there he houses infected with this pestilent disease.

12. Gods plague is the last and the most heavy, and that is when a man has
much wealth and no conscience, cont^nuall health, but is past grace, and can
talk of God, yet keeps company with the ^^uill This plague sore strikes to the
heart, and will st^cke by many, enen of the better sort: Besides these Capital
Plagues there be many boyles, Carbunckles and blisters (not so mortal as the
other) that will lie sucking the bones of the common people* For Hackney-men
are likely to smart this year, in letting out good Horses to Citizens, and
having them turned home like tired Iades, the reason being that Citizens,
Scholars and Sailors, think a horse never goes fast enough, though he run a
maine gallop, and no sooner are they set in the saddle but they ride post.

And slthe^ce upon Saint Lukes day bitter storms of wind and ^aile are likely
to happen about Cuckolds haven, it foresheweth a strange mortallity amongst
Caterpilliers, especially toward Catch poles, who this year shall dye so
thick, that in all the 24. wards in London, nor in all those 109. parishes
that stand in those wards, will there ^ee found one honest man living of that
clapping vocation.

Take heed you my nimble fingred Gentlemen, that come to your possessions by
five and a reach: you Foistes, Nips and Cony catchers, that sit at Duke
Humphreis own table, and turn^ your commodities into money upon the Exchange: I
aduize you all to purge your ^oules, and let blood your consciences, for
otherwise a Hempo^ plague will so hang upon you, that the pest-cart of Newgate
will carry your bodies away in heaps to be buried under Tyborne.

O you common Fiddlers likewise that scrape out a poor living out of dried Cat^
^uts: I prophecy that many of you shall this year be troubled with abominable
noises and singing in your heads, insomuch that agreat part of you shall dye
beggars, and those that survive shall feed upon melody for want of meat,
playing by two of the clock in a frostie morning under a ^indow, and then be
mocked with a (...) tied (through a hole) to a string, which shall be (...) to
make it Iingle in your ^a^s, but presently be drawn up again, whilst you rake
in the (...) for a largess.

O you generation of Apes without tails, made so only to make (...)! you
Players that cry out your commodies: you that feed upon the honey of other
men's wits, yet have nothing in your bowels but gall: a pestilent (...) will run
over all your bodies: look therefore to your selves betimes, and let some
skilfull-water-caster toot upon your vrinall: cast away a groat upon your
selves, for many have been cast away upon you: four penny worth of physic
may do you four pounds worth of good, for I spy by your colors that you are
infected with pride, loosenes of life, Inconstancy, ingratitude, and such like
crude and indegested humors, and reumaticke diseases* So that both P^olomy and
Auicen set this down as a principle, that Saint Iulians plague (which is not
dreampt amongst you yet) shall light on your heads, And that is, you shall
wear gay clothes, carry lofty looks, but a number of you (especially the
hirelings be with empty purses at least twice a week. But if any of you be
so provident as to Phlebotomize, or to buy pills to euacuate these rotten
infectious impostumes, yet he shall not escape this plague, he shall be glad to
play three hours for two pence to the ^asest stinkard in London, whose breath
is stronger then Garlic, and able to poison all the 12. penny rooms: you see
a far of how sharp a winter we are like to have, let us now try if the
spring will proou^ any more cheerful.

Of the Spring.
SPring, the Bride of the Sun, the Nose-gay giver to weddings, the only and
richest Hearbe-wife in the world: the rarest Gardner, sweetest perfumer,
cunningst Weauer, noblest Musition, for all sorts of Birds are her Scholars,
this mother of health, physician to the s^cke, Surgeon to the wounded: this
daughter of plenty, and Sister to Summer, comes not in attired in her green
roabes, as it is published in print, upon the 10 day of March, as it were in
Maies triumph after the sun (with an Herculean Uigor) has conquered his twelve
labors, and (like a skillful Charioteere) has driven his golden wagon through
the twelve signs, ready on that tenth day (as some give out) to begin his race
again, by making his entrance upon the first minute of the Equinoctialt sign
of the Ram whose horns stand in such an even proportion a sunder that the day
and night take them for their measure, and are contented to be of an equal
length.

But shall I tell you at what sign the Spring dwells? cast up your eyes and
behold, for by these marks shall you know her when she comes. When the
nightingale ^its ^inging with a brier at her breast, and the adulterer (that
ravished Philomell) sits singing at the Thorns which prick his conscience:
When young tears put on new liueries, and old whoremongers pull off vizards of
their vices: when the earth bears all kinds of flowers, and the Courts of
Princes bring forth all sorts of virtue: when Gardens begin to be dressed, and
the Church to be mended: when beasts wax wanton by nature, (without violating
her laws,) only to multiply their kind for the good of man: and when men no
longer put themselves into the shapes of beasts. Then and only then do the
vernall gates fly wide open, then may thou be sure to swear it is the
Spring.

But as your fairest faces has often times the sowlest b^dies, so this
beautiful daughter of old Ianus (who is Master Porter to the twelve months)
is by dealing with some few unwholesome Planets, thought not to be free from
diseases. A spice therefore of one plague or other, will lie in her tender
bones, by with means the spring to some people (especially the French, and as it
is thought the English cannot go scot-free) prove as fatal and as bus^e in
privy Searches, as the fall of the Leaf.

The breasts of this delicate young bedfellow to the Sun will so flow with
the Milk of profitte and plentye, that (of all other men) players, by reason
they shall have a hard winter, and must travel on the hoof, will lie sucking
there ^or pence and two pences, like young Pigges at a Sow newly farrowed.

It is like wise thought that in this time of copulation between the planets
and the earth, (...) years will grow up so thick that they will scarce live one
by another, and most of them shall be to their Clients as ^a^es are to a field
of Corn, they shall prosper best when they choke those by whom they are
nourished: yet on the contrary side shall maiden-heads be so scant, that if
five hundred be to be had over night, four hundred and nine teens of those
will be struck of before the next morning.

The disposition of this season is to be hot and moist: by which means those
moist-handed creatures, whose bloods begin to feel warmth, when the spring of
desire boyles; within them, shall have the other quality likewise, they shall
be hot in their tongues: But if any woman happen to fall into that pestilent
infirmity, let the poor man upon whose hands any such light commodities
lies, apply this medicine, for it is apresent cure.

A Medicine to cure the Plague of a woman's tongue, experimented on a Cobblers
wife.
A M^^y Cobbler there was, (dwelling at Ware) who for joy that he mended men's
broken and corrupted soles, did continually sing, so that his shop seemed a
verrie bird cage, and he sitting there in his foul linen and greasy Apron,
showed like a black bird. It was this poor Sowters destiny not to be hanged,
but (worse then that) to be married: and to what creature think you? to a
fair, to a young to a neat delicate country Less, that for her good parts
was able to put down all War^: but with all this honny that flowed in her, did
there drop such abundance of gal and poison from her Scorpio^-like tongue,
that monsieur Shoo-mender wished his life were set upon the shortest last, and
a thousand times a day was ready to dye Caesar's death: O valiant Cordwaynerland
to stab himself not with a bodkin, but with his furious Awle, because he knew
that would go through stitch: he never took up the ends of his thread, but
he wished those to be the ends of his thread of life: he never parde his
patches, but he wished his knife to be the sheeres of the fatal Sisters
three, he never handled his Ball of wax but he compared them to this wife,
and sighe^ to think that he that touches pitch, must be de^^led.

Now did his songs as heavily come from him as music does from a Fiddler, when
in a Tavern he plays for nothing. Now did sig^eur Cobbler stand no more on his
pantofles, but at his shutting in of shop, could have been content to have had
all his neighbors have thrown his old sho^es after him when he went home,
in sign of good luck.

But alas, he durst not do that neither, for she that plaide the Devil in
woman's apparel (his wife I mean) made her Caualero Cobbler, to give her
account every night of every patch that went through his fingers. In this
purgatory did our graduate in the Gentle craft live a long time, but at lenght
he was thrust into hell, for his wife (not following the steps of her husband,
who was ever on the mending hand, but growing from bad into worse) cast as^de
her Wedding stockings, and drew on a pair of yellow hose: then was my
miserable Cobbler more narrowly watched the^ a Mouse by a Cat, or a debtor by a
Catch-pole: he durst not unlock his lips afte^ a We^ch, but his teeth were
ready to fly out of his head with her ^eating: to have touched any Petticoate
but his wife was more dangerous then for a Cat to eat fire: if any maid
brought but her shoes to mending, his wife swore presently that he had the
length of her foot, and that he sowed loue-^^itches into every piece, though
it were no bigger then a Chandlers token.

Wearied therefore with this (worse then a beare-baiting) and being almost
worn to the ^are-bones, his heart fretting out even to the elbowes by rubbing
up and down in this misery, At the length my brave boote-haler sifted his
wits to the very bran, for some hook to fasten into his wives ^ostrils, and
the pill which he found either to choke her or p^rge her, was this:

A Doctor of whom all Ware was afraid, because the Uicar of the town sucked
more sweetness out of his Patients whom he sent to him (by reason all that
came under his hands, went the way of al flesh (then out of all his tithe-Pigs)
ha^ned to dwell close by this distressed Cobbler: to him (having saved his water
over night) repaires my reformer of decayed Shoo-leather, betimes in the
morning. The Bonjour being given and returned, the Cobblers water was looked
into, much tossing and tumbling of it there was for a pretty while, and at
last it was demanded whose the Urine should be? Mine (quoth the Cobbler) So it
may be replied our Galenist, for I spy neither any disease swimming about thy
body in this water, and thy verry looks show that thou art sound: Sound,
(cries out the infected Cobbler) alas sir I see now that some diseases have
power to make dunces of Doctors themselves, Sound (quoth a) why sir I am sick
at heart, I am struck with the Plague, I have a Plague sore upon me (your
Doctors Capis not able to cover it, it is so broad) it eats and spreds more and
more into my flesh, and if you apply not some present remedy, Ware must and
shall trudge to some other, when their old shoes want mending, for the
Cobler's but a dead man.

At this the Doctor stood amazed, and wondered that his skill should shoot so
wide as not to find out a grief so common, so dangerous and so palpable:
whereupon he bidding the Cobbler to open his breast, and not to fear to show him
that Plaguesore, where of he so complained: the Cobbler presently told him he
would but step forth of doors, and at his return he should see it: at
length the Cobbler comes back again with his wife ^orne on his back like a
Sow new scalded on the back of a Butcher, and for all her kicking, railing,
cursing and swearing, yet to the Doctor he came with her, crying look you
here Master Doctor, this is my plaguesore that so torments me: in the night
it keeps me from sleep, in the day it makes me mad: in my bed this serpent
stings me, at my board she stabs me, and all with one weapon (her villainous
tongue, her damnable tongue) If I reply she fights: if I say nothing she
raues: if you call not this a plague Master Doctor, then such a plague light
on you Master Doctor teach me therefore how to cure it, or else if you give me
over I shall grow desperate and cut mine own throat.

The Doctor at this laughed, the Cobblers wise rayled, the Cobbler himself bid
her lie still, and held her so long till a number of his neighbors came about
him to behold this seeane of mi^th: all of them (knowing how dangerously the
Cobbler was infected with this mariage-plague, desiring the Doctor to play the
right physician, and to cure their neighbor. The Doctor hereupon swore he
would do it, and stepping into his study he returned immediately with a paper
in one hand, and a fair cudgel in the other, delivering both to the Cobbler,
protesting that neither Gallen, Auarois, nor Hippocrates can prescribe any
other remedy then this, and that if this medicine cure not the womans evil,
nothing can The Cobbler having neither the wrighting nor reading tongue,
requested the Doctor to read the receipt, as for the cudgel he understood
that well enough.

The paper therefore after a solemn O yes by all the standers by was read, and
contained thus much: Take this salve Cobbler for thy Plague Sore,
A crabbed cudgel fits a froward Whore,
Beat her well and thrif^ily:
Whilst she cries out lustily:
Never let thy hand give ore,
Till she swears to scolde no more.


At the end of this, the Audience gave a plauditie, in token they liked well of
the Doctors physic: the Cobbler thanked him, and thus insteede of an Epilogue
spoke to his neighbors, neighbors (quoth, he) you know, and I know, nay the devil
himself knows, that my wife has stuck upon me like a Plague thus many
years, to apply either the sirrop of a Salt Eele, or the oil of holly to her
shoulders, I heatherto was affraid^, because I had no warrant that a man might
lawfullye beat his wife.

But now sithence Ma^ster D^ctor, (who wears not a velvet night cap for
nothing) having turned over his books, finds that no hear^e, mineral, salve,
nor plaster, no purging nor any other blood-letting will cure or take out that
worm under a womans tongue, (which makes her mad) but only a sound beating: I
will (God willing) give her the diet he sets down, and if ever I complain
her^after to any Physician for the grief of this plague, let all Ware laugh at
me ^or an ass, and swear that my wife-weares the breeches.

Upon this resolution bravely does the Cobbler march home, his wife (like a
fury) following, railing, reuiling and casting di^t and stones, as well at him
as at the youths of the parish that went showting after her heels. But being
within doors and the locks made fast by my valiant Cobbler, her tongue served
as a drum ortrumpet to sound an alla^um, whilst my brave desper view prepared
for the onset with a good bast^ado: the assault was not so furious, but the
Cobblers wife was as ready to receive it: to the skirmish fall they pell mell,
the Cobblers Co^ecombe, being first broken, but he being no Welchman (to faint
at sight of his own blood) so plide his business, and so thrash'd out all the
Chafe in his wife (who was nothing but Rye) that in the end she fell on her
knees, cried for the (...) of the Cobblers mercy, and fed upon them hu^gerly he
living ever after more quietly for her scolding, then if he had dwelt in a
Steeple full of bells, that had lost their claps.

Thus much for the universal plagues, that threaten our kingdom this present
year 1609. Now let us arm our heads to bear of the other miseries that are
ready and must (by decree in the upper house in the heavenly parliament) full
upon mankind.

A prediction of Summer. 1609.
SUmmer the Minion of the year, and mistress of the earth: daughter and heir
to the spring, and empress over many kingdoms: whose robes are fields of
standing Corn, and whose crown is a garland of all sorts of fruits: Summer,
the releener of the poor, and Landlady to the rich: the Ploughmans Goddess,
to whom he prays, the Husband man's Queen whom he worships: the filler up of
barnes, the feeder of Birds, the fatner of men and beasts, the treasurer of
the world: the nurse of plenty, the enemy to dearths and famine: Summer, that
is the Saint, to whom Bowyers and Fletchers kneel, in whose praise Archers
send forth show^s, and Hay-makers merry songs. This high colored red lip'd,
lively faced creature, comes not by turn to her coronation, (to take her rule
over the fourth part of the divided year, upon the eleventh day of June
(according to common A^^ronomical computation, when the Sun (the Coachman of
the light) has fetched a carrier up as hie as the utmost and loftiest place of
his ear, namely, to the first degree of the Es^iual Sols^ice (Cancer) which is
his greatest declination to the North, from the Equinoctial, etc. But the
Buckles of the Girdle (with 12. Studs) which he wears, being this year 1609)
turned behind him, and the celestial houses, at which he uses to lie (in his
summer progress) being now removed and builded in other places, I find y^ he
shall enter at other gates, and that these shall be the harbingers to make way
before his coming, or the Heralds to proclaim the time when he is come.

When therefore our aged gran^am (the earth) shall (albeit in her latter days)
be great with child with Corn, flowers and fruits, and be joyfully delivered
of them, yet other creatures (endued with reason) shall be barren of all
goodness: When the heat of the Sun beams, begets gold in the veins of the
earth, yet gold when it is brought forth shall work a coldness in men's hearts:
when Rin^rs shall swel with Springtides, and the fountains of Art and learning
be drawn dry: when sheep fly to broad trees, to defend themselves from the
wrath of heaven under their shades, and when innocence is guarded under the
wings of greatness from (...) rage of oppression, when cuckows sing merrily, and
cuckolds laugh at their own horns: when Courtiers ride the Wild goose Chase,
whilst farmers stand by and praise their horsemanship: when haruesters come
singing from the field, because the corn lies in shea^es: and when Citizens
wives walk to their Gardens, yet bring from thence to their husbands no
Nose-gaies stuck with Rue. These and no other but these are the badges that
Summer wears, and never comes in but when she puts on these li^eries.

And albeit this Lady of the year, be (like her cousen the Spring) of a sweet
and delicate complexion, and that her body is by nature so fruitful, that
still and anon she is in labor ^o bring forth, yet that curse which at first
was laid upon the earth, shall now this year 1609. fall upon her, insomuch
that her lusty and strong limbs shall grow weak by want, and her entra^les be
ready to dry and shrink up to nothing, by reason of a strange famine, that
most assuredly will feed upon her.

Many dear years are set down in our abridgements of Chronicles, but she
face of this shall look more lean then ever did any: I read that in Edward
the 2. time, there was such a famine, that Horseflesh was eaten and held as
good or better meat then some mutton now: and that ^at dogs, were then catched
up as fat pigs at Bartholmew ^ide: yea, that in many places, they had the dead
bodies of their own children to devour them, and that thieves in prison made
roastme^t one of another. In other Kings reigns likewise have I noted other
effects of hunger, as that sheep have been sold at this price: Hogs,
Chickens, Pigs, Geese, Ducks, with all other broodes of poultry-ware, at such
and such excessive rates, which have been lamentable to endure, and ^ragicall
now to rem^mber. But in this year 1609. beasts shall not be sold dear, but
men, yea men shall be bought and sold like Oxen and Cal^es in Smithfield, and
young Gentlemen shall be eaten up (for dainty meat) as if they were pickled
Geese, or baked Woodcocks.

Neither shall the feeth of this famine fear out the gu^s of she poor Farmer
alone, nor shall the Country village cry out upon this misery, but it shall
even step into Lords, Earls, and Gentlemen's houses: Insomuch y^ Cour^iers
shall this dismal year feed upon citizens, and citizens on the contrary side
lay about them like tall trencher-men to devour the Cour^iers. The Clergy in
this greedy-gutted time shall have thin cheeks, for every body shall fleece or
rather vnfleece them, and count it heavenly purchase, to pull feathers from
their backs.

If any complaint this year be made for the scarcity of bread, let none be
bla^ed for it but Tailors, for by all the consent of the Planets, it is set
down that they will be mighty breadeaters, insomuch that half a score
halfpenny lo^ues will make no show upon one of their stals. But least we make
you hungry that shall read of this mise^y, by discoursing thus of so terrible a
famine, let us make have to g^t out of the heart of this dry and mortal
Summer, and ^^ye what wages the year will bestow upon us the next quarter.

Of Autumn, or the fall of the leaf.
Autumn, the Barber of the year, that sha^es bushes, hedges and trees the
ragged prodigal that consumes al and leaves himself nothing, the arrantest
beggar amongst all the four quarters, and the most diseased, as being always
troubled with the falling sickness, and (like a french man) not suffering a
hair to stay on his head: this murderer of the spring this thief to summer, and
bad companion of Winter, scorns to come in according to his old custom, when
the Sun sits like Justice with a pair of scales in his hand, weying no more
hours to the day then he does to the night, as he did before in his Uernal
progress, when he rode on a Ram. But this baldpate Autumnus, will be seen
walking up and down groves, meadows, fields, woods, parks and pastures,
blasting of fruits, and beating leaves from their trees, when common highwayes
shall be strewed with bo^ghes in mockery of Summer, and in triumph of her
death, and when the doors of usurers shall be strewed with green herbs, to
do honor to poor brides that have no ^dwrie (but their honesty) to their
marriage: when the world looks like the old Chaos, and that plenty is turned
into penury, and beauty into ugliness: when Men ride (the second time) to
Bathe, and carry another Cornelius Tub with them, and when (...) fly amongst
hen sparrowes, yet bring home all the feathers they carried out, Then say that
Autumn reigns, then is the true fall of the lease, because the world and the
year turn over a new leaf.

You have heard before of certain plagues, and of a Famine that hang over our
heads in the clouds: misfortunes are not borne alone, but like married fools
they come in couples, A Civil war must march at the heels of the former
miseries, and in this ^uarter will he strike up his drum.

The dissension that happened once at Oxford, Ed.3. Anno. Reg. 29.
between a Scholar and a Uintner, about a quart of paltry wine, was but a
drie-beating, nay rather a flea-biting to this, for Uprore and noise will fill
all Countries, insurrections or risings up will be within the city, and much
open villainy will be without the walls.

The hottest and heauiest War the blackest and bitterest day of battle that
is prognos^icated to happen, shall be between Lawyers and their clyants, and
Westminster Hall is the field where it shall be fought: What thundering, what
threatening, what mustring, what marching, what brauing and out-brauing, with
summoning to parle^s, and what defiance will there be on both sides? dismal
will be these conflicts to some, deadly to others, and joyful to a third sort:
It is not yet doomb'd by the celes^iall arbiters, on whose side the victory
shall fly, but by all Astrologicall likeli-hoods it is thought that the
Lawyers will carry it away (be it but with wrangling) and they that go armed
with buckram bags, and pen and Inkhornes insteede of flaske and touch^boxe,
by the tree sides, you shoot nothing but paper-bullets, will have those that
march with black boxes at their girdles, and bills in their hands, in sudden
and terrible execution.

Another civil war do I find will fall between players, who albeit at the
beginning of this fatal year, they salute one another like sworn brothers,
yet before the middle of it, shall they wish one another throat cut for two
pence. The contention of the two houses, (the gods be thanked) was appeased
long ago, but a deadly war between the three houses will I fear burst out
like thunder and lightning. For it is thought that Flag will be advanced (as
it were in mortal def^ance against Flag) numbers of people will also be
mustred and fall to one side or other, the drums and trumpets must be sounded,
parts will then (even by the chiefest players) be taken: words will pass too
and fro, speeches cannot so be put up, hands will walk, an Alarm be given,
fortune must favor some, or else they are never able to stand: the whole world
must stick to others, or else all the water in the theames will not serve to
carry those away that will be put to flight, and a third faction must fight
like wild bulls against Lions, or else it will be in vain to march up into the
field.

Yea, and this civil mutiny in the Suburbs, and this sitting upon the skirts
of the City, will I doubt kindle flames in the heart of it: for all
Astronomers conclude, and all the books of the Constellations being turned
over, speak thus: that upon the very next day after Simon and Jude, the
warlike drum and ^ife shall be heard in the very midst of Cheapside, at the
noise whereof people (like madmen) shall throng together, and run up and
down, striving by all means to get into Merces, Silkemens and Gold-smithes
houses, and to such height shall this land-water swell, that the 12 Conduits
themselves are like to be set one against another, and not only the Lord Mayor,
Sheriffs and officers, but also many of the Nobility of the land shall have
much a do with their troops of horse, to break through the disordered heaps
of Tradesmen, and others that will on that fearful day be assembled together.
In vain shall it be for any man for to Cry peace, nothing will be heard but
noise, and the faster that fire-workes are thrown amongst these perditious
children, the louder will grow their rage, and more hard to be appeased. Other
discentions, mutinies, rebellions, battles, combats, and combinations could I
here discover to you my countrymen, but doubting that I put your hearts out of
their right places already with too much horror and affrightment, here do I
sound a Retreat, entreating all men (with me) to draw supplications, and to
exhibit them to the whole body of the celestial Counsel, who sit in twelve
houses of heaven, beseeching them, that their influences may be more mild,
that men may not be so mad, and that women may turn from their evil doing.

I have (if you remember) applied certain salues to some of those plagues set
down before, which I thought curable, It shall not be amiss, if now likewise
I ^eate out a plain and level path, in which you may walk safely, as well to
avoid the famine threatened, as to escape perishing in the civil war.

The comfort men have in a time when victuals grow dear or scant, is either to
be well furnished, or else to have the gift of abstinence, and to be content
with little: Now because flesh is a great preserver of man's life, I will show
you one Stratagem how you may get much into your own hands, how to use it when
you have it, and how to refrain from taking of it, albeit your hunger be never
so great: then will I set down other rare medicinable and polliticke receipts,
or rather Warlike engines, by which in time of such civil insurrections as are
this year like to happen, A man or woman may enforce themselves from the shot
of all danger. For I would account that surgeon or that physician, a mad man or
a fool, that coming to me when I am hurt or diseased, and should only tell
me where my sickness lies, or how deep and dangerous my wounds are, but should
not minister physic, or balmes, to recover me (...) therefore I have
discovered unto you, where and how, and with what weapons you shall be
smitten, So do I prepare medicinable compositions to restore you when you are
struck. And he^re they follow.

An excellent Stratagem, how in the time of Famine, to be well provided of
flesh, how to preserve it along time from corruption, and how (when hunger is
most sharp set) a man shall have no lust to fall too, but may grow abstinent.

IN the City of Caliz (being an Island bordering and belonging to the kingdom
of Spain) there was built a College of Friars, amongst whom there was one
lusty Churchman above the rest, who was better limmed then learned, and could
better skill in composing an amorous sonnet then in soing solemn dirges. This
Friar notwithstanding bare such a holy show, was so demure in his manners, and
so covertly cloaked his holiness, that he was supposed the holiest friar of
all the fraternity, and therefore was appointed a confessor to a nunry, that was
famous in this Island, for women of most severe form of life and godly
conversation. Under the jurisdiction of the Abbess, there were some twenty
Nuns, all young, lusty, and full of favor: very devout, and yet not such
recluses, but they had eyes as other seculer women had, to judge of beauty, and
hearts to wish wanton thoughts, which after grew to light (as time is the
discouerer of most hidden secrets:) for it so fell out, amongst these holy she
saints, that one was either more wise or more wanton then the rest, called
Madona barbadora, issued of good parentage, and only daughter, though not only
child to Signieur Peagnes Bontolus, a man of great reputation in the City of
Caliz. This Barbadora coming oftentimes to be confessed of this friar, whose
name was Father Pedro Ragazoni, noted that he was a man of comely personage,
and so began somewhat favorably to conceit of him: til at length friar Pedro
marking her glances, perceived the^ to be amorous, and with that hearing her
sigh sundry times (ere he had confessed her) did straight imagine that either she
was a great sinner, and deeply repentant, or else sore over laden with ye maidens
plague, (which is over large chastity) and therefore so full of outward sorrow
and contrition: the friar taking her one day by the hand as she was alone with
him in a pew, wished her to uncover her face. Barbadora obeying her'ghostly
fathers command, threw off her veil and blushed, which Friar Pedro espying,
^^ssing her cheek, began to salute her in this manner.

fair Nun, and fair maid, as I am your confessor, and have power to absolve,
so if you conceile any sin from me, it will cra^e the greater punishment:
therefore briefelly and faithfully answer me to my question. There be many
sins that trouble maids which may be eas de, if they be pr^uented by some
friend, or faithful counselor: as unchaste wishes, wanto^ glan^es, amorous
thoughts, and such venial scapes which are ingrafted by nature, and therefore
crave pardon by course, and yet all deserving penance, but seeing they are but
sins of the mind, they are but motions. What say you Barbadora, are you
troubled with any of these trifling follies? The Nun holding down her head,
only answered, she was a woman, and her mothers daughter.

Friar Pedro smelling a pad in the straw, prosecuted thus plesantly. And is it
sweetmaiden (q^. he) for those sins you sigh? oh no holy father (quoth she) for
they be deeper pasions that make me so sorrowful. Why (says y^ Friar) is it
pride, covetousness, gluttony, envy, wrath, sloth, or any such deadly sins
that drive you into those dumps? I would said Ba^badora) I were as free from
all other as from these: Then said the Friar, my life for yours, it is some
woman's plague you are troubled with all, and if it be so, take heed, it is
dangerous, the sin is more easy then the sickness.

I pray you sir says she, what term you tha plague? marry answers the frye^,
that plague is, when a Maiden is fair, young, of ripe years, and has never a
^aithfull friend to her love, but must to great distress dye a Uirgin: that,
that my reverend Confessor, quoth the Nun is my grief^: you have censurd right
of my sorrow, I am troubled, with that burning plague, and if your counsel
comfort me not, I am like to fall into greater inconvenience: seeing therefore
you are privy to my disease, as you are a Ghostly father, and have care of my
soul to absolve my sins (for I hold you as a surgeon) therefore yours be the
charge to provide for the health of my body. The Friar hearing the Nun in so
good a mind whisperd in her ear, but what I cannot tell, but I am sure he
applied such plasters to help her, that she complained no more of the plague
a long time after.

Barbadora being thus set free from her often sighs, could not keep her own
counsel, but she revealed it unto her bedfellow (for the closet of a woman's
thoughts hangs at her tongues end) in such sort discourst the conceit of her
cure unto her, that Iulia longed for the confessing day, (for so was the Nuns
bedfellow called) which being once come, and she in secret with Friar Pedro,
after he had questioned her of many sins, and given much devout and holy
counsel, at last she burst forth into plain terms, and told him she was
troubled with the same sickness her bedfellow Barbadora was, and therefore
craved the like assistance at his hands. The Friar smiling at this, was content
to play the Surgeon to cure this plague, still under the color of auricular
confession, shadowing his villainy, till of twenty Nuns, fifteen were with
child.

At last time began to babble, and the Nuns bellies to grow big, so that before
three months were past, they began to feel y^ for the ame^ding of their
plague, they had a spice of Timpany not long after, the world was quick, that
the Nuns grew big, and to be brief, they feared their fellows should perceive
their fault, and so bewray it to the Abbess, whereupon with a general consent
they all agreed at their next confession to bewray it to the friar, which was
not long before it happened. So Barbadora cunningly dissembling the matter, being
foremost of the rest, because she was eldest and of greatest account with the
Abbess, came to confession. And when friar Pedro began with many a smiling
look, and holy kiss to greet her, and question her about her sins, fetching
a great sigh, made him this answer. Devout father, to make a rehearsal of my
sins is folly; to tell what particular offenses have escaped from me is
needless, because in one brief word, as he that sins in one of the ten
commandments breaks all, so she that by Friar is gotten with Child, has
blemished all her other virtues. And sir, therefore I confess here that my
belly is big, and your sweet sugery has wrought it, so either you must
bestirre your wits to help now at a pinch, or else your discredit will be as
great as my dishonor. The Friar although this motion had greatly amazed him,
yet he would not show it in countenance, least he might discourage his fair
Lemman, but bad her be of good cheer, and not to fear, for he would be charie
of her honor and credit, and salve what was a miss to both their contents. I
sir (quoth. she) were my self only in this perple^ities, I would not doubt of
your pr^sent devise, but there is fourteen more besides my self, all troubled
with the like swelling: what sister, quoth the Friar, and with that he fetched
a great sigh, and said, I have made the old saying true, who sowes shall
reap. I quoth, Barbadora, if it be but a whip and a white sheet, and
therefore good Friar, take heed that your penance be not worse then our
punishment, for your ghostly surgery has brought us to this devilish
sickness. Fear nothing Darling (quoth he and smild) Friars have wit, as w^men
have wills, and therefore doubt not of any conceit, but tell me what is your
greatest care. Marry (quoth she) that the five that are free perceive us not,
and so discover our ^aults to the Abbess. Leave that to me (quoth he) I will
take order for that, to your high content, and so with great comfort to his
holy sister, be sent her away with a kind confession, and took himself to the
rest, who all sung the same song that Barbadora did, which put the poor Friar
to his shifts, but when he had confessed them all, subtly he went to the
Abbess and saluted her, and she returned him as kindly greetings,
questioning how her twelve Nuns profited in virtue. Truly Madam (said Pedro)
well, but amonst twe^ue Disciples, there was one Judas, and when Adam had but
two Sons, one proved a murderer, in Noah's Arc there was one Cham, and where
God has a Church, the devil has a Chapel.

The Abb^sse hearing the holy Father beginning such an enigmaticall exordium,
began to suspect that there was some mischance amongst her Nuns, and therefore
called him into the Dorter, and desired him to bewray unto her what was amongst
the Sisters, the (...) (that had fed upon so much mutton) cunningly began to
ins^nuate himself under the shape of Abacuk, thus Madam you know that it
behooues a confessor to be as secret as severe, and to conceal offenses, as
well as he appoints correction for sins* therefore I may not nor bare not
for mine oath reveal what either I know or they have confessed, but this in
private I give you as a Caueate if they stay long in your Cloister, they will
discredit your house, and bring it in great approbatious question: with that
he named the f^ue honest Nuns, and with a solemn protestation, admonisht the
Abbess as speedily as might be to co^uey them out of the Nun^y with credit.
She thanking the holy father for his care he had of her honor, gave him gold
for his pains, and bad him farewell, still imagining what this matter might
be, and examine them she ^urst not, least they should suspect their confes^or
had discovered their confession, and so upon their complaint bring the Friar to
further trouble, yet willing to have them removed (so to save her house from
blemish) ^he sent for their friends, and dealt so covertly and cunningly with
them, that they were taken home for a time, till further trial of their
fortunes might be had, their friends and parents sorrowful and grieuing, that
they above the rest should miscarry yet conceald all, and shadowed their home
coming by sundry excuse; and yet not so cunningly but the common people began
to imagine diversely of their departure, but none durst censure openly, though
they muttered in secret, so that after many days all was whisht, and the other
Nuns were glad, for all were ^eathered of one wing, and did so closely comfort
themselves, that the Abbess suspected nothing, and Friar Pedro had more free
access to Clergi^ie his holy Uirgins and confessants, and made an agreement
that which of them was brought to ^edde first, should give him their Child,
and he would convey it away to their content and his own credit.

Living thus as pleasantly as a Cock amongst so many Hens, it fell so out at
the last that Barbadoraes good hour was come, and that at such an unhappie
time, that neither the devise of the friar, nor the secrecy of the Nuns, nor
her own policy could save her honesty, for rising as their custom is at
twelve a clock at night to sing certain Himmes. Barbadora in the midst of the
quire fell i^ travel, and though she sought by all means to conceal, and to
bide many sore pangs, yet at last she was feign with a loud alarm to cry hier
then they sung, which the Abbess hearing, s^aid their Mattins and went to
Barbadora, asking her what she ailde, and what extreme disease painde her so,
that she made such heavy shriking? the great bellyed Nun, half dead with pain,
would give the Abbess no answer but oh my belly, my belly, Friar Pedro, Pedro,
oh my belly! the old matron (perhaps in her youth had been cured of the maids
plague) perceived straight where her shoe wrung her, and therefore charged the
Nuns to hold her back, and she played so cunningly the Midwiues part, that
Barbadora was delivered of a pretty Boy, which the Abbess seeing, after she
knew that all danger was past, she raged and railed against the poor Nun,
laying open not only the greeuousnesse of the sin* but also her own
discredit, and chiefly the blemish that should redound to her, to the house,
and all her fellow Nuns, through her only lightness of her life: after she had
almost chaste her self out of breath, she questioned who was the Father, and
Barbadora in great contrition of mind. told her how her holy Father Friar
Pedro did it. The Abbess swearing a mortal revenge against the Friar for the
love she bare to Barbadoras, father Signior Ideaques Bartolos, and for the care
she had, least if this fact were known, her Nunrie should grow in open
contempt, she began to salve the matter amongst the Nuns: I cannot deny sisters
quoth she, but as your how is holy, so the breach of virgin^tie in this case,
deserves no less then hell fire, and without repentance can have no absolute
pardon, for the escape of a Nun is more then of another ordinary Woman, and for
that course only upon suspicion, I removed f^ue of your fellows which I
thought faulty, yet flesh is frail, and women are weak vessels, especially
tempted by such a subtle S^rpent as Friar Pedro is, and therefore the fault is
the less, and the more willingly to be shadowed, so that I charge you here to
conceal the matter both for your own and mine honor: and if any of you all
have been by him persuaded to the like folly, tell it to me now in secret, and I
will be as silent as your selves, to salve and save your honesties. The Nuns
hearing this; all fourteen fell down on their knees before the Abbess and
cried out upon friar Pedro (letcherous Friar Pedro) and cursed him: the Abbess
suspecting nothing of the whole 14. bad them beware not only of him (for he
should no more come within their Dortor) but of all others that hereafter
should be their confe^^ors. Alas Madam (quoth Iuliana) it is to late, for we all
14. are with child by him, marry God forbid (quoth the Abbess) and blessed her,
what (quoth she) 15 at a clap with child, and only by one Friar! Then I see well
the devil is grown devout, when Friars deal their Alms so franckly: but by
sweet S. Anne (said she) I will be revenged on the Friar, and all the Covent
shall pay sweetly for engrossing the market, and buying so much flesh for his
own diet.

So she fell to more strickt examination of them, whether any more friars came
with him or no? and they confessed that he had procured every one of them a
lover, and delivered their names, which she taking note of, deferde not revenge
very long, least suspicion might be had, but thus cunningly sought to acquit
the wrongs proffered both to her and her house: she sent her steward abroad to
buy great provision of victuals, and then her own self went to the Abbot, and
desired that her confessor and 14. of his friends might take part of a feast
which she had provided: the Abbot granted, and the Friars gave her great
thanks, and promised to come, all laughing in their sleeves that she should
give the fair Nuns and them leave to have one merry supper together, seeing in
secret they had so many nights lodging with them. The Abbess went home
smiling, and provided certain tall st^rdy knaves for the purpose, that were
tennants, and belonging to the lands of the Nunry, and conu^ied them all near
unto the back place of the Chapel, and had given them her mind out plainly,
to deal with the friars as she had decreed: and thereupon placed in that back
room fifteen great blocks all standing one by another as orderly as might be.

Having thus fitted all things to the purpose, she put up the Nuns every one
into their Cells, least they should give any inckling unto the Friars of her
determination. At the hour appointed these frolic friars came clad in their
coules with smooth faces, and dissembling hear^s, having great show of prayers
in their eyes, and hope of lechery in their thoughts: but howsoever, the old
stbbesse gave them a most courteous and friendly welcome, telling them that the
Nuns were all this day busy cooks about the Feast, only her self was le^t
to give entertainment: they gra^ulated her courtesies, and she led them all
into a great Parlor, where she caused the Steward to bring them in Wine: then
the place being strong, she went forth and called the Confessor to her, land
then leading him into the back room appointed for the purpose, the tall
knaves laid hold on him, and there stripping him into his shirt they took a
great three forked, nail, and fastened the Friars Dow^ets of dimissories fast
to the block, to the great pain and amasing of the Friar. Well, howsouer he
complained, he could not get any answer of the Abbess, but that she laughed
heartely, and thus by one and one she drew out the Friars, and nailed them
fast in their shirts to the blocks, then laying down by every one of them a
sharp knife, she began to make her Oration thus: Gentle Father Pedro, and you
the rest of the holy Friars, you know the smallest sin craves some penance in
the Lay people, then what do great offenses in Friars? he which knows his
masters will and does it not, must be eaten with many stripes, so you that
know lechery was a deadly sin, and had all by solemn oaths vowed chastity,
have gotten all the Nuns of my house with child. Therefore I in charity have
for your souls health appointed you this penance At that word all the country
fellows set fire in the thach, and the house began so burn: you see (quoth
she) either burn to death, or else here lie knives to free your selves, now it
is at your own choice whether you will burn or geld your selves, and
hereafter endeavor to keep chastity.

The Friars hearing this hard resolution, began with humble looks to entreat
her, but in vain she made them all a low curtes^e and went her ways.

The Friars in great perplexity seeing the house all on fire, and that they
began to fri^ in their shirts, and the house ready to fall about their ears.
Friar Pedro learning first to play the man: took the knife and whipped off his
geni^ories, and away he runs toward the Abbey, and every friar fearing the
fire, played the like part, and away they run bleeding as fast as their legs
would carry them, the fire grew great, and it was perceived a far off, so
that Signior Ideaques Bartolos (Barbadoras Father) espied it, fearing his
daughters mishap, ran thither himself. The Abbot being told the Nunry was on
fire, made no little have for fear of his Friars, and an infinite of other
people being devoutly minded to the Nunry ran thither, and as they went,
Signior Bartolos and the Abbot, met the friars running away in their shirts,
which amazing the^, the Abbot said what news Friar Pedro? what, the Nunry a
fire, and you run away in your shirts, what means this? I know not, I know
not sir (said ^e) we were there late enough, the devil burn house, Abbess,
Nuns and all, and away ^rudged the Covent, every man to his lodging, and
sending speedily for a skilful surgeon, the Abbot with the rest of the
townes-men, and Signior Bartolos came thither, and by y^ time the roof was
pulled down, and all quenched, and they found the Abbess ready to entertain
them friendly. They wondering at this, demanded how the fire came, and what the
reason was the friars run away in their shirts? The Abbess recounted unto them
from point to point, what had happened, and how fifteen of the Nuns were with
child under the shadow of confession, by those 15. friars, and therefore she had
sought revenge to clear her self of that crime, and because your e^es shall
witness what bitter punishment I have appointed them for penance, come all with
me, and so she led them into the back room, where she showed them the knives,
and what the friars for fear had left behind them. At this they all fell into
a great laughter, except Bartolos (who grieved for his Daughter Barbadora) yet
he highlye commended the Abbess for her revenge, and she was honored
through the city: the Nuns banished there religious house, the Friars put out of
these Dortors, and the five poor Nuns that were thrust out (without cause)
entertained again, and ever after the Nunry was in great fame and credit: now
to a second remedy, how to stop the mouth of a Usurer, when his covetousness
complains of famine and cannot be satisfied.

An excellent diet for an Usurer, when his conscience is starued.
IN Rauenspurge, in Germany, there dwelled a Jew that was a usurer, who lived
by ye spoil of his purloining faculty and reapt with ease what others had
purchased with labor, rich he was, and well monied, and ready to lend upon any
reasonable assurance: but as he was sweet to pleasure at the first, so at the
last, whosoever tasted of his favors, found them bees with stings, and fair
panthers with devouring pan^hes, that al his courtesies were but fowlers gins to
bring a bird to the snare, and then to pray upon them like Crocodiles alive,
for this miserable Jew was plyant to the suite of any man, that brought him
either sufficient surety or pawn: but if he broke one minut of his appointed
hour, he took the forfeits with all extremity: gathering thus infinite
treasures into his hands, he grew by this extorting quality to be one of the
richest men in Rauenspurge, yet though his wealth was great, and he in debt to
none, his belly sued an action of trespass (damage five hundredth pounds)
against him, as being indebted to it, in so much for hu^gry meals, and hard
cheer, that he had past over in his life time, for he was not only spare in
his diet, but miserable, gra^ting himself oftentimes, no other then water to
quench his thirst, and feeding upon nothing but the most refuse meat in the
shambles to satisfy his hunger. This Jew called Ioachlm Gorion, thus
flourished and took his only felicity in feeding his eyes with the sight of
infinite treasure not respecting the ruin of many poor men, so he by their
miseries might enrich himself. Whereupon he grew in open contempt, and hatred
of all the people, but as the Fox the more he is ^urst, the better he fares,
so Ioachim the more the poor exclaimed against him, the more his profits and
revenues came in.

At last it fortuned that a Farmer bordering near unto Rauenspurge, being
called Hans Van Limericke, having a sum of money to pay, or else to loose
certain commodities f^ue times worth the value, not knowing how to furnish
himself with so much coin, and finding friends ^^acke in time of necessity,
at length called to mind this wretched Usurer Gorian, and though he knew him
to be a man of no conscience, yet assuring himself how he was able to pay his
money that he borrowed again at the day, was the better encouraged to deal
with him, so that coveting rather to brook an inconvenience, then suffer a
mischief. He went to the house of Ioachim, and broke the matter unto him: the
Jew never denied but friendly promised him to le^d him so much, so he might
have sufficient assurance for his money. Hans hearing this was glad, and said he
meant to lay him his farm, and all his Lands in morgage, with a letter of
defeisance recognized, that all the land should be his, if either he broke the
day or hour. The covetous Jew was content, so that taking a deed of gift
with a prouis^ of him, he tendered down the money, and so fitted and supplied
the Farmers present want, who went home merrily, and dispatched such Creditors
as he was upon that day to discharge. The Jew knowing the Farm to be a pretty
plot, well situated and three times worth the money, wished Limericke dead,
that he might ^reely enter possession of his goods and lands, but it fell out
contrary to his desire and expectation, for the Farmer careful of his day,
because he knew the hard conscience of the Usurer, straind himself and his
friends, and provided the money, and at the time appointed came and brought it
to Gorions house* now the money was to be paid between two and three in the
after noone, which Hans knowing, was there half an hour after two to deliver
his money: the Usurer hearing that he was come, was greatly grieved that he had
kept touch so well, and therefore thought to ouer-reach him with flat poli^i^ke
co^senage, which he performed thus.

The Usurer had a clock in his house, which went with such vices and gim^^als,
that by letting down, a pullie, he could make it strike what a clock
himself would: so that sending down word to him that he would come by and by,
he went himself and straind the pully, and the clock, presently struck
three: whereupon the Jew came down, and demanded of Limericke, what he
would have? Marry sir (quoth he) I have brought you home the money I borrowed
of you, with y^ appoyn^ed loan, and a thousand thanks, besides: promising for
this favor ever to rest yours whilst I live. My money Hans (quoth. he) why do
not know y^ effects of the recognisance? I pray thee at what hours was the
money to be paid? between two and three (quoth Limericke) why so then it is
now past three, and therefore I Will none of the money, but stand to the forfeit
of the bands that are l^st to me by morgage: at this the poor farmer was some
thing amazed, yet thinking tha Jew had but iested, he smild, and began to turn
the money on the board, to tender it: but Ioachim told him flat that he was in
earnest, and would none of the money: why Sir, (quoth Hans) though your clock
has stricken three, by other clock as if is little past two, and therefore I
hope you will not so unjustly stand upon the advantage: the Usurer answered
him that his clock went right and he would take none, upon which they fell at
great debate, till at last other clocks in the town struck three also, which
when the Jew heard he was glad, and bad him if he could count what it was a
clock, to be brief he would not receive a penny, but stood to the extremity
of the morgage.

The poor Farmer grievously perplexed, entreated him with tears, obiecting
that if it were so a minutes breach was not much: but in vain all his
persuasions were bootelesse breathed into the air, for the Jew that had his
heart as flinty as Adament, felt no remorse, but went into his closset, and left
poor Limericke, with his complaints, who sorrowfully going home to his wife,
bewraide the matter unto her, who pertaking her husbands grief with equal
discontent, persuaded him to patience, and told him he had no better remedy
then to make his complaint to the Signorie and rulers of the City, which he
did and called the Jew at a Law day before the judge, and there revealed his case
at large, for might ouercomming right, and money perverting the truth, he went
home with a flea in his ear, utterly undone and beggered, and the usurer
merrily tryumphing in the verdite of his revenues.

This past on a year or two, till at last poor Hans grew to that extreme
want, that he^ had neither money, credit, nor house to put his head in, which
so vexed him, that at length he grew weary of his life, for being fallen from a
man of some account to great contempt by his poverty, he waxed into a kind of
despairing lunacy, and had oftentimes in his melancholy humor slain himself,
had not his wife prevented him by her careful diligence.

While thus Limericke lived in beggars estate with his wife and three small
Children, this Jew (this Ioachim) this wretched Usurer, as he ^ryumphed in his
wealth, was one day suddenly stricken with sickness that he went to his bed, and
there lay till he grew quesie at the heart, and then ^e sent for physicians
whom he greased with gold, and ^ad them spare for no cost, so he might
recover his former health: they applied Potions, Electuaries, Glisters,
Purgations, and Pills, but in vain. Contra vim mortis, non est medicamen in
hortls.

They could find out no simple Herb, Stone nor Mineral, Drugge nor compound
so comfortable, that any way might mittigate his disease, so that growing past
help of man, the Phisitiaus left him, and certain devout men of the town
came to persuade him to God, seeing he was no man of this world, wishing him
to enter with deep insight into his own mind, and to search his conscience
for many wrongs and extorting injuries he had offered to poor men setting
before his eyes the pains of Hell due to sinners, as condign punishment.
Ioachim hearing all, along time with patience answered not a word, but only
desired the^ to depart, and to trouble him no more for a while: which they did,
and he turning himself, lay two or three hours in a tra^ce considering and
repeating in his mind, the infinite wrongs and palpable injuries he had offered
y^ poor, the widow and fatherless, which striking a remorse into his
conscience, seeing he must die, and measuring his sins with the instice of
God, and having no grace to think upon his mercy, he started up, and with his
eyes staring, cried unto his man and said, oh the Plague, the plague, the
plague is here my Ben, the plague: his man thinking he had ra^ 'de for want of
sleep, destred him to be patient, and to leave off those frantic
exclamations. Oh thou of my tribe (quoth* he) I am in my right mind, the plague is
here even in my conscience, in my inward soul, I am worse then Cain or Judas:
I have murdered more then they two by extortion, and therefore I cannot be
saved: the plague in my conscience, my Ben, the plague: his man (although he
hated his master,) and wished him at the Devil, yet to blind the world with
the opinion of a dutiful servant, he presently ran for the chief Burgamasters
of the town, who coming hastily to comfort and counsel him, found him in
this dispairing humor, and could by no means draw him to any hope of grace,
whereupon they left him as he lived, and so gave him over to die, he continuing
still in this melancholy despair. While thus he languished in this mad mood,
Hans and his family harbored in poor estate in the City, and hearing of this
extreme sickness of the I^w, was glad that God had so sharply avenged him of
his enemy: but yet this mishap bred him small help, whereupon desirous to die,
he went, and at an Apothecaries shop bought him a mortal confection, which he
purposed to take to rid him from his present misery.

Having kept it a long while in a Uioll, at last he sat in a great studdy upon
his present hard fortunes, and houering between grace and despair, at last he
resolved to go try now what this Usurer would do, happily (said he to
himself) his sickness has altered his conscience, and his mind is better now
touched with the doubt of death, then when before he had no other thoughts but
upon life, so that I will make experience if he will compassionate my misery,
and make some restitution of that which so wrongfully he detaineth from me.
In this mind the poor man went to Gorions house, and knocking at the door,
be found none there but poor Benjamin, who was almost weary of his life, with
the extreme travel that he had with his lunaticke Jewish Master, and he
poor soul began to turn Christian, and to pity the Farmer, and wished him to
come in.

It may be (says he) grace yet will be sent to him, and the touch of his
extortion will turn his conscience, therefore come unto him, and speak face to
face with him: The Farmer glad of this, came into the chamber and saluted him
in most humble manner. Who is that (oh Ben) says the Jew, that salutes me? It
is sir (quoth he) the poor farmer whose lands you entered upon by a forfeit of
morgage. At that as well as he could, he raised himself up in his bed, and
cried out Uillaine take heed, he comes to rob me, beware of him, look to my
Coffers, to my Gold, to my writings: where are my kepes? Sir (says Benjamin)
they be about your neck: for in his most extremity, no, not till his latest
gasp would he part from them, so that in a covetous lunacy he gropt for
them, held them fast, and cried out the Plague, the Plague, oh Hell, ^ell, the
Devil, the devil.

So his man Ben persuaded him to be quiet and to remember the poor man: the
poor man, I marrye Ben, well said (quod the Jew) where is he? I will give him
his land again, I took from him wrongfully, and then he stood staring him on
the face, he will not live long says his man stay you with him and talk with
him, till I go out and call some neighbors to be with me.

The farmer was content, and so Benjamin went out and left them two together:
as soon as he was gone, the poor man began to instruct him to Godward, and
seeing he was ready to dye, to make restitution of such goods or Lands as he
withheld from any man by extortion.

At this the Iew^ looked on him very ghas^ly, and spyed the Uioll that y^ poor
man held in his hand under his cloak, with that in a rage he cried out what
have thou there in the glass? physic to cool my conscience that burns like
hell, has the Devil sent to heal me.

The Farmer seeing this desperate Jew void of all grace and given over by God
into a reprobate sense, answered him briefly, he has sent me to thee, and vild
Usurer I have brought thee physic from the Devil to help thee. Oh welcome,
welcome says the Jew, what is in it? what is in it? Marie says the Farmer,
there is in it these simples following.

Here are the tears of poor men, distilled from their eyes through the
anguish of thy extortion, and they are made lukewarm with the scalding s^ghes
that throbs from their sorrowful hearts, tempered with the curses of Widows
and Orphans, whom thou have brought to beggary: these boyld with the fire of
Gods wrath, and put up by the Devil into a violl of despair and prepared for
thee to drink, that after thou have taken this potion, thou may go to devil
without repentance.

Then give it me (quoth he) and so he snatched the violl of poiso^ out of the
poor man's hand, and drunk it off, the confection being strong began to
suffocate his senses, that he lay still: perceiving that he could not live long,
thought now, seeing no body was there, to provide for himself: convey any
chests he could not, steal any goods he might not, for he had no opportunity,
and therefore God putting it into his mind, he took pen and paper, and writ
a scedule to this effect.

The Scedule that the Farmer writ.
Ioachim Gorion being whole of mind, though s^^ke in body, touched with remorse
of conscience for the manifest wrongs that I have proffered to insinit poor
men, Widows, and Fatherless Children, hoping that the mercy of God is more
then my sins, do ordain Hans van Limericke my lawful heir and Executor, as a
man whom above all I have most wronged, conditionally that he reward my man
Benjamin, for his faithful service: and for the surplu^age let it be to him
and to his ^eires for ever, of all my goods, lands, Cattles and mooueables, and
that this is my last will and testament, I have thereto set my seal at arms.

Hans Limericke having thus cunningly written it, and being a good pen man, so
excellently well counterfeited his hand that it might not easily be disc^rned,
but the Jew himself had written it: so pulling his seal off from his finger,
he sealed it, and then wrapping it up put it in a purse that hung about the
Jews neck, for Ioachim was already senseless, and lay staring, but the
poison had so suffocated his pipes, that he could not speak.

By that came Benjamin with two or three poor men and Women to watch with
him, whereupon the Farmer took his leave, and his man asked him what news: I
can get no other answer of him than this, that when he is dead, I shall hear
what he will do. At that the Jew looked Ben in the face, and as well as he
could pointed to Hans, meaning how he had poisoned him, but they took it that
he meant some good should be done unto Hans.

After his death, as soon as he was gone, the poison came to the last exigent,
and the pangs of death ^rewe on, and they all perceived that there was no hope
of life, which sorted according to their expectations, for within one half
hour after the Jew died.

As soon as Benjamin saw him dead he shed tears, more for fashion then for
love, and having like a wise Cook lickt his own fingers, that he need no
further legacy to shadow the matter, sent one straight to signify the matter
unto the Burgamasters, that Ioachim the Jew was dead, and seeing that he had
neither made will, nor yet had any kindred that might claim it as his heir,
it were best for them to look for the disposing of his goods.

The Burgamasters coming thither, with a general consent, began to suruay
every chest in the house, and to search each corner putting all into an
inuentory that they ^ound, with ^eing summed together, redounded to an infinite
wealth: besides his lands, leases, and tenements, that he had in the City and
country thereabout: At last missing the keys of certain cheste that could not
be unlocked, Benjamin told them they hung about his neck at his purse, they
wondering at the exceeding covetousness of such a miserable man, smiled and took
his purse, and searching what was in it, found the scrowle which Limericke had
written, sealed with the Jews seal at arms, which when they had well read
over and determined upon, they all censured that God had put some remorse into
his conscience, both to make him heir whom he had so highly wronged, and that
he was in so good a mind to make restitution of his misdeeds; Upon this they
called a convocation in their State-house, they sent after Hans, and by a
general decree, made him lawful inheritour to the Jew, so Hans from a beggar
became richer than any Burgamaster, did many good d^eds to the poor, made
restitution and well rewarded Benjamin, thanking God that the miserable usurer
had couetously gathered and had him to be his heir, whom he never so much as
once dreamt of.

How in a household of civil war, a woman may be safe from a cruel husband.
IN the County of Devonshire, not far from Exceter, there dwelled a
Rope-maker whose name I conceal: this Rope-maker (whom I will call Richard)
was about the age of some forty years, and he was a parlous sour fellow, ill
loved of his neighbors because he so unkindly liked of his wives: for this
jolly companion had bin married to three wives in ten years, and had used them
all so hardly, that he killed them all with kindness.

This brought him in such hatred amongst all his nieghbors, that though he were
a man of verry good wealth, and besides his occupation, landed: yet the poorest
and basest wench in the whole country, did disdain to match herself with such
a frantic husband, so that being a widdower, he had no hope ever to match
himself again, where he was known, and therefore apparelling himself
hansomely, and putting store of crowns in his purse, he went into
Somersetshire hard by Tanton, and there was a suitor to a widows daughter*
that was a good propper maid and wellfauoured, but of no great wealth, and
therefore the easier to be wooed, and won of a stranger.

This rope-maker being a good propper man, and of a comely personage, became a
suitor to this maid, whose name was Mary, a wench of a good bone and a lusty
complexion, much like to Lancashire breed, the maiden entering into
consideration of her mothers estate, and her own poverty, and seeing she had
few suitors, because the hope of her dowry was but small, listened the rather to
Richards motion, who being of a smoothe tongue, and could set out himself
well in talk, as the tiger when he means to prey, then ever hides his claws,
and where the Foord runs smoothest, there is it deepest: so as the old
proverb is, the still Sow eats up all the draffe: and he could use such
civil behavior, trickt out with such eloquent and glorious terms, that in
short time he won the wench and married her, and after that he had remained a
week or two at home with her mother, he took his leave to carry her home to
his own house: although there was some sorrow at parting between the mother
and the daughter, yet because she loved Richard well, she took it patiently,
and being honey moon, he seemed so chairy over her, that it grieved him the
wind should blow on her; well, home they went, and when she came where he
dwelt, she found a house well stored with all things necessary, but she
wondered as the custom was in their country, that none of his neighbors did
come to welcome him to the town: well, this past on till Sunday, and then she
went to Church: when they of the town did see that rich man the Rope-maker had
gotten so propper a woman to his wife, they began to say that the more knave
had ever the better luck, and indeed fortune was blind when she suffered such
a buzzard to light on such a chicken, and to pity the poor woman's mishappe,
that had chanced on such a froward and Hare braind Husband: yet foothing all
up with a good countenance, they after service was done, welcomed her unto the
parrish, and she returned them thanks very ciuillie. It chanced one wife
amongst the rest, whose sister this Rope-maker had married and killed with
kindenes, did long till she spoke with Richards wife, that she might make her
privy unto her husbands untoward qualities: and tarrying a great while to
speak with her, at last finding opportunity, discoursed unto her how her
husband had been married unto three wi^es, and how cruelly he had dealt with
them all, abusing them so, that they took such grief, that for very sorrow
they all dyed, telling her from point to point a number of his ill conditions,
which although they went cold to her heart, yet chearefully made the Woman
answer, that what her husband had done before, it little touched her: the woman
hearing Richards wife speak so modestly, and in the defense of her husband,
only prayed God she might find it so in the end, and so friendly they parted.

The Rope-makers wife being in a great perplexity, that she had made such a
choice in hast^, that she might so deeply repent at leisure, hoping the best,
she went about her huswiferie till her husband came home, who returning within
two days after, she welcomed him with all courtesy that a woman could afford
to her husband: he thanked her, but not with the same familiar countenance he
was wont to do, which straight made her suspect that her neighbors tale would
prove a true prophecy, but patiently brooking some unkind Frowns, she
dealt so carefully, lovingly, and kindly with him, that he could find^ no
cause to beat her, insomuch that his old dogged nature within one half year
began to break out, so that she easily perceived he sought a knot in a rush,
and aimed earnes^lye to find some Cauell that he might hansell her bones with
a cudg^ll if she looked merrily on him, she flowted him, and straight he lent
her a box on the ear for her fleering.

If her countenance were solemnly modest, then she loathed him, and what he
did: and cound about the house he went with a fair Holly wand, if she spoke
unto him she was talkatiue; and straight she had a blow on the lips: if she
said nothing she was ^ullen: and he would make her find her tongue with a
Ropes-ende, which he called a Salt-Eele, and with which against her will she
broake her fast, dinde, and supt many a time: whatsoever she did huswifly in
the house, what meat she dressed, what business she performed, al was
misconstrued and rewarded with blows, which drove y^ poor woman into such a
quandarie, that she wished herself out of the world, her estate growing worse
and worse, at last his habit grew to a custom and so she never went unbeaten to
bed, so that as now gentlewome^ wear their Maskes, so she every Sunday went
to Church with a black^ Face, which her neighbors espying* as they pitied
her, so they smiled, that at length she had found their forewarnings to be no
other but mere prophecies, but although they had liberty to les^, so she had
occasion to sorrow, for the miserable man would drive her into great
extremities, and make trial of her patient nature, with wondrous
contrarieties: for some time coming home late in the night, he would bring
sundry of his Neighbor^ with him, and to show how he could domineere over
his wife, he would make her light a pound of Candles at the great end, which
if either in jest or earnest she refusde to do, str^ight about the house she
went, and had a gentle remembrance to remember his fingers a mo^th after.

And amongst the rest, one day to have the world think in what servile
slavery his wife stood of him, he caused her to stand by him, while he made
Ropes, and fill a Sieve with water, a labor as endless, as painful and
contemptible, so that the ne ghbor^ and passengers noting it, some praised the
w^m^ns patience* that executed her husbands foolish charge, with so steadfast
and resolute a countenance: the poor wise living in this miser^e by the space
of some three or four^ years* so one day being alone by her self, looking in
a glass, and considering advisedly how her wonted countenance was blemished by
her husbands unkindness, she fetched a great figh, and swear a m^rtall and
fatal revenge, so that a deep hate of his ill qualities entering into her
thoughts, she resolved to make him repent those many years he had made her
lead in such s^ruile misery.

In this determination she gathered her wits together, and sought how to cry
quit^ance with her husband, yet could she find no certain means speedily to
auo^de the shrewish disposition of such an earthly Deu^ll, but bearing the
Cross with patience, ^ested the verse subject of distress: to run away she
would not, to withstand him she could not, she shamd to make complaint to the
Justices: and thus every way she was void of any remedy, so that she brookt
al, and went about her business, till on a time fortune smiling upon her, and
intending to give truce to this poor woman, it chanced that as she was
gathering r^she^ to make her house cleanly, against the next Holly-day, sitting
and sighing at her unhappiness, she heard one sing a merry song, which she gave
ear unto: The effect whereof, agreed greatly with her mela^cholly disposition,
for it armed a salve for that sore, that so pincht her, and applide a medicin^
for her continual malladie: the contents of the song were these.

A song sung by an old Woman in a Medowe.
OF all the plagues which make poor wigh^s,
unhappy and accursed:
I think a wicked husband is,
(next to the Devil) the worst.
But will young women come to me,
i will show them how they shall:
With pretty sleights and privy tricks
straight rid them from such thrall.
The husband frowns, and then his fist
lights on her tender cheek:
And if she do reply a word,
a Staff is not to seek.
But will, etc
A iealious eye the husband bears,
then is he out of quiet,
And she must fit her humors then,
to feed his braine-sicke diet.
But will, etc.
Else round about the house she goes,
the holy wand must walk:
And though his words be reasonles.
yet must she brook his talk,
But will, etc.
Thus men do triumph like to kings
and poor wiue^ must obey:
and though he be a verry fool,
Yet must he bear the sway.
But will young women come to me,
I Will show them how they shall
With pre^tie sleights and privy trick:
straight rid them from such thral.
THe old woman having thus ended her song, the poor wife that with tears for
joy, heard some hope of her redress, drew near to find out this old woman,
who had sung such a pleasant Dittie, and finding her forth, she saluted her
and after sundry broken sighs, flowen out of a pensive conscience, she began
to break with her in this manner.

Mother (quoth she) as your age is great, so your experience is much, and
therefore would I willingly discover some part of my grief unto you: the ^uld
woman seeing the wives face, full of sorrow, noting in her the very An^atomie
of a pensive woman, began to compassionate her fortunes, and therefore wished
her miloely and friendly, to r^ueal^ the cause of her distress, and if any way
it lay in her power, to satisfy her thoughts, her cares should be cured with
either counsel or comfort: the poor wife hearing the old woman speak with
such a familiar relish unto her, began her complaint thus:

The wives complain^, of the conditions of an ill husband.
MOther I cannot conce^t my (...) without ^ighes, nor manifest my sorrows
without ^eares, so bitter is the estate of my fortunes, and so ha^lesse is the
event of my redress: I was once as you have be^^, a maid, and then the
country Farmers reported my beauty to be as great, as now my misery is
extreme: Fate so appointed that I was woed and won by a rope-maker, a man I
think (mother) not unknown unto your self, if for no other cause, yet for the
hard usage of his wives, and with that the poor woman bu^st into bitter
tears, and the old woman began to ^^gh, in uttering her conceit with an oath,
asked if she were the maid that Richard the rope-maker had married? I am mother
quoth she, that unfortunate wife, that was once a maid, whose fortunes are
made intolerable, by the bad nature of a froward husband* whose custom is
neither at bed or at board, to show me any good countenance: if I look
so^erly, then I am t^oubled with the sull^ns, and then he wakeneth me with a
hollie w^^and: if I salute any of my neighbors with good morrow, he says
they are my Copesma^es, and then my bones bears the burden: If I speak to
none, he says I scorn such as are his friends, and he will make me find my
tongue: if in my bed I fall asleep, being wearied with labor, he pincheth me
wickedly, and calls me drowsy drunkard: if I ouer-wake him, then he pulls me by
the hair of the head, and says I watch to cut his throat, when he is asleep:
yet mother, these are not the greatest sorrows, for he has a maid at home
which he loves better then me, and her be sets on his knee before my face
he, cuts her the first morsel of the meat, and oftentimes in the night he
rises from me to go to her, and in the day if I but wish her to go to her
work, if she frown, then am I most pitifully beaten, as you may witness with
your eyes, and with that she discovered her naked body to her, which was all
bruised black and blew, with stripes, and yet mother (quoth she) these are not
the greatest sorrows.

The old woman cold at the heart, with the rehearsal of this poor wives
calamities, made her this ^inde answer: daughter enough, I know by the man
much ill, as this sixteen years that I have known him, I have entered into
many discourses of his villainies, but le^ting him pass as he is, to the
present redress of thy miseries, what, says she, have thou no friends to go
unto, whose abillitie may counteruaile his currishnes, and bridle him by the
law, for such beastlines? Alas answered she, I have none but an old woman
and poor like your self to my mother, and it grieves me to make a bootlesse
complaint unto her: why then (says the old woman) have thou no friend who for
the possession of thy love may have him about the pate, and so revenge thy
injuries? Alas (mother) better had I dye miserably, then dishonestly, I have
none, And says the old Matron, I see thou art not strong enough to match him
with blows, and therefore must I fly for thy succor to my last physic:
whose principles be so auth^nticall and sure, that they never miss, therefore
tell me, have thou any woman, that thou dare commit thy secrets unto?

O Mother (says she) two or three his mortal enemies, and my greatest
friends: then Daughter fear not (replied the old^ Counselor) but listen well
to my advise: go thy wa^es home, and do something that may displease. Alas
(said she) that I may easily do, for I cannot do any thing that can please
him: but what then, shall I seek my own destruction to be beaten? for once
daughter (quoth. she) when thou may for that beating live at quiet for ever* But
as soon as he offers to strike thee, stand in de^^ance of him, and say thou
have prayed unto our Lady for help, and she has promised to help thee, and
to revenge all thy injuries, and therefore bid him if he dares, but once while
he lives touch thee again in anger. If then he^ will swinge thee, bear it
patiently, and take this powder that I shall give thee, and when thou know he
goes to work alone by himself, give it him in drink: the virtue of the powder
is to ^uffocate and choke up his senses, so that he shall not have any feeling
for the space of ^ire honres, but he shall lie like a liuelesse carcass, and
his dreams shall be of women, and Angels: then daughter (and then she
whispred many matters in her ears) whether they were charms or spelles I
cannot tell, but this I am sure it was some good conceit, for the poor wife
wept for joy, and on her knees thanked the woman for her advise, and so they
parted, she promising to bring her word within ten days how her physic had
taken effect: well, to be short, merrily goes this good wife home, and finds
her husband dallying with her maid, at which sight her stomach rose, and
began to take him up sharply, and to swear that if she took her Maid and
him so suspitiously together again, she would complain of him to the
Justices, and cut off her mades nose for a general example to such whor^s as
she was.

The Rope-maker (this gentle Richard) pondering at his wives unaccustomed
brauling, began to start up, and to seek for a ^udgell, with that she as a
woman resolved to follow her late counsel, made this reply:

Nay brain-sicke villain, strike me if thou dare, for through thy long abuses
I have heartily prayed to our Lady for revenge and she has this day appeared to
me, and promised me, that if thou do hereafter, but touch the hemme of my
vesture in anger, she will be avenged upon thee so extremely, that thou shall
repent the abuses thou have proffered me, as long as thou do live. Richard
smiling at this reply, made his wife this answer, huswife (quoth he) if our
Lady have appeared unto you, our Lord her son has showed me a vision, that
he that has an ill wife and will not ^eat her, shall lead apes in hell for his
labor, and with that he fell upon her, and pumnield her so soundly, that he
had almost killed her, and she began half to repent that she followed the old
woman's counsel, yet hoping for time to revenge, she bare all things with the
more patience, and finding opportunity upon a day or two after to speak with
her gossips, she revealed unto them the contents of the old wives counsel,
whereat they triumphing and glorying in this determination, they promised to
plague him, and to perform whatsoever should redound to her commodity,
auowing such secrecy, as that it should never come out by any means
whatsoever.

Time passing on thus, it fortuned that our Rope-maker, and his maid, were
wont every week twice, to go to a strange house, and there she turned the
wheel while he twisted his ropes, when their business was done, what exercise
they used I know not: one day amongst the rest Richard and his maid going
alone to this solitary place, to make their ropes, he commanded his wife to
fill them a bottle full of drink, for he could not return before night: she
glad of this opportunity, put the dormitarie powder that the old wife had
given her into the bottle, which they ^aking went their ways merrily together,
and the drink and the powder with iogging was made a mere potion, as soon as
they were gone* she stepped out and went to her (...), and discourst unto them
the whole matter, and with that she drew out from under her ke^^le two three
stringed whippes of sharp and hard twisted cords, with ^ound knots upon the
ends, able to cut the slesh with a small stroke, these she be queathed unto
them, and humbly upon her knees, desired them not to spare for pity to
punish them to the highest extreamitie: they promised to show justice without
mercy and especialy one of the^ who was sister to one of his former wives,
that he had killed with kindness, who for an old grudge did intend now to be
fully ^euenged, and so they went to the graunge house, where leaving them
consulting together, and the good wife gone home full of hope, let us return
to the Rope-maker (Richard and his maid.)

Richard after he had dispatched some part of his business, would to dinner
or drinking, and after his Maid and he had lovingly broken their Fast, they
would like Doves fall to billing, but having drunk soundly of the potion, it
began to mortify their senses, that he desirous to take a nappe, laying his
head in his Maids lap, fell fast a sleep, and she as heavy as he, leaning
her head on her masters shoulders was in a dead trance.

When these two Gossips came and foun^ them thus drowsely tumbled together,
although they saw them soundly a sleep, yet were they aff^aide until they had
made experience of the effects of the potion: for they shook them, pricked them
with pinnes, and used all means to awake them, but it was impossible,
whereupon they grew ^olde, and pulled off his apparel not so much as leaving
his shirt upon him, and they fell unto belabouring of him with their whips, in
such monstrous manner, that the blood came down abundantly from all parts of
his body, and they cut him with their lashes to the very sinews, so then at
length they ceaste, pulled on his apparel as it was before, and dressed him up
very mannerly, not so much as leaving his points untrust, or any thing undone,
whereby he might perceive he had been made unready.

Having thus dressed him in his kind, they fell to his Maid, and served her
with the same sauce, that her master was used with all, and when they had
punished her thoroughly, they dressed her again, laced up her clothes, and laid
them together as they found them, and went their ways merrily to the
Rope-makers house, discoursing unto their Gossip all what had happened, who
joyful of this news, made them the best cheer in her house, and thanked them
heartily for their labors, promising the next day to tell them what her
husband would suspend in this tragedy.

Well, the time of the working of y^ potion being at an end, since they drunk
together, they began to awake together, but the Maid being youngest, had the
strongest senses, and therefore the operation ^oonest wasted in her, and half
between s^umber and awake about to stretch herself as drowsy folks do, her
smock so cleaued to her skin* that the very smart thereof made her not only
awake but to shrieke out, so that when she was come to her self she wondered
what she ailed, that all her flesh was so sore, so that pulling up her
petticoate and looking upon her thighs, she found them all in a gore blood,
lasht and cut in with Whip-corde almost half an inch deep, which made her to
stand in a mase, wondering how she should become so greeuouslie tormented. At
last vnlas^ng herself, she found all her body worse, so that she could not
lift her hands to her head. Whereupon she cried out* and her master awoke, and
being half in a dream, and his eyes scarce open, as he was about to stretch
him* his shirt claue so to his back, that he felt intolerable pains.

Oh Isabell (quoth he) what aile I? or where am I? what have I drempt? and what
do I feel? Alas Master, I am almost whipped to death since I fell a sleep. I
think it is some accursed Fa^ries that have done this deed, and she showed
him all her body, whereat he fell into bitter tears, and then she told him
that she was laced and braced as she was before. Alas Isabell (quoth he)
help me ^o vnbutten me, for I cannot stir my hand to my bossome I am so
sore, then vntrussing him he found himself worse whipped then his Maid,
whereupon he fell into consideration of the words of his wife used against
him, threatening him that our Lady would revenge her wrongs, so that he told his
maid, no doubt it was the Uirgine Marie that had thus punished them both for the
wrongs he had proffered against his wi^e, promising if ever God sent him to
his health, he would never strike her again, nor misuse her so long as he
lived. So he desired his Maid to help him home, and she as Lame as he could
scarce rise, yet one of them helping one another, they went cra^ping home as
well as they could.

As the w^nt lamenting home by the way, they met with the Uicar of the
Parish: this old Sir John meeting his neighbors (and one of his friends and
parishioners) in this woeful perple^t^e asked him how he fared.

Oh Master Uicar (quoth he) not as a man in this world, you seem weak
(quoth the Uicar) sit down and rest you, and tell me where your grief lies,
happily I may gi^e you some good counsel. Oh Master Uicar (quoth he) I am
in no case to sit down, I am so beaten with whipps, that I cannot stir any
joint of my body without pains. Why what ayle you? how should it come so to
pass? with that the Rope-maker told him from point to point what had happened to
him, and to his Maid, and how his wife threatened him the other day, how that
our Lady had appeared unto her, and promised revenge, and I think it is she or
some of her holy Angels that has whipped me and my Maid, for we slept but a
nappe, and when we awoke, we found neither hand nor foot stirred, nopoint
untrust, no button vnbuttoned, nothing out of order, and yet our selves so
whipped, that I think I cannot live till the morning, wherefore good Master
Uicar pray for me.

Sir John hearing this, was wonderfully astonished, and wished him to go home to
his wi^e, to mend his manners, and reconcile himself unto her, and he would
pray for him the next day in the Church: so they parted, and hom^ stumbles
Richard and his Maid, and coming to the door found his wife sitting in the
entrieat her wheel, she seeing her husband coming so simply and weakly with
his Maid, although she tickled at her heart for joy that they were so well
whipped, yet she fained great sorrow at their present sight, and throwing down
her wheel for hast^ran and met him, and weeping fained tears, said alas,
alas, what ailes my husband? and offered to take him by the arm to ^^ay him,
he cried out: oh wife touch me not, I am sore sick and cannot escape death,
our Lady at thy request has given me I fear me my deaths wound, for she
has almost whipped me and my maid to death: oh wife forgive us, and pray for
us, and if we ever hap to live together, I will amend my life, and become a new
man, and never speak angry word to thee again while I have breath in my
body, the Wife seeming passing sorrowful at this, wished that our Lady had
given her so much, so that he had escaped, so helping him in, she laid him
down upon a soft pallet, and came and told her Gossips what had happened, and
how her husband came home, and his maid with him So they came with her
hastilye laughing amongst themselves, but to his face pitying the chance so
that by their help his maid and he were helped to their beds, where when they
had lain a little, and were come to some warmth, their flesh ^ell on bleeding a
fresh, so that the Surgeon being sent for to stanch the blood, seeing their
wounds, and hearing the strange case, fell in a great amase with himself and
said the doing of God was wonderful: much ado he had to stop the Flux of
the blood, yet at last he got it stauncht, but they lay in most miserable
perplexity, almost slain with the whipping.

Well, the news of this (as women are borne blab^) began to go about the
town, yet the two Gossips wondered at it, as much as the rest, and this
happening upon a satterday, the next day being sunday, (good honest Sir John)
came to visit his neighbor, and finding him almost speechles, after some
words of comfort unto him* he went to Church, where after the first Lesson, he
began a certain prayer for the health of the Rope-maker, who he said lay
speechless, and at the mercy of God, and that through a strange and
wonderful fortune, and therefore desiring all them that were present to pray
for him, he began to take his text out of Saint Peter, how wives should obey
their husbands, and husbands cherrish their wives, since they were but one
flesh, and therein for an example brogh^ in the strange adventure of Richard
the Rope-maker how he had abused himself to all his wives, and so making
manifest the wickedness of his life, did tell them what revenge our blessed Lady
had taken upon him in a dream, and so from point to point discourst unto them
what had happened unto him, wishing them by his example to amend their lives,
least for beating their wives the like punishment fall upon them This text no
little pleased the wives of the parish, for they tickled at it* and the men
they were amazed to hear of such a wonderful chanc^ so that in the after
noone, all the parish came to see him and behold him, as if Lazarus had bin
rizen from the dead, there finding a more pitiful spectacle then master
Uicar had told them of, they all said that as the case was verry strange, so
the revenge was just, such as were to shrewes to their ^iues, bit the lip, and
were afraid of our Ladies whipping. At last Richard gathering his spirits, and
his speeches together, exhorted his Neighbors by his ex^mple, not to abuse and
beat their wives, telling unto them the full (...) of this Tragedy.

This discourse pleased the Wives, and affrighted the husbands, so that if any
in the town offered to strike his wife* she would straight vow to make her
complaint at our Ladies shrin^, and so they scapte many a sharp scour* But to
be brief* Richard lay long sick and his maid, and his wife tended and
comforted them so well, that at length they recovered some part of their
strength* and when he was able to walk abroad, he humbled himself to his
wife, and ^urst not abuse her al his life after, and if by chance they had
fallen out, she would say straight, well, I say no more, but our Lady requi^e my
injuries: and then would her husband never go abroad till his wife and he
were reconciled and made friends, so ever after she war^ the breeches, and
was Master, and all the Wives in the parrish fared the better, and were all
greater benefactors to the Shrin^ of our Lady, that rid them from the hands of
their iniu^ious husbands.

And thus with a Ravens quill have I written this Almanacke, which foretells
strange, ominou^ and most dir^ events, The plagues whereof I have spoke shall
as certainly fall out, as the Famine, and the Civil wars: all three are
dreadful, all three are at hand. Make b^n^^res therefore in your streets, (O
you Citizens) to purge the air of all infection, albeit you keep the inward
houses of your bodies never so un clean it is no matter. Open your gates to
let in the country folks, with provision, to beat back famine, but let the
markets be looked unto as men's consciences are: that is to say, every one to
rack it how he lists, As for civil wars there is good hope, they shall
quickly be quenched, because so many hundreds of Constables watch day and night
within the walls to keep the peace: But by no means step you in and be
sticklers when the Church is at ^arre within he^ self by schisms or by
Temporizer^, or when the husband and wife, the Father and Son, the Master and
Servant, or when any other limb of the politic body challenges the combat
against him, whom by nature he is bound to defend: if any predictions bring
thee in pleasure or proffit, thou will encourage me to play the right
Almanacke maker, and in another year to sing mor^ie tunes of my fair weather,
as in this I have struck a dull string, sounbing only storms. In the mean
time suffer my Raven (being weary) to fly to some tree of rest, and there to
prune her self of this s^cke Feathers, which she has caught by meddling with
the diseases of 1609.

FINIS.

