THE History of Travail in the West and East Indies, and other countries
lying either way, toward the fruitful and rich Moluccaes.

As Moscouia, Persia, Arabia, Syria, Aegypte, Ethiopia, Guinea, China in
Cathayo, and Giapan: With a discourse of the Northwest passage.

In the hand of our Lord be all the corners of the earth. Psalm. 94. Gathered
in part, and done into English by Richard Eden.

Newly set in order, augmented, and finished by Richard VVilles.

Imprinted at London by Richard Judge. 1577.

Cum Priuilegio.

To the right noble and excellent Lady, the Lady Brigit, Countess of Bedforde,
my singular good Lady and Mystresse.
AL studies have their special times (Right noble Lady) all good parts, and
singular qualities of the mind are holden up, and maynteyned with honor. The
seely child learneth in his tender age how to speak, to read, to write:
young laddes bestow their time in the study of other liberal sciences: as
years come on, and wit increases, so finally, the whole course of learning is
run over. Again, the art of Grammar is wont erst to be learned, and than
Logike afterward: natural Philosophy goes not before eloquence in our
schools: Geometry is first read, and than Geography. So that the studies of
good letters have their times in respect of man's age, they have their times in
the order of learning: yea they have a time, that makes us all to bestow
therein our time, and to study each faculty in due time, I mean that
special time they floryshe in. I may not deny but that learning has at all
times ben well accounted of, in most countries the skyll of diverse languages
well thought of, and learned men to have been always rewarded. what is than
that special time wherein all studies do flooryshe? Learning may be right
well compared unto the floutes and fruits of the earth, and the special time
of learning, unto their singular seasons. In May, flowers: in June, Cheries: at
Harvest, corn: in September, Grapes: so fares it in the study of good
letters. There was a time wha^ the art of grammar was so much esteemed, that
Gramariens proceeded masters thereof as woorshypfully, as other professors now
do in any other faculty. Than was it honorable to be a Poet: honorable I
say, for that the Poet Laureate enjoyed the honor of a Palatine. that time is
paste. There was a time when Logike and Astrology only so weeried the heads
of young scholars, yea and busied old age also, that true Philosophy in
deed was almost forgotten, eloquence defaced, the languages exiled. that time
is past. Not long since happy was he that had any skill in the greek tongue, he
was thought a great scholar that could make a greek verse. Now a days, who
studieth not rather the Hebrew language? Where have you almost any greek
aucthour printed? Geography lay hydden many hundred years in darkness and
oblivion, without regard and price: of late who takes not upon him to
discourse of the whole world, and each province thereof particulerly, even by
hearesay, although in the first principles of that art, he be altogether
ignorant and unskillful? This time is now. So long as Poetry was esteemed, the
art of grammar accounted of, Logike much made of, Astrology well thought of:
Divine Poets, good Gramariens, perfect Logiciens, excellent Astronomers no
where wanted.

A Virgile can you never want where one Mecenas is. Honor and promotion
bestowed upon the maynteyners of controversies in religion, has brought gray
hears from endless Sophistry, from Scotus formalites, from Buridan and
Burley, from Holcot, from Bricot, from Vademecum, from Dormi secure, and taught
younger years rather to pass through Aristotle and his interpreters, than ever
to dwell therein: caused them to study the scriptures, to read over the
fathers, to confer the counseyles, to learn the greek and Hebrew languages,
to search the Chalday Paraphraste, to peruse the old Doctors, to translate
the new writers, to heap up common places, to discourse of sects, to write
cunningly, to preach eloquently: and made them to be, for braulyng Sophisters,
grave Philosophers, for formal Dunses, plain doctors, for rude questionaries,
divine Orators, for unskillful schoolmen, eloquent and grave divines.

It is now almost one hundred and fifty years ago, that Don Henrico, son
of John the first of that name King in Portugale, and Nepheu unto our King
Henry the fourth, made his vyage after the conquest of Sep^a to the Canaries,
and e^^^uraged the Portugales to search the coasts of Africa, and to seek
the lands thereabout not spoken of to fore. His grande Nepheu John the
second, so furthered this enterprise, that the Portugale ships halled the
Cape of good hope, discovered Aethiopia, and sailed where antiquity denied
passage, beyond all Africa into the Indian seas. He sent also expert and
cunning traueylers into Egypt, and the red sea coasts to espy what way the
Portugales might look for beyond the Cape of good hope to Calecut in India:
the which viage in his son Emanuell his time, was prosperously taken in hand
by Vasquez Gama, the nienth day of July, in the year of our Lord.1497. and
happily ended in July again, two years after, to his great credit and
preferment, to the immortal fame and honor of his Prince and country. Here
began the study of Geographie, that ever since Ptolomeus reign lay trodden
under foot, and buried in dust and ashes, to spring up again, and by the
relations of skilful traueylers in Europe, Affrike, and Asie: through the
discovery of the far Indies, the Moluccaes, and new found lands, of late so
to be wondered at, as no other faculty more. I dare be bold to say, that
generally all Christians, Jews, Turks, Moors, Infidels, and Barbares be this
day in love with Geographie. The wild and rogishe Tartares might for famine
perish in the winter, if they in the summer skylfully followed not the sun.
The heathen Giapans divided the world into three parts: Afrike was described
by a Moore. The Jews report the estates of all countries to the Turks. The
Turkishe Basshaes govern the sweetest provinces in Europe, Afrike, and Asia,
no men greater traueylers than Christians. Who but Geographers do teach us
what parts of the earth be cold, warm, or temperate? Of whom do we learn
how to diuyde the world into parts, the parts into provinces, the provinces
into shyres? of Geographers. unto whom have we to make recourse for Mappes,
Globes, tables, and Cards, wherein the diverse countries of the world are set
down? unto Geographers. Set Geographie aside, you shall neither be able to get
intelligences of the situation and strength of any city, nor of the limits
and bounds of any country, nor of the rule and government of any kingdom,
nor be able well to travail out of your own doors. will you see what wise and
expert traueylers, skilful in geometry and Astronomy, (for that is to be a
Geographer in deed) be able to do? King of Portugale and Algarbs, Lord of
Guinea, of the conquest, navigations, and trafike into Ethiopia, Arabia, Persia,
and India.
Look you on the King of Portugales title: the two parts, of the three
therein, were atchiued by Vasques Gama, and other traueylers adventures.
Consider the fruits, the drugges, the pearl, the treasure, the millions of
gold and silver, the Spanyardes have brought out of the West Indies since the
first viage of Columbus: The great commodities our nation reapeth by the
traueyle of our countrymen into Barbary, Guiny, and Moscouia, will be a
sufficient testimony unto all us Englishmen, what it is to be a skilful
traueyler, what to be a paineful Geographer, and learned. Desire of rule
breeds victories, victories come by co^questes, conquestes are furthered by
traueyle, traueyle can not be maynteyned without great wealth, wealth makes
all traueyle pleasant. The Northwesterne vyage, be it never so full of
difficulties, will become as plausible as any other journey, if our passengers
may return with plenty of silver, silks, and pearl. Let Columbus, Americus,
Cortesius, be well set forth again, and bountefully rewarded, you shall hear
of other new found lands yet altogether unknown. Let Gama be set in place,
and Gama will tell you the situation, the manners, the force and wealth of
forreyne nations* for Gama his endeavor was, not only by his friend Coelius to
descrye the country whersoeuer he came, but also to learn him self the
riches, strength, and conditions of the people. Honor maynteyneth art: and
the skill in Geography, as all other sciences, has but a time of preferment,
the which than chiefly might be looked for, when it is most esteemed. This in
the noble mind of Cadamust bred that earnest desire, after Don Henrico his
example, to traueyle, to pen his own adventures into the Southeast and East
parts, to make the navigations of Gama and his companions known unto the
world. The occasions, the good success, the great commodities whereof, Barros
a counselor of the Portugale King, painted out long ago in many books,
Osorius of late, historically has written the same in few. This made Marcus
Paulus Venetus a courtier in Tartary, Hayton the Armenian to become a
Frenchman, Jews Vartomanne a traueyler in Ethiopia, Brocardus an inhabiter of
Jury, and each one of them to leave his painful journey with posterity in
writing. This enflamed the Spanyardes to take upon them the discovery of the
West and Southwesterne lands, done and written by Columbus, Pinzonus,
Alfonsus, Cortesius, and Americus, of whom that region America has name.
Whose long letters and tedious reports of things there brought to pass in
the conquest of that half world, the strange beasts, the sundry sorts of
fruits, the joys and riches the which that country yields, the manners
and fashions of the people, their cities, and princely palaces, their
nobility, their manner of government, their wars, their servile estate under
the kings of Spain, their conversion unto the Christian faith, P. Martyr a
learned and grave man, borne at Angleria in the duchy of Milane, then President
of the Spanish kings counsel for the west Indies, gathered into one volume,
and leaving a side all superfluous narrations, made thereof, as it were, one
brief and continual history. This volume divided he into eight Decades,
after the Greek word, so calling the sundry parcels thereof, for that each
one conteyneth in it ten particular books or chapters. R. Eden our countreyman
did into English, when K. Philippe was in England, the three first Decades,
and the fourth also, though under a wrong title, according to the Dutche
Printers edition, wherein the fifte, sixte, seventh, and eight Decades were
left out. He translated moreover Gonzales Ferdinandus Ouiedus breuiary of the
west Indies, and geathered together out of many mighty and huge works, some
other pretty pamflettes concerning the Spanyardes and Portugalles voiages into
the late discovered lands, adding thereto certain discourses of the north
parts. These his aforesaid doings, as few men's works at the first come
exactly abroad, this paynefull translatour minded, if not to amend, at the
least to augment, by puttyng thereunto in English Jews Vartomannus Navigations
into Aegypte, Arabia, Siria, Persia, and India, with our Merchantes Moscouian
and Persian trauelles: but death prevented his purpose, not suffryng him to
accomplish his desire.

Christian charity therefore unto the party departed, caused me to help his
works forward: Nature moved me to take some pains in placing orderly, that
which he had confusely given out, the better to direct, and the more to profit
the reader: My profession enforced me to cut of some superfluous translations,
and to fill up the rest of his doings with P. Martyrs other writings, and
finally to furnishe his want with my own store. Hoping and persuading with my
self, that if God likewise call me from these worldly Nauigations, and earthly
descriptions, before my other travel in this facultye, taken long since in
hand, be ended: some other professor of Cosmography will so reward me after my
death, as presently of this dead man I do deserve. Other credit seek I none
therefore, I look for no praise, I hope not for honor, I gape for no gain by
this kind of study. I know this day no place, no preferment, no public
chair, no ordinary lecture, no commune stipende, no special reward due unto
the students in Geography: no not at this time, when this faculty was never
more set by: no not in this realm, where yt never more flourished. The
honorable name of a Christian, and the infallible fruits thereof, ever
inclined me, even from my tender years, for the small portion of learning that
god has lent me, to do good, if I could, unto many: and specially to make
those my friends and well doers known unto the world, by whose benevolence
and favor I do live, and am maintained. In the small number whereof, for
amongst many well willers I find but few well doers, your Honor (right noble
Lady) my Lord and you, his noble children and yours, since my first return
from beyond the seas, must I confess to have stood me chiefly in steed: and
humbly acknowledge, the first yearly pension I ever was assured of in England,
to have been by your Ladyship bestowed on me. Wherefore as I will most
willingly yield unto many other of your Honors ge^tleme^ to come of great
houses, to have welthier friends, larger possessions and revenues than I, to
be more active, more comely, more wise, politic, learned, and to have seen
more: so in humble duty, loyal service, sincere affection and good will to your
Honor, I may, I can, I will contend with any of them all, even to the vttermust
force and power of my heart, head, body, life, blood, mind, and soul. In
testimony whereof, and full assurance of my service unto you for ever, these
last doings of R. Eden newly increased, my first labors in our language, his
history and mine of travel in the west and East Indies, altogether in one
volume, duetifully do I present unto your Honor, with all humility praying and
most earnestly requesting your good Ladyship, that you will vouchsafe it, and
by leisure, in this journey, the which my Lord and you have determined into
the west country, to let your page read them over to your Honors recreation,
as one of the principal causes wherefore at this time they were set forth. If
variety of matter, occurrents out of foreign countries, news of new found
lands, the sundry sorts of government, the different manners and fashions of
diverse nations, the wonderful works of nature, the sightes of strange trees,
fruits, foul, and beasts, the infinite treasure of Pearl, Gold, Silver,
and joys may recreate and delight a mind traveled in weighty matters, and
weeried with great affairs: credit me, good Madam, in listening unto this
work, shall you have recreation, you shall find delight in reading over these
relations, wherein so new, so strange, so diverse, so many recreations and
delights of the mind are expressed. Your Honors good lykyng thereof, will be
to me no small contentation for this work paynefully done, a good occasion
spedyly to finish the rest of my own labors concerning this faculty, a great
encouragement and comfort to bestow my whole time hereafter only in that study,
wherewith all my former knowledge in Philosophy and Geography may end. The
which, conveniently now, I am in good hope to perform, with my Lord and
your Ladyshyps good leave, and continuance of my duty and effectual desire to
do your Honors the better service.

At London the 4. day. of July. 1577. Your Honors servant humbly at
commandment. Richard VVilles.

R. VVilles Preface unto the Reader, wherein is set down a general sum as
it were of the whole work.
THis great and large bolume consists principally of four parts, agreeable
unto those four corners of the world, whereunto the skillful seamen and
merchauntes adventurers of late years have chiefly traueiled, and yet
specially are wont to resort. The first part conteyneth four Decades, written
by P. Martyr, The first part, the first Decad^
a learned and grave counselor of Charles the Emperor fifte of that name,
concerning the Spanyardes voyages Southwestwarde, and their famous exploites
done in these newly discovered parts of the world, the which usually we
now call the west Indies. Hereunto have we added Gonzalus Eerdinandus Ouiedus
brief history touching the same matter, so that the first part of our volume
has five particular books. In the first whereof cap 1.2.3 4 and 5. P. Martyr
describes Columbus first and second nauigations and discoueries of certain
Islands made by him specially and his brother. In the 6. chapter or book
thereof (for both names we find) is set forth Columbus third voyage, and the
discovery of Peru, in the maigne west Indish land. In the seventh, his
troubles both in the west Indies, and return into Spaigne with his brother,
being both prisoners. The 8. is of P. Alfonsus voyages that same way. In the 9.
are declared the travails of Vincent and Peter Pinzoni, and other Spaniards
likewise thither from Palos. The 10. is a conclusion of the whole Decade, with
particular mention of some special novelties, and Colu^bus fourth voyage
began. So that in the first Decade you have historically set down the
discouerye of the west Indies, taken in hand about the year of our
Lord.1492. by Columbus and his companions, until the year 1510. as P. Martyr
witnesses fol. 8. 43 47. and 54. This worthy trauayler and skillful seaman
died at Validolid in Spaigne. An. dom. 1506. as Lopez reports cap. 25. in his
general history de las Indias.

The second Decade conteyneth Peru matters, The second Decade.
entitled by P. Martyr, Creditus Cortinens, that is, a continent or maigne
land, as in deed it is of it self with the rest of America, in like manner as
Europe, Affryk, and Asia, be one continent or maigne land united together. In
the first and second chapters of this Decade, shall you read the voyages of
Fogeda and Nicuesa, to Dariena. In the third, Colmenaris trauayles, Nicuesa his
death, and the Indishe king Comogrus benevolence: In the fourth, Vasquez Nunnez
doings in Vraba gulf. His conquest of rebellious Barbarian kings in the
fifte. In the syxt Quicedus and Colmenaris embassage out of Dariena to
Hispaniola, and the religion of king Commendator in Cuba. The seventh book
contains Petrus Arias journey to Paria in Peru. The.8. the dissension betwixt
the Spaniardes and Portugales for their bounds, and making of five Bishops in
these newely found parts of the world. In the 9 are showed the ryuers of
Darien, and philosophically the causes of so great waters there. That country
is described in the.10 and the extreme hunger, abydden by the companions of
Nicuesa, set forth.

In the first, second, and third chapters of the third Decade, is contained an
abridgement of Vascus Nunnez relations, The third Decade.
concerning his voyage to the south sea, for it lies south from Darien,
usually termed now a days Mar del zur, and may also be called the wide east
Indyshe Ocean. The discovery thereof made by Nunnez, the king subdued by him,
especially king Commogrus christenyng by the name of Charles, and the wynnyng
of king Tumanama or Tubanama and his country. In the fourth chapter shall you
find Columbus fourth vyage, began An. do. 1502 to the main west Indyshe land,
with the description of some part thereof, lying betwyxt our Atlantike or
western Ocean, and the aforesaid Mar del zur, as Vraba, and Beragua. In
respect of the history and course of years, this book might have been placed
before the second Decade, but it should seem that these reports came no
sooner to. P. Martyr his hands, wherefore he began this fourth book right
well thus. I was determined. etc. The fyfth book conteyneth. P. Arias journey
mentioned dec. 2 lib. 7. to the north side of Peru, wherein Carthagena and S.
Martha, two famous havens, do stand, with a description of the country and
people thereof. In the syxt you have a disputation touching the Leuant stream
or eastern surge of the sea, the discovery of Baccalaos done by Cabot. P.
Arias arrival in Darien, the buildyng of. S. Maria antiqua there, with other
fortresses, finally the commodities and vnwholesomnesse of Darien. In the.7 8.
and.9 books, shall you have a description of Hispaniola, Cuba, and other
Islands thereabout, done by Andreas Moralis. And in the.10 shall you read of
the Island Dives in Mar del zur, of the king thereof subdued by Andreas Moralis,
of Pearls and the finding thereof, of Petrus Arias Captains doings against
the Caniballes, of the Barbares fowlyng, and the manner of the geatheryng of
gold in Dariena.

The fourth Decade, for so was it named in the Spaniards edition of. The fourth
Decade.
P. Martyr his works set forth at Alcala in Spain An. do. 1530. though the
Basile and Cullen printers have entitled it, De insulis nuper inuentis, that
is, of Islands lately found out, to wit, after Columbus voyages: this book I
say was by. P. Mar. culled out of the Indian registers, conteynyng special
notes that seemed unto him most meet to be publyshed: as the discovery of
certain Islands and creekes, namely Iucatan (done by Fernandes of Corduba and
his companions) Cozumella, the Islands of Sacrifice, the Islands of women, the
province Coluacan and Palmaria etc. by John Gri^alua and his fellows: the
Iucaians captivity and discovery of Florida made by those Spanyardes which
Diegus Velasquen sent out of Cuba, and Ferd. Cortesius first navigations,
wherein he conquered Potanchana in new Spain, the death of Valdiuia, ye
execution of Vascus Nunnez, king Muteezu^a his presents to Charles the
Emperor, his books, letters, and superstitions, finally the ruin of
Hispaniola, and utter decay thereof, if heed should not be taken in time.

Last of al Gonzalus Ferdinandus Ouedus history contains in.18. several
chapters (each one whereof has his proper title) a brief declaration of the
west Indysh navigations, of the metals the which are found in those lately
discovered lands, of the manners of the people, rites, customs, and ceremonies,
of the beasts, fowls, birds, worms, fyshes, seas, rivers, sprynges, trees,
plants, herbs, and diverse other things that are engendered there both on the
land and in the water. To this have we added certain special reports of new
Spain or Mexico, of Peru* of Rio de la Plata, and the country lying thereunto,
of the lands Laborador and Baccalaos, with the discoueryng of Florida. And thus
much for the first part of this volume.

The second part of this work appears what it is, by the title thereof set
down. The second part.
Fol. 230. to wit, a discourse to prove that there is a passage to the
Moluccaes by the northwest, the which presently. M. Cap. Furbisher attempteth,
with certain reports of the province China in Cathayo, where he has to
strike in his voyage, and thyrdly of Giapan, and other Islands by the way. The
which second part, wherein matter concerning the northwest is handled, is so
much the shorter, by how much the first part seemed ouerlong: besides that the
particularities of this corner of the world are not yet so thoroughly known,
but that other writers shall doubtless in more ample manner employe their labor
therein after the return of our northwesterne trauaylers. The which I wyshe to
be most happy and prosperous, as they most valiantly and painefully, to the
renown of our English nation, do show to have taken it in hand.

In the third part shall you find a description of the northeasterne frosty seas
and kingdoms lying that way: as Moscouia, Schondia, The third part.
or Denmark, Groenlande, Islande, Laponia, Norway, Suecia* or Swethlande,
Bothnia, and Gothlande: out of Zeiglerus, Paulus Iouius, Haiton, and Sebastian
free lord or Baron of Herbestein, with the countries as well north and
northeast beyond Moscouia, namely Petzora, Iuhra, and other provinces of the
Tartars: as also the voyages made through Moscouia by the merchauntes of London
into Persia, conteinyng many special things worth the knowledge, both of the
country it self, the commodities thereof, the manners of the people, and the
privileges granted unto our merchauntes by the Sophie or Shaugh the Persian
king.

Finally in the fourth part are set down our merchauntes voyages into Guinea,
The fourth part.
and the other parcelles of Affrike lying toward the Southeast, Jews
Vertomannus nauigations into Egypt, Ethiopia, Arabia, Syria, Persia, and east
India, even to the fruitful Moluccaes, with the prices of drugges and other
wares brought from thence. Whereto for a conclusion, have we added partly out
of Maximilian Transiluanus letter written unto the Cardinal of Saltzburge, and
partly out of P. Martyrs other works, that famous navigations made round about
the whole world: the contention betwixt the Portugales and Spanyardes for the
Moluccaes, and the decydyng thereof by Pope Alexander the syxt: and last of all
the abridgement of. P. Martyrs four last Decades, wherein especially that
noble and glorious conquest of Mexico is written. Generally this much of the
four parts of this large volume. The lesser parcelles and special matter
contained in each part, you have so exactely rehearsed in the table of the
Decades. Fol. 173. and in the resydue of the whole work before each chapter
so evidently set down, that any particular table thereof at all the reader
greatly needs not, if so be that he be able to remember in what region of the
world, East, West, North, or South, that be, the which he looks for.

Now concerning. R. Edens own doings, syncerely to say what I think, and
curteousely to yield him that due praise the which worthyly these his labors
deserve, yet not to flatter him neither, where any fault has been committed:
as hyghly he was to be commended for Englyshyng so strange, so wonderful, so
profitable histories as these are, nothing inferior to the books of ancient
writers, far exceedyng the multitude of foolysh commentaries and frivolous
translations, to to licentiousely used in our time: So may the gentle reader
forbear his ouersyghte, in so great a work, where some Spanyshe proverb,
harsh latin phrase, or unclean speech may seem hardly Englyshed, or any
rash note to shame the text. I would excuse him for translatyng the days by
the latin names, as Fol. 12. Non. April. thus. At the Nones of Apryll. item,
3. Idus Octobris. thus. The third day of the Ides of October. item. Fol. 17.
tertio Kalend. Maij. thus. The third day before the Kalendes of May: meaning
in deed, the fyfth day of Apryll, the.13. day of October, the 29. of April:
but therein it should seem that he followed his own humor, for he observes
the same phrase of translatyng throughout. P. Martyrs whole work. Many of his
English words cannot be excused in my opinion for smellyng to much of the
Latin, as Dominators. Fol 5. Ponderouse. Fol. 23. Ditionaries. Fol. 25.
Portentouse. Fol. 28. Antiques. Fol. 31. despicable. Eol. 387. Solicitate. Fol.
76. obsequiouse. Fol. 90. homicide. Fol. 390. imbibed. Fol. 395. Destructive.
Fol. 276. Prodigious. Fol. 279. with other such like: in the steed of Lords,
weyghtie, subjects, wonderful, ancient, low, careful, duetifull,
manslaughter, drunken, noisome, monstrous. etc. the which faults he confesses
in other his own verses, writing thus of him self.

I have not for every word asked counsel
of eloquent Eliot, or Sir Thomas Moore:
Take it therefore as I have intended,
the faults with favor may soon be a mended.

Certain Preambles here follow, geathered by R. Eden, for the better
understanding of the whole work.

Of the first discoueryng of the west Indies.
A Certain Carauel saylyng in the West Ocean, about the coasts of Spain, had
a forcybly and continual wind from the East, whereby it was driven to a land
unknown, A hard begynyng.
and not described in any map or card of the sea, and was driven still along by
the coaste of the same for the space of many days, until it came to a haven,
where in a short time the most part of the maryners, being long before very
weak and feeble by reason of hunger and trauayll, dyed: So that only the
Pilot, with three or four other, remained alive. And not only they that dyed,
did not inioye the Indies which they first discovered to their mysfortune, but
the resydue also that lived had in manner as little fruition of the same: not
leauyng, or at the least not openly publyshyng any memory thereof, neither of
the place, or what it was called, or in what year it was found: Albeit, the
fault was not theyrs, but rather the malice of other, or the envy of that
which we call fortune. I do not therefore marueyle, that the ancient histories
affirm, that great things proceed and increase of small and obscure
begynnynges, sith we have seen the same veryfied in this fynding of the
Indies, being so notable and new a thing. We need not be curious to seek the
name of the Pilot, sith death made a short end of his doings. Some will, that
he came from Andaluzia, and traded to the Islands of Canaria, and the Island of
Madera, when this large and mortal navigations chanced unto him. Other say that
he was a Byscanne, The Pylot that first found the Indies.
and traded into England and France. Gther also, that he was a Portugale, and
that either he went or came from Mina or India: which agrees well with the
name of these new lands, Mina.
as I have said before. Again, some there be that say that he brought the
Carauel to Portugale, or to the Island of Madera, or to some other of the
Islands called De los Azores. Yet do none of them affirm any thing, although
they al affirm that the Pilot dyed in the house of Christopher Colon, with
whom remained all such writings and annotations as he had made of his voyage
in the sad Carauell, as well of such things as he observed both by land and
sea, as also of the elevation of the pole in those lands which he had
discovered.

What manner of man Christopher Colon (otherwise called Columbus) was, and how
he came first to the knowledge of the Indies.
CHristopher Colon was borne in Cugureo, or (as some say) in Nerui, a vyllage
in the territory of Genua in Italy. He descended as some think, of the house
of the Pelestreles of Placentia in Lumbardie. He began of a child to be a
maryner: of whose art they have great exercise on the river of Genua. He
traded many years into Suria, and other parts of the East. After this, he
became a master in making cards for the sea, whereby he had great vantage. He
came to Portugale to know the reason and description of the south coasts of
Africa, and the nauigations of the Portugales, thereby to make his cards more
perfect to be sold. He married in Portugale, as some say: or as many say, in
the Island of Madera, where he dwelt at such time as the said Carauell arrived
there, whose Pilot soiorned in his house, and dyed also there, bequeathyng to
Colon his card of the description of such new lands as he had found,
whereby Colon had the first knowledge of the Indies. Some have thought yt Colon
was well learned in ye Latin tongue and the science of Cosmographie: and that
he was thereby first moved to seek the lands of Antipodes, and the rych Island
of Cipango, whereof Marchus Paulus writes. Also that he had read what Plato in
his dialoges of Timeus and Cricias, writes of the great Island of Atlantide,
and of a great land in the west Ocean undiscovered, being bygger then Asia and
Africa. Furthermore that he had knowledge what Aristotell and Theophrastus
say in their books of maruayles, where they write that certain merchauntes
of Carthage, saylyng from the streyghtes of Gibraltar toward the West and
South, found after many days a great Island not inhabited, yet replenyshed
with all things requisite, and having many nauigable ryuers. In deed Colan was
not greatly learned: Colon was not much learned.
yet of good understanding. And when he had knowledge of the said new lands
by the information of the dead Pilot, Colon conferred with learned men.
made relation thereof to certain learned men, with whom he conferred as
touching ye like things mentioned of old autours. He communicated this
secret and conferred chiefly with a friar, named John Perez of Marchena, that
dwelt in the monastery of Rabida. So that I verily believe, that in manner all
that he declared, and many things more that he leaft unspoken, were written by
the said Spanyshe Pilot that dyed in his house. For I am persuaded, that if
Colon by science atteined to the knowledge of the Indies, he would long before
have communicate this secreate to his own country men the Genueses, that
travail all the world for gaynes, and not have come into Spain for this
purpose. But doubtelesse he never thought of any such thing, before he chanced
to be acquainted with the said Pilot, who found those lands by fortune,
according to the saying of Pliny, Quod ars docere non potuit, casus inuenit.
That is, That art could not teach, chance found. Albeit, the more
Christian opinion is, to think that God of his singular providence and
infinite goodness, at the length with eyes of compassion as it were lookyng
down from heaven upon the sons of Adam, so long kept under Satan's
captivity, intended even then (for causes to him only known) to raise those
wyndes of mercy whereby that Carauell (herein most like unto the ship of Noe,
whereby the remnante of the whole world was saved, as by this Carauel this new
world received the first hope of their salvation) was driven to these lands.
But we will now declare what great things followed of this small beginning, and
how Colon followed this matter, revealed unto him not without Gods providence.

What labor and travail Colon took in attemptyng his first voyage to the
Indies.
AFter the death of the Pilot and maryners of the Spanyshe Carauell that
discovered ye Indies, Christopher Colon purposed to seek the same. But in how
much more he desired this, the less was his power to accomplish his desire.
For, beside that of him self he was not able to furnyshe one ship, he lacked
also the favor of a king, under whose protection he might so enjoy the
riches he hoped to find, that none other might take the same from him, or
defeat him thereof. And seeing the king of Portugale occupied in the conquest of
Africa, and the Nauigations of the East, which were then first attempted, the
king of Castyle likewise no less busyed in the wars of Granada, he sent to
his brother Bartholomewe Colon (who was also privy to this secret) to
practice with the king of England (Henry the seventh) being very rich and
without wars, King Henry the seventh.
promysyng to bring him great riches in short time, if he would show him
favor, and furnyshe him with shyps to discover the new Indies, whereof he had
certain knowledge. But neither here being able to bring his suit to pass, he
caused the matter to be moved to the king of Portugale Don Alonso, the fyfth of
that name: at whose hands he found neither favor nor money, Barnarde knew
not all things.
forasmuch as the Licenciat Calzadilla the bishop of Viseo, and one master
Rodrigo, men of credit in the science of Cosmographie, withstoode him, and
contended that there neither was nor could any gold or other riches be found
in the west, as Colon affirmed. By reason whereof he was very sad and pensive:
but yet was not discouraged, or despaired of the hope of his good adventure,
which he afterward found. This done, he took shyppyng at Lisburne, and came
to Palos of Moguer, where he communed with Martin Alonso Pinzon, an expert
Pilot, who offered him self unto him. After this, disclosyng the whole
secrets of his mind to John Perez of Marchena (a friar of thorder of saint
Frances in Rabida, and well learned in Cosmographie) and declaryng unto him
how by following the course of the Sun by a temperate voyage, rych and great
lands might be found: the friar greatly commended his interpryse, and gave
him counsel to break the matter to the Duke of Medina Sidonia, Don Enrique
of Guzman, a great lord, and very rych: and also to Don Luis of Cerda, the
Duke of Medina Celi, who at that time had great provision of shyps well
furnyshed in his haven of Santa Maria. But whereas both these Dukes took the
matter for a dream, and as a thing devised of an Italian deceyuer, who (as
they thought) had before with like pretense deluded the kings of England and
Portugale, the friar gave him courage to go to the court of the Catholyke
princes Don Ferdinando, and lady Isabell princes of Castyle, affyrmyng that
they would be joyful of such news: And for his better furtherance herein,
wrote ^etters by him to friar Ferdinando of Talauera the queens confessor.
Christopher Colon therefore, repaired to the court of the Catholyke princes,
in the year.1486. and delivered unto their hands the petition of his request,
as concerning the discoueryng of the new Indies. But they being more careful,
and applying al their mind how they might drive the Moors out of the
kingdom of Granada, The conquest of Granada.
which great enterprise they had already taken in hand, did little or nothing
esteem the matter. But Colon not thus discouraged, found the means to
declare his suit to such as had sometimes private communication with the king.
Yet because he was a stranger, and went but in simple apparel, nor otherwise
credited then by the letter of a gray friar, they believed him not, neither
gave ear to his words, whereby he was greatly tormented in his imagination.
Only Alonso of Quintanilia, the kings chief auditour, gave him meat and
drink at his own charges, and heard gladly such things as he declared of
the lands not then found: desyryng him in the mean time to be content with
that poor enterteynment, and not to despair of his enterprise: puttyng him
also in good conforte that he should, at one time or other, come to the speech
of the Catholyke princes. And thus shortly after, by the means of Alonso of
Quintanilia, Colon was brought to the presence and audience of the Cardinal
Don Pero Gonzales of Mendoza, archbishop of Toledo, The archb^shop of Toledo,
a man of great revenues and authority with the king and queen, who brought
him before them, after that he well perceived and examined his intent. And by
this means was his suit heard of the Catholyke princes, who also read the
book of his memorials which he presented unto them. And although at the first
they took it for vain and false that he promised, nevertheless they put him
in good hope that he should be well dispatched when they had fynyshed the
wars of Granada which they had now in hand. With which answer, Colon
began to reuyue his spirits, with hope to be better esteemed, and more
favorably to be heard among the gentelmen and noble men of the court, who
before took him only for a crafty fellow and deceyuer: and was nothing
dismayde or discouraged when soever he debated the matter with them, although
many judged him fantastical, as is the manner of ignorant men, to call all
such as attempt any thing beyond their reach, and the compass of their
knowledge, thynkyng the world to be no bygger then the cagies wherein they are
brought up and live. But to return to Colon. So hot and vrgente was the
siege of Granada, that they presentely granted him his demand to seek the
new lands, and to bring from thence gold, silver, pearls, precious stones,
spices, and such other rich things. They gave him also the tenth part of all
the revenues and customs due unto the king, of all such lands as he should
discover, not doing prejudice in any thing to the king of Portugale. The
particulars of this agreement were made in the town called Sancta Fe: and the
privilege of the reward in Granada the.xxx. day of Apryll, the same year
that the city was woonne. And whereas the said Catholyke princes had not money
presently to dispatch Colon, Luis of. S. Angel, the kings secretary of
accomtes, lent them six Quentes of Maraz, which in a gross sum make.xvi.
thousand ducades.

In the scutcheon of arms given to Columbus by Don Ferdinando and queen
Isabella, these verses were written.

Por Castella, y por Leon. Nueuo mondo hallo Colon. For Castile and for Leon.
A new world found was by Colon.
Why they were called Indies.
SOme think that the people of the new world were called Indians, because
they are of the color of the east Indians. And although (as it semmeth to me)
they dyffer much in color and fashions, The color of the East Indians.
yet is it true, that of India they were called Indians. India is properly
called that great province of Asia, in the which great Alexander kept his
wars, and was so named of the river Indus: and is divided into many kingdoms
confinyng with the same. From this great India (called the East India) came
great companyes of men, as wrytteth Herodotus, and inhabited that part of
Ethiopia that lies between the sea Bermeia (otherwise called the red sea, or
ye gulf of Arabia) and the river of Nilus: all which regions that great
Christian prince Prester John does now possess. The said Indians prevailed so
much, that they utterly changed the customs and name of that land, and
called it India: by reason whereof, Ethiopia also has of long time ben called
India. And hereupon came it that Aristotle, Seneca, and certain other old
authors said, that India was not far from Spain. After this also, of later
days our west India was so called, of the said India of Prester John where
the Portugales had their trade: For the Pilot of the Carauell that was first
driven by forcible wind to an unknown land in the west Ocean, called the
same India, because the Portugales so called such lands as they had lately
discovered eastward. Christophor Colon also, after the said Pilot, called the
west lands by the same name: Albeit some that take Colonus for an expert
Cosmographer, think that he so named them of the East India, as to be the
furthest and unknown end thereof, reachyng into the West, under the other
hemispherie or half globe of the earth beneath us: affirming that when he
first attempted to discover the Indies, he went chiefly to seek the rich
Island of Cipango, which falls on the part of great China or Cathay, as
writes Marcus Paulus Venetus, and other: And that he should sooner come
thither by following the course of the Sun Westward, then against the same.

Of the color of the Indians.
ONe of the marvelous things yt God uses in the composition of man, is
color: which doubtless can not be considered without great admiration, in
holdyng one to be white, and an other black, being colors utterly contrary:
some likewise to be yealowe, which is between black and white: and other of
other colors, as it were of diverse liueries. And as these colors are to be
marueyled at, even so is it to be considered, how they dyffer one from an
other, as it were by degrees, forasmuch as some men are white after diverse
sorts of whitnes, yelowe after diverse manners of yelowe, and black after diverse
sorts of blackenes: and how from white they go to yelow by discoloring to
brown and red, and to black by ash color, and murry, somewhat lighter then
black, The color of the west Indians.
and tawny like unto the west Indians, which are altogether in general either
purple or tawny, like unto sodde Quinses, or of the color of Chestnuttes or
Olyues, which color is to them natural: and not by their going naked, as many
have thought: albeit their nakedness have somewhat helped thereunto. Therefore
in like manner, and with such diversity as men are commonly white in Europe,
and black in Affrike, even with like variety are they tawney in these Indies,
with diverse degrees diversely inclinyng more or less to black or white. No
less marueyle is it to consider, that men are white in Siuile, and black at
the cape of Buena Speranza, and of Chestnut color at the river of Plata, being
all in equal degrees from the Equinoctial line. Likewise, that the men of
Affrike and Asia, that live under the burnt line (called Zona Torrida) are
black: and not they that live beneath, or on this side the same line, as in
Mexico, Iucatan, Quauhtema, Lian, Nicaragua, Panama, Santo Domingo, Paria, Cape
Saint Augustine, Lima, Quito, and other lands of Peru, which touch in the
same Equinoctial. For in all the tracte of these coasts, certain black men
were found only in Quarequa, when Vaschus Nunnez of Balboa discovered the sea
of Sur. By reason whereof it may seem, that such variety of colors
proceeds of man, and not of the earth: which may well be, although we be al
borne of Adam and Eve, and know not the cause why God has so ordained it,
otherwise then to consider that his divine majesty has done this, as infinite
other, to declare his omnipotency and wisdom, Gods wisdom and power is
seen in his works.
in such diversities of colors, as appear not only in the nature of man, but
the like also in beasts, birds, and flowers, where diverse and contrary colors
are seen in one little feather, or the leaves growyng out of one little stalk.
An other thing is also greatly to be noted, as touching these Indians: and this
is, that their hear is not curld, as is the Moors and Ethiopians that
inhabit the same clime: neither are they balde, except very ^ildome, and that
but little. All which things may give further occasions to Philosophers to
search the secrets of nature, and complexions of men, with the novelties of
the new world.

A most ancient testimony of the West Indies, by the writing of the divine
Philosopher Plato.
PLato in his famous and divine Dialogue, named Timeus, where he entreats of
the universal nature and frame of the whole world, takes for his principle
the most ancient history of an Island, in time of great antiquity, named
Athlantides, making also mention of the king, people, and inhabitants of the
same: and that they kept war against the Atheniens, and were overcome of
them. Plato also there inducing the said history to be rehearsed by one named
Critia, who affirmed that he had often heard it of his Uncle, who was in the
time of Solon, one of the seven sages of the Greeks. This Critia declared, that
when Solon went into Egypt to a certain city named S^im, situate upon the
river of Nilus, where the division and recurryng of the river, makes the
Island Delta, he there spoke with certain learned priests, very skillful in
knowledge of antiquities of many worlds past. Insomuch that they made mention
of many things that were before the flood of Noe, or Deucalion, and also
before the universal conflagration or burning of the world in the time of
Phaeton, forasmuch as the wars between the people of the said Island of
Athlantides and the Atheniens, was long before the general flood, and the
conflagration aforesaid. Plato induces the priest, speaking to Solon in manner
as follows.

Things most marvelous and true ( O Solon) remain in ancient writings and
memory of our predecessors, and old ages long before our times. But above
all things, one exceeds al admiration for the greatness and singularity
thereof, which is this: It is in our records of most antiquities, that in
times past your city of Athens has oftentimes kept wars against an
innumerable multitude of nations which came from the sea Athlantike, in manner
into al Europe and Asia: whereas now appears no such nation, forasmuch as
the said sea is now al over nauigable: And yet at that time had, in the
mouth, and as it were in the entry (where you place the Columns of Hercules)
an Island which was said to be much greater then al Africa and Asia, and that
from thence was passage to many other Islands near thereabout, and from the
said Islands to the continent or fyrme land, which was right over against it
near unto the sea: Yet, that within the mouth, there was a little gulf with a
port: the deep sea without, was the true sea, and the land without was the
true continent. This Island was named Athlantides, and in it was a king of
marvelous great power and might, who had the dominion of the said Island, and
many other, and also a great part of the continent land whereof we have
spoken, and much more toward our parts also, forasmuch as they were
dominatours of the third part of the world conteynyng Africa, Egypt, and
Europe, even unto the sea Tirrhenum. The power therefore of them being then so
great, they came to invade both your country and ours, and all other that are
within the Columns of Hercules. Then ( O Solon) the virtue of your city
showed it self famous in magnanimity and feats of arms, with the
assemblance of the other Grecians, in resystyng their great power, until you
had driven them out of our lands, and restored us to our liberty. But shortly
after that this enterprise was atchiued, befell a marvelous great earthquake,
and exundation or ouerflowing of the sea, which continued for the space of one
day and night: In the which the earth opened it self, and inglutted all those
valiant and warlike men, and the said Island Athlantides sunk into the
bottom of the sea, which was the occasion that never from that time forward,
any ship could sail that way, by reason of the great mudde and slyme which
remained of the drowned Island.

This is the sum of those things which old Critia said he had understood
of Solon. And certaynely these words of Plato of the said Island, have caused
great contention among many great Philosophers, which have written commentaries
upon the said Dialogue of Timeus composed by Plato: Insomuche that the same in
those days being utterly unknown, many have taken this narration of Solon,
for an allegorical fable, and have interpreted the same in diverse senses and
meanynges. But it may now well appear the true meaning hereof to be this:
that Plato intendyng to write of the universal frame of the world, the which
he knew to be made an habitation for the divine best man, and also beholding
therein the great ornament and beauty of the heaven and stars, whereby man
might know his God and creator, it might seem to him a thing to far from
reason, that only two parts thereof should be inhabited, and the other part
desolate and deprived of men: and that the Sun and stars might seem to
show their light only half their course without profit, shining only upon
the sea and desolate places, destitute of man and other living creatures. And
therefore Plato had in great admiration the history of the said Egyptian
priest, making mention of an other part of the world beside Asia, Europa, and
Africa, and thought it worthy to be rehearsed in the beginning of his divine
Dialogue aforesaid. We ought therefore certainly to think our selves most
bound unto God, that in these our times it has pleased him to reveal and
discover this secret in the fyndyng of this new world, whereby we are
certaynely assured, that under our Pole star, and under the Equinoctial line,
are most goodlye and ample regions, as well and commodiously inhabited, as are
other parts of the world best known unto us.

The testimony of the Poet Seneca in his Tragedy De Medea, where by the
spirit of Poetical fury, he says.

Venient annis
Secula seris, quibus Oceanus
Vincula rerum laxet, et ingens
Pateat tellus, Typhisque nouos
Detegat Orbs,
Nec sit terris, vltima Thyle.
Which may be thus Englished.

In late years new worlds shall be found,
And new lands shall then appear on the ground.
When Typhis Navigations new worlds shall find out,
Then shall not Thyle for last be left out.
Thyle is Islande.
For then shall the Ocean dissolve his large bands,
And show forth new worlds, regions, and lands.

To the most noble prince and catholic king, Charles, Peter Martyr of
Angleria wishes perpetual felicity.
THe divine providence, from the time that he first created the world, has
reserved unto this day the knowledge of the great and large Ocean sea: The
largeness of the Ocean unknown to this day.
In the which time he has opened the same, chiefly unto you (most mighty
Prince) by the good fourtune and happy success of your grandfather by your
mother side. The same providence (I know not by what destenie) has brought me
out of my native country of Milane, and out of the city of Rome (where I
continued almost.x. years) into Spain, that I might particularlye collecte
these marvelous and new things, which should otherwise perhaps have lien
drowned in the whirlepoole of oblivion, forasmuch as the Spanyardes (men
worthy great commendation) had only care to the general inventions of these
things. Notwithstanding, I do not challenge unto me only, the thanks of the
travail bestowed herein, whereas the chief reward thereof is due to Ascanius,
Cardinal Ascanius.
vicount Cardinal, who perceauyng that I was wylling to depart out of the
city to be present at the wars of Granatum, The wars at Granatum against
the Moors.
dissuaded me from my purpose: But seeing that I was fully resolved to depart,
exhorted and required me to write unto him such news as were famous in
Spain, and worthy to be noted. I took therefore my journey into Spain,
chiefly for the desire I had to see thexpedition which was prepared against
the enemies of the faith, forasmuch as in Italye, by reason of the dissension
among the Princes, I could find nothing wherewith I might feed my wit,
being a young man desirous of knowledge and experience of things. I was
therefore present at the wars, from whence I writ to Cardinal Ascanius,
and by sundry epistles certifyed him of such things as I thought most woorthye
to be put in memory. But when I perceived that his fortune was turned from a
natural mother to a stepdame, I ceased from writing. Yet after I saw, that
by thouerthrowe of the enemies of our faith, Spain was pourged of the Moors,
as of an evil weed plucked up by the roots, lest I should bestow my
slippery years in unprofitable idleness, I was minded to return to Italy.
But the singular benignity of both the Catholyke king and queen now
departed, and their large promises toward me upon my return from my legacy
of Babylon, deteyned me from my purpose. Yet does it not repent me that I drew
back my foot, as well for that I see in no other place of the world at this
time the like worthy things to be done: as also that in manner throughout all
Italy, Italy disquieted with wars.
by reason of the discord of Christian Princes, I perceived all things to
run headlong into ruin, the countries to be destroyed and made fat with
humane blood, the cities sacked, The sequeles of war.
virgins and matrones with their goods and possessions carried away as captives,
and miserable innocents without offense to be slain unarmed within their own
houses. Of the which calamities, I did not only hear the lamentable
outcryes, but did also feel the same: For even the blood of mine own
kinsfolks and friends, was not free from that cruelty. As I was therefore
musyng with my self of these things, the Cardinal of Arragone, after that he
had seen the two first books of my Decades written to Ascanius, required me
in the name of king Frederike his uncle, King Frederike.
to put forth the other eight epistle books. In the mean time also, while I
was void of al care as touching the matters of the Ocean, the Apostolical
messengers of the bishop of Rome, Leo the tenth (by whose wholesome counsel and
authority we trust the calamities of Italy shall be fynished) raised me as it
were from sleep, and encoraged me to proceed as I had begun. To his holiness
I writ two Decades, comprysed in short books, after the manner of epistles,
and added them to the first, which was printed without mine advise, as shall
further appear by the preface following. But now I return to you (most noble
Prince) from whom I have somewhat digressed. Therefore whereas your grandfather by
your mothers side, have subdued al Spain under your dominion, Spain subdued
from the Moors.

The kingdom of Naples.


except only one corner of the same, and have also left you the kingdom of
Naples, with the fruteful Islands of our seas, it is surely a great thing and
worthy to be noted in our cronacles. But not offendyng the reverence due to our
predecessors, whatsoever from the beginning of the world has been done or
written to this day, to my judgment seems but little, if we consider what
new lands and countries, what new seas, what sundry nations and tounges,
what gold mines, what treasuries of perles they have left unto your
highness, beside other revenues. The which, what they are, and how great,
these three Decades shall declare. Come therefore most noble Prince elected of
God, and enjoy that high estate of things not yet understood to men. We
offer unto you the Equinoctial line hitherto unknown, The temperatnesse of
the Equinoctial unknown to the old writers.
and burnte by the furious heat of the son, and uninhabitable after the
opinion of the old writers, a few excepted: but now found to be most
replenished with people, fair, fruiteful, and most fortunate, with a thousand
Islands crowned with gold and bewtifull pearls, besides that great portion
of earth supposed to be part of the firm land, Continent or fyrme land as
bygge as three Europes.
excedyng in quantity three Europes. Come therefore and embrase this new
world, and suffer us no longer to consume in desire of your presence. From
hence, from hence I say (most noble young Prince) shall instruments be prepared
for you, Riches are the instruments of conquestes.
whereby all the world shall be under your obeisance. And thus I bid your majesty
farewell: to whose taste if I shall perceive the fruits of this my tyllage to
be delectable, I will heareafter do my endeavor that you may receive the same
more abundauntly. From Madrid, the day before the Calendes of October, In the
year of Christ M.D.XUI.

The first Book of the Decades of the Ocean, written by Peter Martyr of
Angleria Milenoes, counsaylour to the king of Spain, and Protonotarie
Apostolical to Ascanius Sphorcia, Vicount Cardinal. etc.
THe reverend and thankful antiquity was accustomed to esteem those men as
gods, The reward^ of virtue.
by whose industry and magnanimity such lands and regions were discovered,
as were unknown to their predecessors. But unto us, having only one God, whom
we honor in triplicitie of person, this rests, that albeit we do not worship
that kind of men with divine honor, yet do we reverence them, and woorthyly
marueyle at their noble acts and enterpryses. Unto kings and princes we give
due obeysaunce, by whose governance and furtherance they have been aided to
perform their attempts: we commend both, and for their just desartes
woorthyly extol them. Wherefore, as concerning the Islands of the west Ocean,
lately discovered, The Islands of the West Ocean.
and of the auctours of the same (which thing you desire by your letters to
know) I will begin at the first aucthour thereof, lest I be injurious to any
man. Take it therefore as follows.

Christophorus Colonus (otherwise called Columbus) a gentleman of Italy, borne
in the city of Genua, Christophorus Colonus.
persuaded Fernando and Elizabeth, catholic princes, that he doubted not to
find certain Islands of India, nere unto our Ocean sea, India.
if they would furnyshe him with ships and other things apparteynyng:
affyrmyng that thereby not only the Christian religion might be enlarged, but
Spain also enryched by the great plenty of gold, pearls, precious stones,
and spices, which might be found there. At the length three ships were
appointed him at the kings charges: of the which one was a great carac^e with
deckes, and the other two were light marchaunte ships without deckes, which
the Spaniardes call Carauelas. Thus he departed from the costs of Spain about
the calendes of September, in the year of Christ.1492. and set forward on
his viage, The first voyage of Colonus
being accompanied with CC.xx. Spanyardes. The fortunate Islands (as many
think them to be, which the Spaniardes call Canariae, The Islands of Canarie.
Gades, or Calsmals.
found but of late days) are distaunte from the Islands of Gades a thousand
and two hundredth miles, according to their accomptes, for they say they are
distant three hundred leagues: A league, what it conteyneth by sea.

The fortunate Islands.


whereas such as are expert sea men, affirm that every league contains
four miles, after their supputations. These Islands were called fortunate, for
the temperate air which is in them. For neither the coldness of winter is
sharp unto them, nor the heat of summer intolerable. Yet some men are of
opinion, that those were in old time called the fortunate Islands, which the
Portugales call Capo Verde. Capo Verde.
Colonus therefore sailed first to the Islands of Canariae, to the intent there
to refreshe his ships with fresh water and fuel, before he committed him
self to this so laborous a viage. And because I have hear made mention of the
Islands of Canariae, it shall not be much from my purpose, to declare how of
unknown they became known, and of savage and wild, better manured: For by
the long course of many years, they were forgotten, and remained as unknown.

The.vii. Islands of Canarie. Betanchor a French man subdued the Islands of
Canarie. etc.
These seven Islands (therefore) called the Canaries, were found by chance by
a french man, called Betanchor, by the permission of queen Katharine,
protectrixe of king John her son, while he was yet in his nonage, about the
year of Christ. M.CCCC.U. This Betanchor invaded two of these Islands called
Lancelotus and Fortisuentura, which he inhabited and brought to better culture.
He being dead, his son and heir sold both the said Islands to certain
Spaniardes.

After this, Farnandus Peraria and his wife, invaded Ferrea and Gomera. The
other three were subdued in our time. Grancanaria, by Petrus de Vera, citizen
of the noble city of Xericium, and Michael of Moxica. Palma and Tenerifen, by
Alphonsus Lugo, at the kings charges. Gomera and Ferrea were easily subdued:
But the matter went hard with Alphonsus Lugo. Alphonsus Lugo.
For that naked and wild nation, fyghtyng only with stones and clubbes, drove
his army to flight at the first assault, and slew about four hundred of his
men: But at the length he overcame them. And thus all the Islands of Canariae
were added to the dominion of Spain. From these Islands Colonus directyng his
voyage toward the west, following the falling of the sun, but declining
somewhat toward the left hand, sailed on forward.xxxiii. days continually,
having only the fruition of the heaven and the water. Then the Spanyardes
which were accompanied with him, Colonus men rebel against him.
began first to murmr secretly among them selves, and shortly after with
words of reproach spoke evil of Colonus their governor, and consulted with
them selves, either to rydde him out of the way, or else to cast him into the
sea: ragyng that they were deceived of a stranger, an outlandyshe man, a
Ligurian, a Genues, and brought into such dangerous places, that they might
never return again. And after.xxxiii. days were past, they furiously cried
out against him, and threatened him that he should pass no further. Fair
words and promises.
But he ever with gentle words and large promises, appeased their fury, and
prolonged day after day, some time desyryng them to bear with him yet a while,
and some time putting them in remembrance that if they should attempt any
thing against him, or otherwise disobey him, it would be reputed for treason.
Thus after a few days, with cheareful hearts they espied the land long looked
for. In this first navigations, he discovered.vi. islands, whereof two were
exceedyng great: Of which, the one he called Hispaniola, and the other
Iohanna. Hispaniola. Iohanna.
But at that time he knew not perfectly that Iohanna (otherwise called Cuba)
was an island. As they coasted along by the shore of certain of these islands,
Nightingales sing in November.
they heard Nyghtyngales sing in the thycke wooddes in the month of November.
They found also great ryuers of fresh water, and natural havens, of
capacity to harbor great nauies of ships. Sailing by the coasts of
Iohanna, from the north point to the west, he rode little less then eight
hundred miles (for they call it a hundred and fourscore leagues) supposing that
it had been the continent or fyrme land, because he could neither find the
lands end, nor any token of the end, as far as he could judge with his
eye: wherefore he determined to turn back again, being partly thereto
enforced by the roughness of the sea, for the sea banks of the island of
Iohanna, by sundry wyndynges and turnynges, bend them selves so much toward
the north, that the northnortheast wind roughly tossed the shyps by reason of
the winter. Turning therefore the stemmes of his ships toward the East, he
affyrmed that he had found the island of Ophir, The Island of Ophir.
whither Solomon's ships sailed for gold. But the description of the
Cosmographers well considered, it seems that both these, and the other
islands adioynyng, The Islands of Antilia.
are the islands of Antilia. This island he called Hispaniola, on whose north
side as he approached near to the land, the keele or bottom of the biggest
vessel ran upon a blind rock covered with water, A shypwracke.
and cloue in sunder: but the playnenesse of the rock was a help to them that
they were not drowned. Making haste therefore with the other two shyps to help
them, they brought away all the men without hurt. Here coming first a land,
The people of the Island.
they saw certain men of the Island, who perceiuyng an unknown nation
coming toward them, flocked together, and ran al into the thycke woods, as
it had been hares coursed with grehoundes. Naked people.
Our men pursuing them, took only one woman, whom they brought to the ships:
where fylling her with meat and wine, and appareling her, they let her depart
to her company. Shortly after a great multitude of them came runnyng to the
shore to behold this new nation, whom they thought to have descended from
heaven. They cast them selves by heaps into the sea, Expert swymmers.

Gold for earth and glass.


and came swimming to the ships, brynging gold with them, which they
changed with our men for earthen pottes, drinking glasses, points, pinnes,
hawks bells, looking glasses, and such other trifles. Thus growing to further
familiarity, our men were honorably entertained of the king of that part of
the island, Many kings
whose name was Guacc^narillus: for it has many kings, as when Eneas arrived
in Italy, he found Latium divided into many kingdoms and provinces, as Latium,
Mezeutium, Turnum, and Tarchontem, which were separated with narowe bounds, as
shall more largly appear hereafter. At the even tide about the falling of the
son, when our men went to prayer, and kneeled on their knees after the manner
of ye Christians, Religious and humane people
they did the like also. And after what manner so ever they saw them pray to
the cross, they followed them in all points as well as they could. They showed
much humanity toward our men, Canoas.
and helped them with their lyghters or small boats (which they call Canoas) to
unlade their broken ship, and that with such celeritie and cherefulnesse,
that no friend for friend, or kynseman for kynseman, in such case moved with
pity, could do more. Their boats are made only of one tree, Monoxyla, They
have no iron.
made holowe with a certain sharp stone (for they have no iron) and are very
long and narowe. Many affirm that they have seen some of them with forty
ores. The wild and myscheuous people called Canibales, or Caribes, Canibales,
or Caribes. Anth^opophagi.
which were accustomed to eat man's flesh (and called of the old writers,
Anthropophagi) molest them exceedyngly, inuading their country, taking them
captive, kyllyng and eating them. As our men sailed to the islands of these
meke and humane people, they left the islands of the Canibales, in manner in the
midst of their viage toward the south. They complained that their islands were
no less vexed with the incursions of these manhuntyng Canibales when they go
forth a rouyng to seek their pray, then are other tame beasts, The cruelty
of the Canibales.
of Lions and Tigers. Such children as they take, they geld to make them fat,
as we do cock chickens and young hogs, and eat them when they are well
fed: of such as they eat, they first eat the intralles and extreme parts,
as hands, feet, arms, neck, and head. The other most fleshye parts, they
powder for store, as we do pestels of porke, and gammondes of bakon: yet do
they absteyne from eating of women, and count it vile. Therefore such young
women as they take, they keep for increase, as we do hens to leye eggs: the
old women, they make their drudges. They of the islands (which we may now call
ours) both the men and ye women, when they perceive the Canibales coming,
have none other shyft but only to flee: for although they use very sharp
arrows made of reeds, yet are they of small force to repress ye fury of the
Canibales: for even they them selves confess, that ten of the Canibales are
able to overcome a hundred of them if they encountre with them. Their meat is
a certain root, which they call Ages, Ages. Roots in the steed of meat.
Iucca.

Bread of roots


much like a nauewe root in form and greatness, but of sweet taste, much
like a green chestnutte. They have also an other kind of roots, which they
call Iucca, whereof they make bread in kyke manner. They use Ages more often
roasted or sodden, then to make bread thereof. But they never eat Iucca, except
it be first sliced and pressed (for it is full of lycoure) and then baked or
sodden. But this is to be marueyled at, that the juice of this root is a
poison as strong as Aconitum, In herb of strange nature.
so that if it be drunk, it causes present death, and yet the bread made of
the mass thereof, is of good taste and wholesome, as they all have proved. They
make also another kind of bread of a certain pulse, called Panicum, much
like unto wheat, Maizium.
whereof is great plenty in the Dukedom of Millane, Spain, and Cranatum. But
that of this Country is longer by a spanne, somewhat sharp toward the end,
and as bygge as a man's arm in ye brawne: the graynes whereof are set in a
marvelous order, and are in form somewhat like a Pease. While they be sour
and unripe, they are white, but when they are ripe, they be very black, when
they are broken, they be whiter then snow: this kind of grain they call
Maizium. Gold is of some estimation among them: Gold in estimation.
for some of them hang certain small pieces thereof at their ears and
nosethrylles. A little beyond this place, our men went a land for fresh
water, where they chanced upon a river, Gold in the sands of rivers.
whose sand was myxed with much gold. They found there no kinds of four
footed beasts, except three kinds of little conies. These islands also
nouryshe serpents, Serpents without venime.

Turtle doves. Duckes. Popiniayes.


but such as are without hurt. Likewise wild geese, turtle doves, and duckes,
much greater then ours, and as white as swannes, with heads of purple color.
Also Popiniayes, of the which some are green, some yelowe, and some like them
of India, Plini.
with yelowe rings about their necks, as Pliny describes them. Of these
they brought forty with them, of most lively and dilectable colors, having
their feathers entermingled with green, yelowe, and purple, which variety
delyghteth the sense not a little. Thus much thought I good to speak of
Popyniayes (right noble prince) specially to this intent, that albeit the
opinion of Christophorus Colonus (who affyrmeth these islands to be part of
India) does not in all points agree with the judgment of ancient writers as
touching the bygnesse of the Sphere and compass of the Globe, These Islands
are part of India.

The Indians are Antipodes to the Spanyardes.


as concerning the nauigable portion of the same being under us, yet the
Popiniayes and many other things brought from thence, do declare that these
Islands savor somewhat of India, either being near unto it, or else of the
same nature: forasmuch as Aristole also, about the end of his book de Caelo
and Mundo, Aristotle. Seneca.
and likewise Seneca* with diverse other aucthours not ignorant in
Cosmographie, do taffirme that India is no long tracte by sea, India not far
from Spain. Mastyx. Aloe.

Gossampine cotton or bombase. Seres.


distant from Spain by the west Ocean, for the soil of these islands brings
forth Mastyx, Aloes, and sundry other sweet gummes and spyces, as does India,
Cotton also of the Gossampine tree, as in India in the country of the people
called Seres.

The languages of all the nations of these islands, may well be written with
our Latin letters. For they call heaven Turei. The language of these Indians.
A house Boa. Gold Cauni. A good man, Taino. Nothing, Mayani. Al other words
of their language, they pronounce as plainly as we do the Latin tongue. Trees
and fruits unknown to us
In these islands they found no trees known unto them, but Pine apple trees,
and Date trees, and those of marvelous heyght, and exceedyng hard, by reason
of the great moystnesse and fatness of the ground, Fat and moist ground.

Heat continual and temperate. The fruitefulnesse of Hispaniola.


with continual and temperate heat of the sun, which endures so all the
whole year. They plainly affirm the island of Hispaniola to be the most
fruitful land that the heaven compasses about, as shall more largely
appear hereafter in the particular description of the same, which we entende
to set forth when we shall be better instructed. Thus making a league of
frendshyp with the king, and leaving with him.xxxviii. men to search the
island, he depar^ed to Spain, taking with him ten of the inhabitauntes to
learn the Spanishe tongue, to the intent to use them afterward for
interpretours. Colonus therefore at his return was honorably received of the
king and queen, who caused him to sit in their presence, which is a token of
great love and honor among the Spanyardes. He was also made Admiral of the
Ocean, and his brother governor of the island.

Toward the second voyage he was furnished with.xvii. ships, whereof three were
great caractes of a thousand tun.xii. were of that sort which the Spaniards
call Carauelas, without deckes, The second voyage of Colonus.
and two other of the same sort somewhat bygger, and more apt to bear deckes,
by reason of the greatness of their mastes. He had also a thousand and two
hundred armed footmen well appointed: among which were many artificers, as
smythes, Carpenters, myners, and such other, certain horsemen also, well
armed: Likewise mares, sheep, heyghfers, and such other of both kinds for
increase: Likewise al kind of pulse, or grain, and corn, as wheat, barley,
rye, beans, and pease, and such other, Corn and seeds to sow.
as well for food as to sow: beside vines, plants, and seeds, of such trees,
fruits, and herbs, as those countries lack, and (not to be forgotten)
sundry kinds of artyllerie and iron tools, Tools and artyllerie.
as bows, arrows, crosbowes, bylles, hargabusses, broad swoordes, large
targettes, pykes, mattockes, shouelles, hammers, nails, sawes, axes, and such
other, Thus being furnished accordyngly, they set forward from the Islands of
Gades (now called Cales) the seventh day before the Calendes of October, in
the year of Christ.1493. and arrived at the islands of Canarie at the Calendes
of October: Of these islands, the last is called Ferrea, in which there is no
other water that may be drunk, Water droppyng from a tree continuallye.
but only that is geathered of the deawe, which continually distylleth from one
only tree, growyng on the highest bancke of the island, and falls into a
round trenche made with man's hand: we were enfourmed of these things within
few days after his departure. What shall succeed, we will certify you
hereafter. Thus fare ye well, from the court, at the Ides of November.1493.

The second book of the first Decade, to Ascanius Sphorcia, Vicount Cardinal.
etc.
YOu repeat (right honorable prince) that you are desirous to know what
news we have in Spain from the new world, and that those things have
greatly delyted you, which I wrote unto your highness of the first
Navigations: You shall now therefore receive what has succeeded. Methymna
Campi. Castella Vetus.
Methymna Campi, is a famous town in high Spain, in respect from you, and is
in that part of Spain which is called Castella Vetus, being distant from
Gades about.xl. miles. Here the court remained, Gades.
when about the.ix. of the Calendes of Apryll, in this year of ninety and
four, there were posts sent to the king and queen, certifiyng them that
there were twelve ships come from the new islands, and arrived at Gades: but
the governor of the ships sent word to the king and queen, that he had
none other matter to certify them of by the posts, but only that the Admiral
with five ships, and fourscore and ten men, remained still in Hispaniola to
search the secrets of the island, and that as touching other matters, he him
self would shortly make relation in their presence by word of mouth:
therefore the day before the Nones of Apryl, he came to the Court him self.
What I learned of him, and other faithful and credible men, which came with
him from the Admiral, I will rehearse unto you, in such order as they declared
the same to me, when I demanded them: take it therefore as follows. The third
day of the Ides of October, departing from Ferrea, the last of the islands of
Canariae, and from the coasts of Spain, The Iland^ of Ferrea.
with a Navy of seventeen ships, they sailed.xxi. days before they came to
any island, inclining of purpose more toward the left hand then at the first
voyage, following the north northeast wind, and arrived first at the islands of
the Canibales or Caribes, Islands of the Canibales.
of which only the fame was known to our men. Among these, they chanced
first upon one, so beset with trees, that they could not see so much as an
elle space of bare earth or stony ground, this they called Dominica, because
they found it on the Sunday. The Island of Dominica.
They tarried here no time, because they saw it to be desert. In the space of
these.xxi. days, they think that they sailed eight hundred and xx. leagues,
the north northeast wind was so full with them, and so freshly followed the
stern of their ships. After they had sailed a little further, they espied
diverse islands replenyshed with sundry kinds of trees, from the which came
fragrant savors of spyces and sweet Gummes: here they saw neither man nor
beast, except certain Lysartes of huge bygnesse, Lysartes.
as they reported which went aland to view the country. This island they
called Galana or Galanta: from the cape or point of this island, The Island of
Galanta.
espying a mountain a far of, they sailed thither. About.xxx. miles from
this mountain, they saw a river dessendyng, which seemed to be a token of
some great and large flood. This is the first land which they found
inhabited from the islands of Canariae, and is an island of the Canibales, The
Island of Guadalupea.
as they learned by the interpretours which they took with them from
Hispaniola into Spain at their first voyage. Searching the island, they found
innumerable villages of.xx. houses, or.xxx. at the most, set round about in
order, Villages of.xx. or.xxx. houses.
making the street in compass like a market place. And forasmuch as I have
made mention of their houses, it shall not be greatly from my purpose to
describe in what manner they are builded: The buildyng of their houses.
They are made round like belles or round pauilions. Their frame is raised of
exceedyng high trees, set close together, and fast rampaired in the ground, so
standing aslope, and bending inward, that the tops of the trees join
together, and bear one against another, having also within the house certain
strong and short proppes or posts which sustain the trees from falling. They
cover them with the leaves of date trees, and other trees stronglye compact and
hardened, wherewith they make them close from wind and weather. At the short
posts or proppes within the house, they tie ropes of the cotton of gossampine
trees, or other ropes made of certain long and rough roots, Gossampine cotton.
much like unto the shrubbe called Spartum, whereof in old time they used to
make bands for vines, and gables and ropes for ships. These they tie
ouerthwarte the house from post to post, on these they lay as it were
certain matresses made of the cotton of gossampine trees, which grow
plentifully in these islands. This cotton the Spaniards call Algodon, Bombase.
Hangyng beds.
and the Italians Bombasine: and thus they sleep in hangyng beds. At the
entrance of one of their houses, they saw two images of wood like unto
serpents, which they thought had been such idols as they honor: but they
learned afterward that they were set there only for comeliness, for they
know none other god then the sun and moon, although they make certain
images of gossampine cotton to ye similitude of such fantasies as they say
appear to them in the night. Images.
Our men found in their houses, al kinds of earthen vessels, not much unlike
unto ours. They found also in their kytchens, man's flesh, Fine cookerie.
duckes flesh, and goose flesh, al in one pot, and other on the spyts ready to
be laid to the fire. Entering into their inner lodgings, they found faggottes
of the bones of men's arms and legs, Arrowheades of bones.
which they reserve to make heads for their arrows, because they lack iron,
the other bones they cast away when they have eaten the flesh. They found
likewise the head of a young man fastened to a post, and yet bleedyng. They
have in some vyllages, one great hall or palace, about the which their common
houses are placed: to this they resort, as often as they come together to
play. When they perceived the coming of our men, they fled. In their houses
they found also above thirty children captives, which were reserved to be
eaten, but our men took them away to use them for interpreters. Searching more
diligently the inner parts of the island, they found seven other ryuers, bygger
then this which we spoke of before, runnyng through the island, with
fruitful and pleasant banks, delectable to behold. This island they called
Guadalupea, for the similitude that it has to the mount Guadalupus in Spain,
The mount Guadalupus.
where the image of the virgin Marie is religiously honored, but the
inhabitauntes call it Carucueria, or Queraquiera: It is the chief habitation
of the Canibales. Carucueria.
They brought from this island.vii. Popiniayes, bigger then Phesants, Popiniayes
bygger then Phesantes.
much dyfferyng from other in color, having their backs, breasts, and
bellies of purple color, and their wings of other variable colors: in all
these islands is no less plenty of Popyniayes, then with us of sparrowes or
starelynges. As we bring up capons and hens to frank and make them fat, so
do they these bigger kinds of Popyniayes for the same purpose. After that
they had thus searched the island, The Canibales driven to flight.
and driven these Canibales to flight (which ran away at their first approach,
as soon as they had espied them) they called their company together, and as
soon as they had broken ye Canibales boats or lighters (which they call
Canoas) they loosed their ankers the day before the Ides of November, and
departed from Guadalupea. Colonus the Admiral, for the desire he had to see his
companions, which at his first voyage he left the year before in Hispaniola
to search the country, let pass many islands both on his right hand, and
left hand, and sailed directly thither. By the way there appeared from the
north a great island, which the captives that were taken in Hispaniola, called
Madanino, or Matinino, Matinino an Island of women.
affirming it to be inhabited only with women, to who^ the Canibales have
access at certain times of the year, as in old time the Thracians had to
the Amazones in the island of Lesbos: the men children they send to their
fathers, but the women they keep with them selves. They have great and strong
caves or dens in the ground, to the which they flee for safgarde if any men
resort unto them at any other time then is appointed, and there defend them
selves with bows and arrows, against the violence of such as attempt to
invade them. They could not at this time approach to this island, by reason of
the North northeast wind, which blewe so vehemently from the same, whereas they
now followed the East southeaste. After they departed from Madanino, and sailed
by the space of.xl. miles, they passed not far from an other island which the
captyues said to be very populus, and replenyshed with all things necessary
for the life of man. The Islands of Mons Serratus.

Huntyng for men.


This they called Mons Serratus, because it was full of mountains. The
captyues further declared, that the Canibales are wont at some time to go
from their own coasts above a thousand miles to hunt for men. The day
following, they saw an other island, the which because it was round, they
called Sancta Maria Rotunda. Sancta Maria Rotunda.
The next day, they found an other, which they called S. Martini, which they
let pass also, Sanctus Martinus.
because they had no leisure to ^arrye. Likewise the third day they espied an
other, whose Diametral side, extendyng from the East to the west, Sancta Maria
Antiqua.
they judged to be a hundred and fyftie mile. They affirm all these islands to
be marvelous fair and fruitful: This last, they called Sancta Maria Antiqua.
Saylyng forward, and leauyng many other islands, after they had sailed about
forty miles, they chanced upon an other, much bygger then any of the rest,
which thinhabitans call Ay Ay, but they named it Insula crucis: Insula crucis,
an Island of the Canibales.
Here they cast anchor to fetch fresh water. The Admiral also commanded.xxx.
men to go a land out of his own ship, and to search the island: Here they
found four dogs on the shore. The Canibales are expert Archers.
The Inhabitants are Canibales, and marvelous expert in shooting, as well women
as men, and use to infect their arrows with poison. When they had tarried there
two days, they saw a far of a Canoa, in the which were eight men, and as
many women, having with them bows and arrows. Arrows in^ected with ^enime.
They fiercely assailed our men without all fear, and hurt some of them with
their venomous arrows. Among these there was a certain woman, to whom the
other gave reverence, and obeyed as though she were their queen. Her son
waited upon her, being a young man, strongly made, of terrible and frownyng
countenance, and a Lions face. Our men, least they should take the more hurt
by being wounded a far of, thought it best to join with them. A conflict
with the Canibales.
Therefore with all speed, setting forward with their ores the brigandine in
which they were set alande, they ouerturned their Canoa with a great
violence, which being overwhelmed, they notwithstanding, as well the women as
the men, swymming, cast their darts at our men thick and threefolde. At the
length, geatheryng them selves together upon a rock covered with the water,
they fought manfully until they were overcome and taken, one being slain, and
the queens son sore wounded. When they were brought into the Admirals
ship, they did no more put of their fiercenes and cruel countenaunces, then
do the Lions of Lybia when they perceive them selves to be bound in chains.
There is no man able to behold them, The fierceness and terrible countenance
of the Canibales.
but he shall feel his bowels grate with a certain horror, nature has
endued them with so terrible menacing and cruel aspect. This conjecture I make
of me self, and other which oftentimes went with me to see them at Methymna
Campi: but now to return to the voyage. Proceeding thus further and further,
Methymna Campi.
more then five hundred miles, first toward the west southwest, then toward
the southwest, and at the length toward the west northwest, they entered into a
main large sea, having in it innumerable islands, marvelously dyfferyng one
from another, Innumerable Islands.
for some of them were very fruitful, and full of herbs and trees, other
some, very dry, barren, and rough, with high rockye mountains of stone,
whereof some were of bright blewe, or asurine color, and other glysteryng
white: wherefore they supposed them, by good reason, The mines of metals and
precious stones.
to be the m^nes of mettalles and precious stones: but the roughness of the
sea, and multitude of islands standing so thycke together, hyndered them so,
that they could cast no anchor, lest the bigger vessels should run upon
the rocks: therefore they deferred the searchyng of these islands until
another time: they were so many, and stood so thycke, that they could not
number them, yet the smaller vessels which drew no great deapth, entered
among them, and numbered forty and six islands, but the bygger vessels kept
aloof in the main sea* for fear of the rocks. They call the sea where this
multitude of islands are situate, Archipelagus. The sea called Archipelagus.
From this tracte proceeding forward, in the midde way there lies an island
which thinhabitantes call Burichina, or Buchena: Insula. S. Johannes or
Buchena.
but they named it Insula. S. Iohannis. Diverse of them whom we had delivered
from the Canibales, said that they were borne in this island, affirming it to
be very populous and fruitful, having also many fair wooddes and havens.
There is deadly hatred and continual battle between them and the Canibales.
They have no boats to pass from their own coasts to the Canibales: but if
it be their chance to overcome them when they make incursion into their
country to seek their pray (as it sometime happens, the fortune of war
being uncertain) they serve them with like sause, requiting death for death.
Death for death
For one of them mangeleth an other in pieces, and roste them, and eat them
even before their eyes. They tarried not in this island: Yet in the west angle
thereof, a few of them went a land for fresh water, and found a great and
high house after the manner of their buyldyng, having.xii. other of their
vulgar cotages placed about the same, but were all left desolate, whether it
were that they resorted to the mountains by reason of the heat which was that
time of the year, ^he moun^^ynes are col^er then the ^^aynes.
and to return to the plain when the air waxes coulder, or else for fear of
the Canibales which make incursion into the island at certain seasons. In all
this island is only one king. The south side hereof extends about two
hundredth miles. Shortly after, they came to the island of Hispaniola, being
distante from the first island of the Canibales, five hundredth leagues. Here
they found al things out of order, and their fellows slain which they left
here at their first voyage. from Domi^^ca to Hispa^^ola five hun^^ed leagues.
In the beginning of Hispaniola (having in it many regions and kingdoms as we
have said) is the region of Xamana, whose king is named Guaccanarillus. This
Guaccanarillus joined friendship with our men at the first voyage, ^he Spaniar^s
left in the ^ande are ^yne.

^yng Guacca^^rillus re^^leth.


and made a league with them: but in the absence of the Admiral, he rebelled,
and was the cause of our men's destruction, although he dissimuled the same, and
pretended friendship at the Admirales return. As our men sailed on yet a little
further, they espied a long Canoa with many ores, in which was the brother of
Guaccanarillus, with only one man waiting on him. He brought with him two
images of gold, which he gave the Admyrall in the name of his brother, Two
images of gold.
and told a tale in his language as concerning the death of our men, as they
proved afterward, but at this time had no regard to his communication for
lack of interpretours, which were either all dead, or escaped and stolen away
when they drew near the islands. But of the ten, seven dyed by change of
air and diet. The inhabitauntes of these islands have been ever so used to live
at liberty, in play and pastyme, Liberty and idleness.
that they can hardly away with the yoke of servitude, which they attempt to
shake of by all means they may. And surely if they had received our religion,
A happy kind of life.
I would think their life most happy of all men, if they might therewith
enjoy their ancient liberty. A few things content them, having no delight
in such superfluities, Superfluity.
for the which in other places men take infinite pains, and commit many
unlawful acts, and yet are never satisfied, whereas many have to much, and
none yenough. Many have to much, and none yenough.
But among these simple souls, a few clothes serve the naked: weightes and
measures are not needeful to such as can not skyl of craft and deceyte, and
have not the use of pestiferous money, the seed of innumerable mischeeues: so
that if we shall not be ashamed to confess the truth, they seem to live in
that golden world of the which old writers speak so much, The golden word.
wherein men lived symplye and innocentlye without enforcement of laws,
without quarrellyng, judges, and libelles, content only to satisfy nature,
without further vexation for knowledge of things to come. Yet these naked
people also are tormented with ambition, for ye desire they have to enlarge
their dominions: by reason whereof, Naked men troubled with ambition.
they keep war and destroy one another, from the which plague I suppose the
golden world was not free. For even then also, Cede, non cedam, that is, give
place, and I will not give place, Give place.
had entered among men. But now to return to the matter from which we have
digressed. The admiral desirous to know further of ye death of his men, sent
for Guaccanerillus to come to him to his ship, dissimulyng that he knew any
thing of the matter. After that he came aboard ship, saluting the Admiral and
his company, The Admiral sends for the king.
giving also certain gold to the captains and officers, turned him to the
women captives, which not long before our men had delivered from the
Canibales, and earnestly beholding one of them whom our men called Katherine,
he spoke gentely unto her. And thus when he had seen and marueyled at the
horses, No horses in the Islands.
and such other things as were in the ship, unknown to them, and had with a
good grace and meryly asked leave of the Admiral, he departed. Yet some there
were which counsayled the Admiral to keep him still, that if they might by
any means prove that he was consentyng to the death of our men, he might be
punyshed accordyngly. But the Admiral consyderyng that it was yet no time to
incense the inhabitants minds to wrath, A time for all ^ynges.
dismissed him. The next day following, the kings brother resortyng to the
ships, either in his own name or in his brothers, seduced the women. For on
the next night about mydnyght, this Katherine, A desperate adventure of a woman.
as well to recover her own liberty, as also her fellows, being suborned
thereto either by the king or his brothers promises, attempted a much more
difficult and dangerous adventure then did Cloelia of Rome, which being in
hostage with other maids to the king Porcena, Cloelia of Rome.
deceived her keepers, and rode over ye river Tiber, with the other virgins
which were pledges with her. For whereas they swamme over the river on
horsbacke, this Katherine with seven other women, trustyng only to the strength
of their own arms, swam above three long miles, and that also at such time
as the sea was somewhat rough: for even so far of from the shore lay the
ships at rode, as nygh as they could conjecture. But our men following them
with the shipboates, by the same light seen on the shore, whereby the women
were led, took three of them, supposing that Katherine with the other four,
went to Guaccanarillus: for in the spryng of the morning, certain messengers
being sent unto him by the Admiral, had intelligence that he was fled with all his family and stuff, and the women also, which thing ministered further
suspection that he was consentyng to the death of our men. Wherefore the
Admiral sent forth an army of three hundred men, over the which he appointed
one Melchior to be captain, wyllyng him to make diligent search to find out
Guaccanarillus. Guaccanarillus is sought.
Melchior therefore with the smallest vessels entryng into the country by
the rivers, Melchior.
and scouryng the shores, chanced into certain crooked goulfes, defended with
five little and steep hills, supposing that it had been the mouth of some great
river. He found hear also a very commodious and safe haven, and therefore
named it Portus Regalis. They say that the entrance of this is so crooked and
bending, that after the shyps are once within the same, whether they turn them
to the left hand, or to the right, they can not perceive where they came in,
until they return to the mouth of the river, although it be there so broad
that three of the byggest vessels may sail together on a froont. The sharp
and high hills on the one side and on the other, so brake the wind, that they
were uncertain how to rule their sails. In the myddle gulf of the river,
there is a promontorie or point of the land with a pleasant grove, full of
Popingiayes and other birds, Popyngiayes and birds.
which breed therein and sing very sweetly: They perceived also that two ryuers
of no small largeness fell into the haven. While they thus searched the land
between both, Melchior espied a high house a far of, where supposing that
Guaccanarillus had lain hyd, he made toward it: and as he was going, there met
him a man with a frownyng countenance, and a grymme look, with a hundred men
following him, armed with bows and arrows, and long and sharp staves like
iauelynnes, made hard at the ends with fire, who approaching toward our men,
spoke out aloud with a terrible voice, saying that they were Taini (that is)
noble men, and not Canibales: Taini.
but when our men had given them signs of peace, they left both their weapons
and fierceness. Thus geuyng each of them certain hawks bells, Hawks belles.
they took it for so great a reward, that they desired to enter bonds of
near frendshyp with us, and feared not immediately to submit themselves under
our power, and resorted to our shyps with their presents. A large house.
They that measured the house (being made in round form) found it to be from
side to side.xxxii. great paces, compassed about with xxx. other vulgar
houses, having in them many beams cross over, Reeds of sundry colors.
and covered with reeds of sundry colors, wrethed and as it were weaued with
marvelous art. When our men asked some of them where they might find
Guaccanarillus? They answered, that that region was none of his, but their
kings, being there present: Yet they said they supposed that Guaccanarillus
was gone from the plain to the mountains. Making therefore a brotherly league
with this Cacicus (that is to say a king) they returned to the Admiral, Caccius.
to make relation what they had seen and heard: whereupon he sent forth
diverse other Centurians with their hundredes, to search the country yet
further: Hoiedus and Gorualanus.
among which were Hoiedus and Gorualanus, noble young gentlemen, and of great
courage. And as they went toward the mountains to seek Guaccanerillus,
dividing the mountains between them, one of them found on the one side
thereof, four ryuers falling from the same mountains, and the other found
three on the other side. Gold in rivers ^allyng from mountains.
In the sands of al these rivers is found great plenty of gold, which the
inhabitauntes of the same island which were with us, geathered in this manner:
making holes in the sand with their hands a Cubite deep, The manner of
gathering gold.
and taking up sand with their left hands from the bottom of the same,
Graynes of gold.
they pycked out graynes of gold with their right hands without any more art
or cunnyng, and so delivered it to our men, who affirm that many of them thus
geathered, were as bygge as tares or fytches. And I me self saw a mass of
rude gold (that is to say, such as was never moulten) like unto such stones
as are found in the bottomes of ryuers, weighyng niene ounces, which Hoieda
him self found. A mass of rude gold weyghing ix. ounces.
Being contented with these signs, they returned to the Admiral to certify
him hereof. For the Admiral had commanded under pain of punishment, that
they should meddle no further then their commission: which was only, to
search the places with their signs. For the fame went that there was a
certain king of the mountains from whence those ryuers had their fall,
Caunaboa* king of the house of gold.
whom they call Cacicus Caunaboa, that is, the lord of the house of gold, for
they call a house Boa, gold, Cauni, and a king or lord Cacicus, as we have
said before. They affirm that there can no where be found better fyshe,
Wholesome water, and plenty of fyshe.
nor of more pleasant taste, or more wholesome then in these rivers: also the
waters of the same to be most wholesome to drink. Melchior him self told me,
that in the month of December, the days and nyghtes be of equal length among
the Canibales: The day and night of equal length in December.
but the sphere or circles of the heaven agrees not thereunto, albeit that in
the same month, some birds make their nestes, and some have alredye hatched
their eggs by reason of the heat, Birds breed in December.
being rather continual then extreme. He told me also when I questioned with
him as concerning ye elevation of the pole from the horizontal line, The
elevation of the pole.

The stars are called guardens of the pole.


that all the stars called Plastrum or charles wayne, are hyd under the North
pole to the Canibales. And surely there returned none from thence at this
vioage, to whom there is more credit to be given, then to this man. But if he
had been skillful in Astronomy, he should have said that the day was almost
equal with the night: For in no place toward the stay of the son (called
Solsticium) can the night be equal with the day. And as for them, they never
came under the Equinoctial, The Equinoctial line.
forasmuch as they had ever the North pole their guide, and ever eleuate in
sight above the Horizontal. Thus have I briefly written unto your honor, as
much as I thought sufficient at this time, and shall shortly hereafter (by
Gods favor) write unto you more largely of such matters as shall be daily
better known. For the Admiral him self (whom I use famyerly as my very
friend) has promised me by his letters, that he will give me knowledge of al
such things as shall chance. He has now chosen a strong place where he may
build a city, near unto a commodious haven, and has already builded many
houses, and a chapel, A chapel and priests.
in the which (as in a new world heretofore void of all religion) God is
daily served with.xiii. priests, according to the manner of our churches. When
the time now approached that he promised to send to the king and queen, and
having prosperous wind for that purpose, sent back the.xii. Carauelles,
whereof we made mention before: which was no small hynderance and grief unto
him, especially consyderyng the death of his men whom he left in the island at
the first voyage, whereby we are yet ignorant of many places and other secrets,
whereof we might otherwise have had further knowledge: but as time shall reveal
them again, so will I aduertyse you of the same. And that you may the better
know by conference had with the Apothecaries and merchant strangers
Sirophenicians, what this Regions bear, Marchantes Syrophenicians.
and how hot their ground is, I have sent you all kinds of grains, with the
bark and inner parts of that tree which they suppose to be the Cinamome
tree. The Cinamome tree.
And if it be your pleasure to taste either of the graynes, or of the small
seeds, the which you should perceive to have fallen from these graynes, or
of the wood it self, touch them first softly, moouyng them to your lyppes, for
although they be not hurtful, yet for their excess of heat, they are sharp,
and byte the tongue if they remain any while thereon: but if the tongue be
blystered by tastyng of them, the same is taken away by drynkyng of water. Of
the corn also whereof they make their bread, this brynger shall deliver some
graynes to your lordshyp, both white and black, and therewith also a trunk of
the tree of Aloes, the which if you cut in pieces, you shall feel a sweet
savor to proceed from the same. Xiloaloes, or Lignum Aloes.
Thus fare you heartily well, from the Court of Methymna Campi, the third day
before the Calendes of May. Anno Dom. 1494.

The third book of the first Decade, to Lodouike Cardinal of Aragonie, and
Neuiewe to the king.
YOu desire that foolyshe Phaeton should again rule the chariots of the
Sun, and contend to draw sweet licours out of the hard flynt, whereas you
require me to discribe unto you the new world, found in the west by the good
fortune and governance of the Catholic princes Ferdinandus and Elizabeth,
your Uncle and Aunte, showing me also the letters of king Frederike your Uncle,
written to me in that behalf: But sith you have laid this burden on my back,
in whose power it is to command me to take upon me more then I am well able,
ye both shall receive this precious stone rudely closed in lead after my manner
of workemanshyp. Wherefore, when you shall perceive the learned sort friendly,
the malicious enuiously, and the backbyters furiously, to bend their
slanderous darts against our fair Nymphs of the Ocean, you shall freely
protest in how short time, and in the myddest of what troubles and calamities
you have enforced me to write of the same. Thus fare you well, from Granata the
nienth day before the Calendes of May.

We have declared in the book herebefore, how the Admiral passed by the
coasts of the Canibales, Hispaniola.
to the island of Hispaniola with his whole navy: But now we entende further
to show what he found as concerning the nature of this island, after that he
had better searched the secrets of the same: Likewise of the island of Cuba
near unto it, which he supposed to be the fyrme land. Hispaniola therefore
(which he affirms to be Ophir, whereof we read in the third book of the
kings) is of latitude five south degrees, Ophir, whither Solomon's shyps sailed
for Gold.
having the north pole eleuate on the north side.xxvii. degrees, and on the
south side (as they say) xxii. degrees, it reaches in length from East to
West, seven hundred and fourscore miles, it is distant from the islands of
Gades (called Cales) xlix. degrees, and more, as some say: the form of the
island resembles the leaffe of a Chesnutte tree. Upon a high hill on the North
side of the island, he builded a city, because this place was most apt for
that purpose, Isabella.
by reason of a mine of stones which was near unto the same, seruyng well
both to build with, and also to make Lyme: at the bottom of this hill, is
there a great plain of threescore miles in length, and in breadth
somewhere.xii. somewhere.xx. miles where it is brodest, and six miles where it
is narrowest: through this plain run diverse fair ryuers of wholesome waters,
but the greatest of them, which is nauigable, falls into the haven of the
city for the space of half a furlong: how fertile and fruitful this valley
is, you shall understand by these things which follow. On the shore of this
river, they have lymitted and enclosed certain ground, to make gardens and
orchyardes, A token of marvelous fruitefulnesse.
in the which al kind of bygger herbs, as radishe, letuse, coleworts,
borage, and such other, wax ripe within.xvi days after the seed is sown,
likewise Melones, Gourdes, Cucumers, Herbs green all the whole year.
and such other, within the space of.xxxvi. days, these garden herbs they
have fresh and green all the whole year. Also the roots of the canes or
reeds of the licour whereof sugar is made, Sugar reeds, Plants and vines.
grow a cubite high within the space of.xv. days, but the licour is not yet
hardened. The like they affirm of plants or shroudes of young vines, and that
they have the second year geathered ripe and sweet grapes of the same: but
by reason of to much rankenesse they bear but few clusters. Furthermore, a
man of the country sowed a little Wheat about the Calendes of Februarye, Corn
and grain ripe twyse a year.
and brought with him to the city an handful of the ripe ears of the same the
third day before the calendes of April, which was that year the vigile of
the Resurrection of our Lord. Also, al kinds of pulse, as beans, peason,
fytches, tares, and such other, are ripe twyse in the year, as al they which
come from thence affirm with one voice, yet the ground is not universally
apt to bear wheat. In the mean time while these things were doing, the
Admiral sent out a company of.xxx. men to search the Region of Cipanga,
otherwise called Cibana. The region of Cipanga, or Cibana.
This Region is full of mountains and rocks: and in the myddle back of the
whole island is great plenty of gold. Gold.
When they that went to search the region were returned, they reported
marvelous things as touching the great riches of this Region. From these
mountains, descend four great ryuers, which by the marvelous industrye of
nature, divides the whole island into four parts, in manner equal,
ouerspreading and wateryng the whole island with their branches. Of these four
ryuers, the one reaches toward the East, this the inhabitants call Iunna:
another toward the weste, and is called Attibunicus: the third toward the
North, named Iachem: the last reaches into the South, and is called Naiba.
The day before the Ides of March, the Admiral him self, with all his
horsemen, and four hundred footmen, marched directly toward the South side
of the golden Region. Thus passing over the river, the plain, and the
mountain which environed the other side of the plain, The golden region of
Cibana.
he chanced upon an other vale, with a river much bygger then the first, and
many other mean ryuers running through. When he had also conueighed his army
over the river, and passed the second vale, which was in no part inferior to
the first, he made away through the third mountain, where was no passage
before, and descended into another vale, which was now the beginning of
Cibana. The vale of Cibana.
Through this also run many fluddes and ryuers out of every hill, and in the
sands of them all is found great plenty of gold. And when he had now
entered threescore and twelve miles into the golden Region from the city, he
intended to build a fortress upon the top of a hill, standing by ye shore
of a certain great river, that he might the better and more safelye search
the secrets of the inner parts of the Region: this he called the fortress of
saint Thomas, the which in the mean time while he was buyldyng, Gold for
hawks bells.
the inhabitauntes being desirous of hawks belles, and other of our things,
resorted daily thither, to whom the Admiral declared, that if they would
bring gold, they should have whatsoever they would ask. Forthwith turning
their backs, and runnyng to the shore of the next river, they returned in a
short time, bryngyng with them their hands full of gold. Amongst all other,
there came an old man, bryngyng with him two pibble stones of gold, weyghyng
an ounce, Graynes and pibble stones of gold.
desyryng them to give him a bell for the same: who when he saw our men
marueyle at the bygnesse thereof, he made signs that they were but small and
of no value in respect of some that he had seen, and taking in his hand
four stones, the least whereof was as big as a Walnut, and the biggest as
big as an Orange, he said that there was found pieces of gold so bygge in
his country, being but half a days journey from thence, and that they had no
regard to the geatheryng thereof, whereby we perceived that they pass not
much for gold, They pass not for gold, in that it is gold only but. etc.
inasmuche as it is gold only, but so far esteem it, as the hand of the
Artificer has fashioned it in any comely form. For who does greatly esteem
rough marble, or unwrought Iuorie? but if they be wrought with the cunning
hand of Phidias or Praxiteles, and shaped to the similitude of ye fair
Nymphs or Faires of the sea (called Nereiades) or the Fayres of the wooddes
(called Hamadriades) they shall never lack buyers. Beside this old man, there
came also diverse other, bryngyng with them pybble stones of gold, weighing.x.
or.xii. drammes, and feared not to confess, that in ye place where they
geathered that gold, there were found sometime stones of gold as bygge as the
head of a child. Stones of gold as big as the head of a child.
When he had tarried here a few days, he sent one Luxanus, a noble young
gentleman, with a few armed men, to search all the parts of this region: who at
his return, reported that the inhabitants showed him greater things then we
have spoken of here before, but he did openly declare nothing thereof, which
they thought was done by the Admirals commandment. They have woods full of
certain spyces, but not such as we commonly use: these they geather even as
they do gold, that is, Spices.
as much as will serve for their purpose, every man for himself, to exchange
the same with the inhabitauntes of other countries adjoining to them, for such
things as they lack, as dyshes, pottes, stools, and such other necessaries.
As Luxanus returned to the Admiral (which was about the Ides of March) he
found in the woods certain wild vines, Wild vines of plesaunte taste.
ripe, and of pleasant taste, but the inhabitauntes pass not on them. This
region, though it be full of stones and rocks (and is therefore called Cibana,
which is as much to say as a stone) yet it is well replenyshed with trees and
pastures, yea they constantly affirm, Fruitful mountains.
that if ye grass of these mountains be cut, it grows again within the
space of four days, higher then wheat. And forasmuch as many showers of
rain do fall in this region, whereof the ryuers and flooddes have their
increase, Gold in the land of ryuers falling from the mountains.
in every of the which gold is found myxt with sand in all places, they
judge that the gold is driven from the mountains, by the vehement course of
the streams which fall from the same, and run into the ryuers. The people
of this region are given to idleness and play, for such as inhabit the
mountains, Liberty and idleness. The mountains are cold.
sit quakyng for cold in the Winter season, and had rather to wander up and
down idelly, then take the pains to make them apparel, where as they have
wooddes full of Gossampine cotton: but such as dwell in the valles or playnes,
feel no cold in Winter. When the Admiral had thus searched the beginning of
the region of Cibana, he repaired to Isabella (for so he named the city)
where, leauyng the governance of the Island with his deputies, he prepared him
self to search further the limittes of the Island of Cuba or Iohanna, which
he yet doubted to be the firm land, The island of Cuba.
and distant from Hispaniola only.lxx. miles. This did he with more speedye
expedition, calling to remembrance the kings commandment, who wylled him
first with all celeritie, to ouerrunne the coasts of the new Islands, Least any
other prince. etc.
lest any other prince should in the mean time attempt to invade the same,
for the king of Portugale affirmed that it parteyned only to him to discover
these unknown lands: but the bishop of Rome, Discention between the
Portiugales and Spaniardes.
Alexander the sixth, to avoid the cause of this dissension, granted to the
king of Spain by the authority of his leaden bulls, that no other prince
should be so bold, as to make any voyages to any of these unknown regions,
lying without the precinct of a direct line drawn from the North to the South
a hundred leagues Westwarde, without the paralels of the Islands called Capud
Viride, or Cab^uerde, The islands of cobouerde or Hesperides.
which we think to be those that in old time were called Hesperides: these
parteyne to the king of Portugale, and from these his Pylotes, which do
yearly search new coasts and regions, direct their course to the East,
saylyng ever toward the left hand by the back of Aphrike, and the seas of
the Ethiopians: neither to this day had the Portugales at any time sailed
Southwarde or Westwarde from the Islands of Cabouerde. The Portugales v^ages.
Preparing therefore three ships, he made haste toward the Island of Iobanna
or Cuba, whyther he came in short space, and named the point thereof, where he
first arrived, Alpha and O, that is, the first and the last: for he supposed
that there had been the end of our East, because the son falls there, and
of the West, because it ryseth there. For it is apparent, that Westwarde, it is
the beginning of India beyond the river of Ganges, and Eastwarde, The end of
the east and weste.
the furthest end of the same: which thing is not contrary to reason,
forasmuch as the Cosmographers have left the lymittes of India beyond Ganges
undetermined, where as also some were of opinion, that India was not far from
the coasts of Spain, Note. India not far from Spain.
as we have said before. Within the prospect of the beginning of Cuba, he
found a commodious haven in the extreme angle of the Island of Hispaniola, for
in this part the Island receives a great goulfe: this haven he named Saint
Nicholas port, Saint Nicolas port.
being scarcely twenty leagues from Cuba. As he departed from hence, and
sailed Westward by the South side of Cuba, the further that he went, so much
the more the sea seemed to be extended in breadth, and to bend toward the
South. On the South side of Cuba, he found an Island which the inhabitauntes
call Iamaica, this he affirms to be longer and brother then the Island of
Scicile, having in it only one mountain, which on every part, The island of
Iamaica.
beginning from the sea, ryseth by little and little into the myddest of the
Island, and that so plainly without roughness, that such as go up to the
top of the same, can scarcely perceive that they assende: This Island he
affyrmeth to be very fruiteful and full of people, as well in thinner parts of
the same, as by the shore, Quick witted people.
and that the inhabitants are of quicker wit then in the other Islands, and
more expert Artificers, and warlyke men: For in many places where he would
have aryued, they came armed against him, and forbode him with threatnyng
words: but being overcome, they made a league of frendshyp with him. Thus
departing from Iamaica, The compassing of the earth.
he sailed toward the West, with a prosperous wind, for the space of
threescore and ten days, thynking that he had passed so far by the
compass of the earth being underneath us, Aurea Chersonesus, or Malaccha.
that he had been near unto Aurea Chersonesus (now called Malaccha) in our
east India, beyond the beginning of Persides: for he plainly believed that he
had left only two of the twelve hours of the sun, A secreate of Astronomy.
which were unknown to us, for the old writers have left half the course of
the sun untouched, where as they have but only discussed that superficial
part of the earth which lies between the Islands of Gades, and the river of
Ganges, The river of Ganges.
or at the uttermost, to Aurea Chersonesus. In this Navigations, he chanced on
many furious seas, running with a fall as it had been the streams of floods,
also many whyrlepooles, Dangerous streightes by reason of many Islands.
and shelfes, with many other dangers, and strayghtes, by reason of the
multitude of islands which lay on every side. But not regardyng al these
perils, he determined to proceed, until he had certain knowledge whether
Cuba were an island, or firm land. Thus he sailed forward, coastyng ever by
the shore toward the West for the space of.CC.xxii. leagues, that is, about a
thousand and three hundred miles, and gave names to seven hundred islands by
the way, leauyng also on the left hand (as he feared not to report) three
thousand here and there. But let us now return to such things as he found
worthy to be noted in this navigations. Saylyng therefore by the side of Cuba,
and searchyng the nature of the places, he espied not far from Alpha and O a
large haven, A large haven.
of capacity to harborowe many ships, whose entrance is bendyng, being
enclosed on both sides with capes or points which receive the water: this
haven is large within, and of exceedyng deapth. Saylyng by the shore of this
port, he saw not far from the same, two cotages, covered with reeds, and
in many places fire kyndled. Here he sent certain armed men out of the ships
to the cotages, where they found neither man nor woman, but rostemeate
yenough, Roasted fish and serpents of viii. foot long.
for they found certain spyttes of wood lying at the fire, having fyshe on
them about a hundred pound weight, and two serpents of eight foot long
apeece: whereat marueylyng, and lookyng about if they could espy any of the
inhabitauntes, and that none appeared in sight (for they fled al to the
mountains at the coming of our men) they fell to their meat, and ate the
fyshe taken with other men's travail, but they absteyned from the serpents,
which they affirm to differ nothing from the Crocodiles of Egypt, Crocodiles
of Egipte.
but only in bygnesse: for (as Pliny says) Crocodiles have sometimes ben
found of.xviii. cubits long, but of these the biggest were but of eight foot.
Thus being well refreshed, they entered into the next wood, where they found many
of the same kind of serpents, hanging upon boughs of trees, of the which,
some had their mouths tied with strings, and some their teeth taken out. And
as they searched the places near unto the haven, they saw about.lxx. men in
the top of a high rock, which fled as soon as they had espied our men, who
by signs and tokens of peace calling them again, there was one which came
near them, and stood on the top of a rock, seemyng as though he were yet
fearful: but the Admiral sent one Didacus to him, a man of the same country,
whom he had at his first voyage taken in the island of Guanahaini, being near
unto Cuba, wyllyng him to come near, and not to be afraid. When he heard
Didacus speak to him in his own tongue, he came boldly to him, and shortly
after resorted to his company, persuading them to come without al fear. After
this message was done, there dessended from the rocks to the shyps, about
threescore and ten of the inhabitants, profering friendship and gentleness to
our men: which the Admiral accepted thankfully, and gave them diverse rewards,
and that the rather, for that he had intelligence by Didacus the interpreter,
that they were the kings fyshers, The kings fishers.
sent of their lord to take fyshe against a solemn feast which he prepared
for another king. And whereas the Admiralles men had eaten the fyshe which
they left at the fire, they were the gladder thereof, because they had left
the serpents: for there is nothing among their delicate dysshes, that they
esteem so much as these serpents, in so much that it is no more lawful for
common people to eat of them, Serpents esteemed for delicate mea^^
then Peacockes or Phesantes among us: as for the fyshes, they doubted not to
take as many more the same night. Being asked why they first roasted the fyshe
which they intended to bear to their king? they answered, that they might be
the fresher and uncorrupted. Thus ioynyng hands for a token of further
frendshyp, every man resorted to his own. The Admiral went forward as he
had appointed, following the falling of the sun from the beginning of Cuba,
called Alpha and O: the shores or sea banks even unto this haven, albeit they
be full of trees, yet are they rough with mountains: Blossoms and fruits
both at one time.
of these trees, some were full of blossoms and flowers, and other laden with
fruits. Beyond the haven, the land is more fertile and populus, whose
inhabitants are more gentle, and more desirous of our things: for as soon as
they had espied our ships, they flocked all to the shore, bryngyng with them
such bread as they are accustomed to eat, and gourdes full of water, offering
them unto our men, and further, desyryng them to come alande. In all these
Islands is a certain kind of trees as big as Elmes, Trees which bear
gourds.
which bear Gourdes in the stead of fruits, these they use only for
drynkyng pottes, and to fetch water in, but not for meat, for the inner
substance of them is sowrer then gall, and the bark as hard as any shell. At
the Ides of May, the watchmen lookyng out of the top castle of the ship,
toward the South, saw a multitude of Islands standing thycke together, A
multitude of Islands.
being al well replenished with trees, grass, and herbs, and well inhabited:
in the shore of the continent, he chanced into a nauigable river, whose water
was so hot, Hot water.
that no man might endure to abide his hand therein any time. The day
following, espying a far of a Canoa of fyshermen of the inhabitants, fearyng
lest they should flee at the sight of our men, he commanded certain to
assail them privily with the ship boats: but they fearing nothing, tarried the
coming of our men. Now shall you hear a new kind of fyshyng. Like as we
with Greyhoundes do hunt Hares in the plain feeldes, A strange kind of
fisshing.
so do they, as it were with a hunting fish, take other fishes: this fyshe
was of shape or form unknown unto us, but the body thereof not much unlike
a great yeele, having on the hinder part of the head a very tough skin, like
unto a great bag or purse: this fyshe is tied by the side of the boat with a
cord, let down so far into the water, that the fish may lie close hid by
the keele or bottom of the same, for she may in no case abide the sight of the
air. Thus when they espy any great fyshe, or Tortoyse (whereof there is great
abundance, Abundance of Tortoyses.
bygger then great targettes) they let the cord at length, but when she
feels her self loosed, she inuadeth the fyshe or Tortoyse as swiftly as an
arrowe, and where she has once fastened her hold, she casts the purse of
skin, whereof we spoke before, and by drawyng the same together, so
graspeleth her pray, that no man's strength is suffycient to unloose the same,
except by little and little drawyng the line, she be lyfted somewhat above the
brymme of the water, for then, as soon as she sees the brightness of the
air, she lets go her hold. The pray therefore being now drawn nere to
the brymme of the water, there leapeth suddenly out of the boat into the sea,
Fisher men.
so many fyshers as may suffice to hold fast the pray, until the rest of
the company have taken it into the boat. Which thing done, they loose so
much of the cord, that the huntyng fyshe may again return to her place
within the water, where by an other cord, they let down to her a piece of the
pray, as we use to reward greyhoundes after they have killed their game. This
fyshe, they call Guaicanum, but our men call it Reuersum. They gave our men four
Tortoyses taken by this means, The fish Guaicanum.
and those of such byggenesse, that they almost filled their fyshyng boat:
for these fyshes are esteemed among them for delycate meat. Our men
recompensed them again with other rewards, and so let them depart. Being
asked of the compass of that land, they aunsweared that it had no end
westwarde. Most instantly they desired the Admiral to come a land, Humane
people.
or in his name to send one with them to salute their Cazicus, (that is) their
king, affirmyng that he would give our men many presents, if they would go
to him. But the Admiral, lest he should be hindered of the voyage which he
had begun, refused to go with them. Then they desired to know his name, and
told our men likewise the name of their king. Thus sailing on yet further ever
toward the West, within few days he came nere unto a certain excedyng high
mountain, A mountain fruitful and well inhabited
well inhabyted by reason of the great fertility of the same. Thinhabitauntes
of this mountain, brought to our ship, bread, gossampine cotton, cunnies, and
sundry kinds of wyldfoule, demaundyng relygiously of thinterpretours, if this
nation descended not from heaven. The king of this people, and diverse other
sage men that stood by him, informed him that that land was no Island.
Shortly after, entering into one of the islands being on the left hand of this
land, they found no body therein, for they fled al at the coming of our
men: Yet found they there four dogs of marvelous deformed shape, Dogs of
strange shape and dumme
and such as could not bark. This kind of dogs, they eat as we do goats.
Here is great plenty of geese, duckes, and hearons. Between these islands and
the continent, he entered into so narowe streyghtes, that he could scarsely
turn back the ships, and these also so shalowe, that the keele of the
ships sometime rased on the sands. white and thick water.
The water of these streyghtes, for the space of forty miles, was white and
thycke, like unto milk, and as though meal had been sparkeled throughout all that sea. And when they had at the length escaped these strayghtes, and were
now come into a main and large sea, and had sailed thereon for the space of
fourscore miles, they espied an other exceeding high mountain, whyther the
Admiral resorted to store his ships with fresh water and fuel. Hear among
certain wooddes of Date trees, Wooddes of ^ate trees.
and pyneapple trees of excedyng height, he found two native sprynges of
fresh water. In the mean time, while the woodde was cuttyng, and the
barrelles fyllyng, one of our archers went into the wood to hunt, where he
espied a certain man with a white vesture, Men appare^^d like white ^^yers.
so like a friar of thorder of saint Marye of Mercedis, that at the first
sight he supposed it had been the Admirals priest, which he brought with him,
being a man of the same order: but two other followed him immediatlye out of the
same wooddes. Shortly after, he saw a far of a whole company of men clothed
in apparel, being about xxx. in number. ^pparelled ^en.
Then turning his back, and crying out to his fellows, he made haste to the
ships with all that he might drive. These apparelled men, made signs and
tokens to him to tarry, and not to be afraid, but that notwithstanding he
ceased not to flee. The Admiral being aduertysed hereof, and not a little
reioycyng that he had found a civil people, incontinently sent forth armed
men, with commandment that if need should so require, they should enter
forty miles into the island, until they might find either those apparelled
men, or other inhabitauntes of that country. When they had passed over the
wood, they came into a great plain full of grass and herbs, in which
appeared no token of any pathway. Here attemptyng to go through the grass and
herbs, they were so entangled and bewrapt therein, that they were scarselye
able to pass a mile, the grass being there little lower then our ripe corn:
being therefore weeryed, they were enforced to return again, finding no
pathway. The day following he sent forth xxv. armed men another way,
commaundyng them to make diligent search and inquisition what manner of people
inhabited the land: Who departing, when they had found, not far from the sea
side, certain steps of wyld beasts, of the which they suspected some to be of
Lions feet, being strycken with fear, returturned back again. As they came,
they found a wood in the which were many native vines, here and there
creepyng about high trees, Native vines. Trees bearyng spices and sweet
fruits.
with many other trees bearyng aromatical fruits and spyces. Of these vines
they brought with them into Spain many clusters of grapes, very ponderous, and
full of licour: but of the other fruits they brought none, because they
putrified by the way in the ship, and were cast into the sea. They say also
that in the lands or meadows of those wooddes, they saw flocks of great
Cranes, twyse as bygge as ours. As he went forward, and turned his sails
toward certain other mountains, he espied two cotages on the shore, in the
which he saw only one man, who being brought to the ship, signified with
head, fyngers, and by all other signs that he could devise, that the land
which lay beyond those mountains was very full of people: and as the Admiral
drew near the shore of the same, there met him certain Canoas, having in them
many people of the country, who made signs and tokens of peace and frendshyp.
But here Didacus the interpretour, Diverse languages in the Island of Cuba.
which understood the language of thinhabitantes of the beginning of Cuba,
understood not them one whit, whereby they considered that in sundry provinces
of Cuba, were sundry languages. He had also intelligence, that in the inlande
of this region was a king of great power, and accustomed to wear apparel: he
said that all the tracte of this shore was drowned with water, and full of
mudde, besette with many trees, after the manner of our maryshes: Yet whereas
in this place they went alande for fresh water, Pearls in shelfyshes.
they found many of the shelfyshes in the which pearls are geathered. But
that could not cause the Admiral to tracte the time there, entending at this
viage, only to prove how many lands and seas he could discover according to
the kings commandment. As they yet proceeded forward, they saw here and
there, all the way along by the shore, a great smoke rising, until they came to
an other mountain four score miles distant, there was no rock or hill that
could be seen, but the same was all of a smoke. But whether these fyres were
made by thinhabitantes for their necessary busynes, or (as we are wont to set
beacons on fire when we suspecte thapproche of our enemies) thereby to give
warning to their neighbors to be in a redines, and geather together, if
perhaps our men should attempt any thing against them, or otherwise as
(seems most lykely) to call them together, as to a wonder, to behold our
ships, they know yet no certentie. In this tracte, the shores bended sometime
toward the South, and sometime toward the West and west southwest, and the
sea was every where entangled with Islands, The sea entangled with Islands.
by reason whereof, the keeles of the ships often times rased the sands for
shalownesse of the water: So that the ships being very sore bruised and
appayred, the sails, cables, and other tackelinges, in manner rotten, and the
vytailes (especially the biskette bread) corrupted by taking water at the
ryftes evil closed, the Admiral was enforced to turn back again: This
last point where he touched of Cuba (not yet being known to be an island) he
called Euangelista. Thus turning his sails toward other islands lying not
far from the supposed continent, he chanced into a main sea, where was
such a multitude of great Tortoyses, that sometime they stayed the ships: A
multitude of great Tortoyses.

A gulf of white water.


Not long after, he entered into a gulf of white water, like unto that whereof
we spoke before. At the length, fearing the shelfes of the islands, he returned
to the shore of Cuba by the same way which he came. Here a multitude of
thinhabitantes, as well women as men, resorted to him with cheerful
countenances, and with fear, bringyng with them popingayes, bread, water, and
cunnyes, but especially stock doves, much bygger then ours, which he
affirms, in savor and taste, to be much more pleasant then our partryches.
Wherefore where as in eating of them he perceived a certain sauoure of spyce
to proceed from them, he commanded the croppe to be opened of such as were
newely killed, and found the same full of sweet spyces, which he argued to
be the cause of their strange taste: For it stands with good reason, that the
flesh of beasts, should draw the nature and quality of their accustomed
nouryshment. As the Admiral hard mass on the shore, there came toward him a
certain gouernoure, a man of four score years of age, and of great gravity,
The humanity of a reverend old governor
although he were naked saving his pryuie parts. He had a great train of men
waiting on him. All the while the priest was at mass, he showed him self
very humble, and gave reverent attendance, with grave and demure countenance.
When the mass was ended, he presented to the Admiral a baskette of the
fruits of his country, delyuering the same with his own hands. When the
Admiral had gentelly entertained him, desyring leave to speak, he made an
oration in the presence of Didacus the interpreter, to this effect. I have been
advertised (most mighty prince) that you have of late with great power subdued
many lands and Regions, hitherto unknown to you, An oration of the naked
governor.
and have brought no little fear upon all the people and inhabitauntes of the
same: the which your good fortune, you shall bear with less insolency, if
you remember that the souls of men have two iourneyes after they are departed
from this body: The one, foul and dark, Their opinion of the soul of man.
prepared for such as are injurious and cruel to mankind: the other,
pleasant and delectable, ordained for them which in their life time loved
peace and quietness. If therefore you acknowledge your self to be mortal, and
consider that every man shall receive condign reward or punyshement for such
things as he has done in this life, you will wrongfully hurt no man. When he
had said these words and other like, which were declared to the Admiral by
the interpreter, he marueyling at the judgment of the naked old man,
answered, that he was glad to hear his opinion as touching the sundry
iourneys and rewards of souls departed from their bodies, supposing that
another he, or any other of thinhabitantes of those Regions, had had any
knowledge thereof: declaring further, that the chief cause of his coming
thither, was to instruct them in such godly knowledge and true religion: Desire
of gold, found that which religion could not ^ynde.
and that he was sent into those countries by the Christian king of Spain
(his lord and master) for the same purpose, and specially to subdue and
punyshe the Canibales, and such other mischeuous people, Virtus post nummos.
etc.
and to defend innocents against the violence of evil dooers, wyllyng him, and
al other such as embraced virtue, in no case to be afraid, but rather to open
his mind unto him, if either he, or any other such quiet men as he was, had
sustained any wrong of their neighbors, and that he would see the same
revenged. These comfortable words of the Admiral so pleased the old man, that
notwithstanding his extreme age, he would gladly have gone with the Admiral,
as he had done in deed, if his wife and children had not hyndered him of his
purpose: but he marueyled not a little, that the Admiral was under the dominion
of another: and much more, when the interpretour told him of the glory,
magnificence, pomp, great power, and furnimentes of war of our kings, and
of the multitudes of cities and towns which were under their dominions.
Intendyng therefore to have gone with the Admiral, his wife and children fell
prostrate at his feet, with tears desyring him not to forsake them and leave
them desolate: at whose pitiful requests, the worthy old man being moo^ed,
remained at home to the comfort of his people and family, satisfiyng rather
them then him self: for not yet ceassyng to wonder, and of heavy countenance
because he might not depart, he demanded oftentimes if that land were not
heaven, which brought forth such a kind of men? For it is certain, that
among them the land is as common as the sun and water, The land as common
as* the sun and water.
and that Mine and Thine (the seeds of all myscheefe) have no place with them.
They are content with so little, that in so large a country they have rather
superfluity then scarceness: so that (as we have said before) they seem to
live in the golden world without toil, living in open gardens, not entrenched
with dyches, divided with hedges, or defended with walls: they deal truly
one with another without laws, without books, and without judges: they take
him for an evil and myscheuous man, which takes pleasure in dooyng hurt to
other. And albeit that they delight not in superfluities, yet make they
provision for the increase of such roots whereof they make their bread, as
Maizium, Iucca, and Ages, contented with such simple diet, whereby health is
preserved, and diseases avoided. The Amirall therefore departing from thence,
Simple diet.
and myndyng to return again shortly after, chanced to come again to the
Island of Iamaica, being on the south side thereof, and coasted all along by
the shore of the same from the West to the East, from whose last corner on the
East side, when he saw toward the North side on his left hand certain high
mountains, he knew at the length that it was the south side of the Island of
Hispaniola, which he had not yet passed by. Wherefore, Hispaniola.
at the Calendes of September, entryng into the haven of the same Island,
called saint Nicholas haven, he repaired his ships, to the intent that he
might again waste and spoil the Islands of the Canibales, and burn all their
Canoas, The Canibales.
that those rauenyng wolves might no longer persecute and devour the innocent
sheep: but he was at this time hyndered of his purpose, by reason of a disease
which he had gotten by to much watching. Thus being feebl^ and weak,
Sickness of to much Watching.
he was led of the Maryners to the city of Is^^ella, where, with his two
brethren which were there, and other of his familiars, he recovered his health
in short space: yet could he not at this time assail the Canibales, by
reason of sedition that was risen of late among the Spanyardes which he had
left in Hispaniola, whereof we will speak more hereafter. Thus fare ye well.

The fourth book of the first Decade, to Lodouike Cardinal of Aragonie.
COlonus the Admiral of the Ocean, returning (as he supposed) from the
continent or fyrme land of East India, East India
had aduertisment that his brother Boilus, and one Peter Margarita, an old
familiar of the kings, and a noble man, The Spaniardes rebel in the Admirals
absence.
with diverse other of those to whom he had left the government of the Island,
were (of corrupted mind against him) departed into Spain. Wherefore, as well to
purge him self of such crimes, as they should lay to his charge, as also to
make a supply of other men in the place of them which were returned, and
especially to provide for vyttualles, as wheat, wine, oil, and such other,
which the Spanyardes are accustomed to eat, because they could not yet well
agree with such meats as they found in the Islands, determined shortly to
take his voyage into Spain: but what he did before his departure, I will
breefely rehearse.

The kings of the Islands which had hitherto lived quietly, and content with
their little which they thought abundant, whereas they now perceived that our
men began to fasten foot within their regions, The kings of the island rebel.
and to bear rule among them, they took the matter so grievously, that they
thought nothing else but by what means they might utterly destroy them, and
for ever abolyshe the memory of their name, The Spaniardes misbehauiour.
for that kind of men (the Spanyardes I mean, which followed the Admiral in
that navigations) were for the most part unruly, regarding nothing but
idleness, play, and liberty, and would by no means absteyne from injuries,
rauishing of the women of the Islands before the faces of their husbands,
fathers, and brethren: by which their abominable mysdemeanour, they disquieted
the minds of all the inhabitants, insomuche that wheresoever they found any
of our men unprepared, they slew them with such fierceness and gladness, as
though they had offered sacrifice to God. A just revenge.
Intendyng therefore to pacify their troubled minds, and to punyshe them that
slew his men before he departed from thence, he sent for the king of that vale,
which in the book before we described to be at the foot of the mountains of
the region of Cibana, this kings name was Guarionexius: who, the more
strayghtly to concyle unto him the frendshyp of the Admiral, gave his sister
to wife to Didacus, a man from his chyldes age brought up with the Admiral,
whom he used for his interpreter in the provinces of Cuba. After this, he sent
for Caunaboa, called the lord of the house of gold, that is, of the
mountains of Cibana: For this Caunaboa he sent one Captain Hoieda, whom the
ditionaries of Caunaboa had enforced to keep his hold, Captain Hoieda.
besieging for the space of thirty days the fortress of saint Thomas, in the
which Hoieda with his fyftie soldiers stood at their defense, until the
coming of the Admiral. While Hoieda remained with Caunaboa, many
ambassadors of the kings of diverse regions were sent to Caunaboa, persuading
him in no condition to permit the Christians to inhabit the Island, except he
had rather serve then rule. On the other party, Hoieda advertised Caunaboa to
go to the Admiral, and to make a league of frendshyp with him: but the
ambassadors on the contrary part, threatened him, that if he would so do, the
other kings would invade his region. But Hoieda answered them again, that
whereas they conspired to maynteyne their liberty, they should by that means
be brought to servitude and destruction, if they intended to resist or keep
war against the Christians. Thus Caunaboa on the one side and the other being
troubled, as it were a rock in the sea beaten with contrary flooddes, and
much more vexed with the storms of his gyltie conscience, for that he had
privily slain.xx. of our men under pretense of peace, feared to come to the
Admiral: but at the length, having excogitated his deceyt, Caunaboa conspireth
the Admirals death.
to have slain the Admiral and his company, under the color of frendshyp,
if opportunity would so have served, he repaired to ye Admiral, with his whole
family, and many other waiting on him, armed after their manner. Being
demanded why he brought so great a rout of men with him, he answered, that it
was not decent for so great a prince as he was, to go out of his house without
such a band of men: but the thing chanced much otherwise then he looked
for, for he fell into the snares which he had prepared for other, for whereas
by the way he began to repent him that he came forth of his house, Hoieda with
many fair words and promises brought him to the Admiral, at whose
commandment he was immediately taken and put in prison, so that the souls of
our men were not long from their bodies unrevenged. Thus Caunaboa with all his
family being taken, the Admiral was determined to run over the Island, but
he was certified that there was such famine among the inhabitauntes, Famine in
the island of hispaniola.
that there was already fyftie thousand men dead thereof, and that they dyed
yet daily, as it were rotten sheep, the cause whereof, was well known to be
their own obstinacy and frowardness: for whereas they saw that our men
intended to choose them a dwelling place in the Island, supposing that they
might have driven them from thence if the vittualles of the Island should
fail, they determined with them selves, not only to leave sowyng and plantyng,
The hunger of gold causes great famine.
but also to destroy and pluck up by the roots, every man in his own region,
that which they had already sown, of both kinds of bread, whereof we made
mention in the first book, but especially among the mountains of Cibana,
otherwise called Cipanga, forasmuch as they had knowledge that the gold
which abounds in that region, was the chief cause that deteyned our men in
the Island. In the mean time, he sent forth a Captain with a band of men, to
search the South side of the Island, who at his return, reported that
throughout all the regions that he trauayled, there was such scarceness of
bread, that for the space of.xvi. days, he ate nothing but the roots of
herbs, and of young date trees, or the fruits of other wild trees: but
Guarionexius the king of the vale, lying beneath the mountains of Cibana,
whose kingdom was not so wasted as the other, gave our men certain
vyttualles. Within a few days after, both that the iourneys might be the
shorter, and also that our men might have more safe places of refuge, if the
inhabitauntes should hereafter rebel in like manner, he builded another
fortress (which he called the Tower of Conception) between the City of
Isabella, The tower of conception.
and Saint Thomas fortress, in the marches of the kingdom of this
Guarionexius, within the precinct of Cibana, upon the side of a hill, having a
fair river of wholesome water runnyng hard by the same. Thus when the
inhabitants saw new buyldinges to be daily erected, and our ships lying in
the haven rotten and half broken, they began to despair of any hope of
liberty, and wandered up and down with heavy cheer. From the Tower of
Conception, searchyng diligently the inner parts of the mountains of Cibana,
there was a certain king which gave them a mass of rude gold as big as a
man's fyst, weighing.xx. ounces: this gold was not found in the bank of that
river, but in a heap of dry earth, and was like unto the stone called Tophus,
which is soon resolved into sand. This mass of gold I me self saw in
Castile, in the famous City of Metbymna Campi, where the Court lay all that
winter. I saw also a great piece of pure Electrum, of the which belles, and
Apothecaries morters, and many such other vessels and instruments may be
made, as were in old time of copper the city of Corinthus. Electrum is a
metal naturally mixed of one portion of gold, and an other of silver, being of
property to bewraye poison, and was therefore in old time in greater
estimation then gold. The mine of Electrum.
This piece of Electrum was of such weight, that I was not only with both my
hands unable to lift it from the ground, but also not of strength to remove it
either one way or other: they affirmed that it weyed more then three hundred
pound weight, after eight ounces to the pound, it was found in the house of
a certain prince, and left him by his predecessors: and albeit that in the
days of the inhabitauntes yet living, Electrum was no where dug, yet knew
they where the mine thereof was, but our men with much adoo could hardely
cause them to show them the place, they bore them such privy hatred, yet at
the length they brought them to the mine, being now ruinate and stopped with
stones and rubbyshe: it is much easyer to dygge then is the iron mine, and
might be restored again, if myners and other workmen skillful therein were
appointed thereto. An other kind of amber is taken out of great whale fishes.
Not far from the tower of Conception, in the same mountains, is found
great plenty of Amber, and out of certain rocks of the same, distilleth a
substance of the yelowe color which the Paynters use. Not far from these
mountains are many great woods, Orpement o^ oker.
in the which are none other trees then Brasile, which the Italians call
Verzino. Wooddes of brasile trees.
But here perhaps (right noble prince) you would ask, what should be the
cause, that where as the Spanyardes have brought out of these Islands certain
ships laden with Brasile, somewhat of Gossampine cotton, a quantity of
Amber, a little gold, and some spyces, why they have not brought such plenty
of gold, and such other rich marchaundizes, as the fruitefulnesse of these
regions seem to promise? To this I answer, that when Colonus the Admiral
was likewise demanded the cause hereof, he made answer, that the Spanyardes
which he took with him into these regions, were given rather to sleep, play,
and idleness, then to labor, Licentiusnes of to much liberty.
and were more studious of sedition and news, then desirous of peace and
quietness: also, that being given to licenciousnesse, they rebelled and
forsook him, findyng matter of false accusation against him, because he went
about to repress their outragiousnesse: by reason whereof, he was not yet able
to break the power of the inhabitauntes, and freelye to possess the full
dominion of the Island, and these hynderaunces to be the cause that hitherto
the gaynes have scarsely counteruayled the charges: albeit, And this only
geathered, and not dygged out of the body of the mine.
even this year while I wrote these things at your request, they geathered in
two months the sum of a thousand and two hundred pounds weight of gold.
But because we entende to speak more largely of these things in their place,
we will now return from whence we have digressed. When the inhabitauntes
perceived that they could by no means shake the yoke from their necks, they
made humble supplication to the Admiral, that they might stand to their
tribute, and apply them selves to reincrease the fruits of their country,
being now almost wasted. He granted them their request, and appointed such
order that every region should pay their tribute, with the commodities of
their countries, according to their portion, and at such time as they were
agreed upon: but the violent famine did frustrate al these appoyntmentes, for all the trauayles of their bodies, were scarcelye able to suffice to find them
meat in the wooddes, whereby to sustain their lives, being of long time
contented with roots and the fruits of wild trees: yet many of the kings
with their people, even in this extreme necessity, brought part of their
tribute, most humblye desyryng the Admiral to have compassion of their
calamities, and to bear with them yet a while, until the Island were restored
to the old state, promysyng further, that that which was now wantyng,
should then be double recompensed. But few of the inhabitauntes of the
mountains of Cibaua kept their promise, because they were sorer oppressed with
famine then any of the other. They say that the inhabitants of these
mountains dyffer no less in language and manners from them which dwell in the
playnes, The nature of the region disposes the manner of the people.
then among us the rusticalles of the country, from the gentlemen of the
court: whereas notwithstanding they live as it were both under one portion of
heaven, and in many things much after one fashion, as in nakedness, and rude
simplicity. But now let us return to Caunaboa the king of the house of
gold, King Caunaboa in captivity.
being in captivity. When he perceived him self to be ^ast in prison,
frettyng and gratyng his teeth, as it had been a Lion of Libia, and daily and
nyghtly deuysyng with him self how he might be delivered, began to persuade
the Admiral, that forasmuch as he had now taken unto his dominion the region
of Cipanga or Cibaua (whereof he was king) it should be expedient to send
thither a garrison of Christian men, to defend the same from the incursions of
his old enemies and borderers: for he said, that it was signified unto him,
that the country was wasted and spoiled with such incursions. By this crafty
devise, he thought to have brought to pass, that his brother which was in
that region, and the other his kynsfolkes and friends with their adherentes,
should have taken, either by sleight or force, as many of our men as might have
redeemed him. But the Admiral understanding his crafty meaning, sent Hoieda
with such a company of men, as might vanquishe the Cibauians, if they should
move war against them. Our men had scarcelye entered into the region, but the
brother of Caunaboa came against them with an army of five thousand naked
men, armed after their manner, with clubbes, Caunaboa his brother rebelleth.
arrows tipped with bones, and spears made hard at the ends with fire. He
stole upon our men being in one of their houses, and encamped round about the
same on every side. This Cibauian, as a man not ignorant in the discipline of
war, about the distaunce of a furlong from the house, divided his army into
five battayles, appoyntyng to every one of them a circuit by equal division,
and placed the froont of his own battle directly against our men. When he
had thus set his battayles in good array, he gave certain signs that ye whole
army should march forward in order with equal paces, A conflict between the
Cibanians and the Spaniards.
and with a larome freshly assail their enemies, in such sort that none might
escape. But our men judging it better to encountre with one of the battayles,
then to abide the brunt of the whole army, gave onset on the main battle
aranged in the plain, because that place was most commodious for the horsemen.
When the horsemen therefore had given the charge, they ouerthrewe them with the
breasts of their horses, and slew as many as abode the end of the fight, the
residue being strycken with fear, disparcled, and fled to the mountains and
rocks: from whence they made a pitiful howlyng to our men, desyryng them to
spare them, protestyng that they would never more rebel, but do what so ever
they would command them, if they would suffer them to live in their own
country. Thus the brother of Caunaboa being taken, the Admiral licenced the
people to resort every man to his own: these things thus fortunately
atchiued, this region was pacified. Among these mountains, the vale which
Caunaboa inhabited, is called Mag^na, and is exceeding fruitful, having in it
many goodly springes and rivers, in the sand whereof is found great plenty
of gold. The same year in the month of June, A great tempest in the month
of June.
they say there arose such a boystous tempest of wind from the Southwest, as
has not lightly ben heard of, the violence whereof was such, that it plucked up
by the roots whatsoever great trees were within the reach of the force
thereof. When this whyrlewynde came to the haven of the city, it beat down to
the bottom of the sea three ships, which lay at anchor, and broke the cables
in sunder, and that (which is the greater marueyle) without any storm or
roughness of the sea, only turnyng them three or four times about. The
inhabitauntes also affirm, that the same year the sea extended it self
further into the land, and rose higher then ever it did before by the memory
of man, by the space of a cubit. The people therefore muttered among them
selves, that our nation had troubled the elements, and caused such portentous
signs. These tempests of the air (which the Grecians call Tiphones, that
is, whyrlewyndes) they call Furacanes, which they say, do often times chance
in this Island: Whirle winds.

Furacanes.


but that neither they, nor their great graundfathers, ever saw such violent
and furious Furacanes, that plucked up great trees by the roots, neither yet
such surges and vehement mocions on the sea, that so wasted the land: as in
deed it may appear, forasmuch as wheresoever the sea banks are near to any
plain, there are in manner every where floryshyng meadows reaching even unto
the shore: but now let us return to Caunaboa. The death of king Caunaboa and
his brother.
As king Caunaboa therefore and his brother should have been brought into
Spain, they dyed by the way, for very pensiveness and anguish of mind. The
Admiral, whose ships were drowned in the foresaid tempest, perceiving him
self to be now enclosed, commanded forthwith two other ships (which the
Spaniardes call Carauelas) to be made: for he had with him all manner of
Artificers parteyning thereunto. While these things were dooyng, he sent
forth Bartholomeus Colonus his brother, being Lieuetenant of the Island, with
an army of men to search the gold mines, being distant threescore leagues
from the city of Isabella, which were found by the conducte of certain
people of the Island, before the mines of Cipanga or Cibana were known. In
these mines they found certain deep pittes, which had been dygged in old
time, out of these pyttes, the Admiral (who affirms this Island of Hispaniola
to be Ophir, The gold mines of Solomon.
as we said before) supposes that Solomon the king of Jerusalem had his
great riches of gold, whereof we read in the old Testament, and that his
ships sailed to this Ophir by the gulf of Persia, called Sinus Persicus. But
whether it be so or not, it lies not in me to judge, but in my opinion it is
far of. As the myners dygged the superficial or uppermost part of the earth
of ye mines, Gold in the superficial parts of the earth.
during for the space of six miles, and in diverse places syfted the same on
the dry land, they found such plenty of gold, that every hired labourer
could easily find every day the weight of three drammes. These mines being
thus searched and found, the Lieuetenant certified the Admiral hereof by his
letters, the which when he had received, the fifth day of the Ides of March,
Anno. 1495. he entered into his new ships, and took his voyage directly to
Spain, to advertise the king of all his affairs, leauyng the whole regiment
of the Island with his brother the Lieuetenant.

The fifth book of the first Decade, to Lodouike Cardinal of Aragonie.
AFter the Admirals departing into Spain, his brother the Lieuetenaunt builded
a fortress in the gold mines, as he had commanded him: this he called the
golden tower, The golden tower.
because the laborers found gold in the earth, and stone whereof they made
the walls of the fortress. He consumed three months in making the
instruments wherewith the gold should be geathered, washed, tried, and
moulten: yet was he at this time, by reason of want of vittualles, Lack of
vitayles.
enforced to leave al things imperfecte, and to go seek for meat. Thus as
he, with a band of armed men, had entered threescore miles further within the
land, the people of the country here and there resortyng to him, gave him a
certain portion of their bread, in exchange for other of our things: but he
could not long tarry here, because they lacked meat in the fortress, whyther
he hasted with such as he had now gotten. Leauyng therefore in the fortress a
garrison of ten men, with that portion of the Island bread which yet remained,
leauyng also with them a Hounde to take those kinds of little beasts which
they call Vsias, not much unlike our Conies, he returned to the fortress of
Conception. This also was the month wherein the king Guarionexius, and also
Manicautexius borderer unto him, should have brought in their tributes.
Remaynyng there the whole month of June, he exacted the whole tribute of these
two kings, and vyttualles necessary for him and such as he brought with him,
which were about four hundred in number. Vittualles brought from Spain.
Shortly after, about the Kalendes of July, there came three Carauels from
Spain, bringing with them sundry kinds of vyttualles, as wheat, oil, wine,
bakon, and Martelinas beef, which were divided to every man according as
need required, some also was lost in the caryage for lack of good lookyng to.
At the aryual of these ships, the Lieutenaunt received commandment from the
king and the Admiral his brother, that he with his men should remove their
habitation to the south side of the Island, because it was nearer to the gold
mines: Also that he should make diligent search for those kings which had
slain the Christian men, and to send them with their confederates bound into
Spain. At the next voyage therefore he sent three hundred captives, with three
kings, and when he had diligently searched the coasts of the south side, he
transported his habitation, and builded a fortress there, upon the top of a
hill near unto a sure haven: Saint Domi^ikes tower.
this fortress he called saint Dominikes tower. Into this haven runs a
river of wholesome water, replenished with sundry kinds of good fyshes: they
affirm this river to have many benefits of nature, for where so ever it
runs, all things are exceedyng pleasant and fruitful, having on every
side groves of Date trees, and diverse other of the Island fruits so
plentifullye, that as they sailed along by the shore, oftentimes the branches
thereof, laden with flowers and fruits, hong so over their heads, that they
might pluck them with their hands: also that the fruitfulnes of this ground,
is either equal with the soil of Isabella, or better. In Isabella he left
only certain sick men, and ship wryghtes, Isabella.
whom he had appointed to make certain carauels, the residue of his men, he
conueighed to the south, to saint Dominickes tower. After he had builded this
fortress, leauyng therein a garryson of.xx. men, he with the remanent of his
soldiers, prepared them selves to search the inner parts of the West side of
the Island, hitherto known only by name. Therefore about.xxx. leagues, (that
is) fourscore and ten miles from the fortress, he chanced on the river
Naiba, The River of Naiba.
which we said to defend from the mountains of Cibaua, right toward the
south, by the myddest of the island. When he had ouerpassed this river with a
company of armed men diuyded into.xxv. decurions, that is, ten in a company,
with their capitaynes, he sent two decurions to the regions of those kings in
whose lands were the great woodds of brasile trees. Inclyning toward the
left hand, they found the wooddes, entered into them, and felled the high and
precious trees, Wooddes of Brasile trees.
which were to that day untouched. Each of the decurions filled certain of the
island houses with the trunkes of brasile, there to be reserved until the
ships came which should carry them away. But the Lieutenaunt directing his
journey toward the right hand, not far from the banks of ye river of
Naiba, found a certain king whose name was Beuchius Anacauchoa, encamped
against thinhabitantes of the province of Naiba, to subdue them under his
dominion, as he had done many other kings of the island, borderers unto him. The
palace of this great king, is called Xaragua, and is situate toward the West
end of the island, distant from the river of Naiba.xxx. leagues. All the
princes which dwell between the West end and his palace, are ditionaries unto
him. All that region from Naiba, to the furthest marches of the west, is
utterly without gold, although it be full of mountains. When the king had
espied our men, laying a part his weapons, Mountains without gold.
and geuyng signs of peace, he spoke gentelly to them (uncertain whether it
were of humanity or fear) and demanded of them what they would have. The
Lieuetenaunt aunsweared, That he should pay tribute to the Admiral his
brother, in the name of the Christian king of Spain. To whom he said, How
can you require that of me, whereas never a region under my dominion brings
forth gold? For he had heard, that there was a strange nation entered into the
island, which made great search for gold: But he supposed that they desired
some other thing. The lieutenaunt answered again, God forbydde that we
should enjoin any man to pay such tribute as he might not easily forbear,
or such as were not engendered or growing in the region: but we understand
that your regions bring forth great plenty of Gossampine cotton, and hemp,
with such other, whereof we desire you to give us part. When he heard these
words, he promised with cherefull countenance, to give him as much of these
things as he would require. Thus dismissing his army, and sending messengers
before, he him self accompanied the Lieutenaunt, and brought him to his
palace, being distant (as we have said).xxx. leagues. In all this tracte, they
passed through the jurisdiction of other princes, being under his dominion: Of
the which, some gave them hemp, of no less goodness to make tackelinges for
ships then our wood: Other some brought bread, and some gossamppne cotton.
And so every of them paid trybute with such commodities as their countries
brought forth. At the length they came to the kings mansion place of Xaragua.
Before they entered into the palace, a great multitude of the kings servants
and subjects resorted to the court, honorably (after their manner) to receive
their king Beuchius Anacauchoa, with the strangers which he brought with him to
see the magnificence of his court. But now shall you hear how they were
entertained. Among other triumphs and syghtes, two are especially to be noted:
First, there met them a company of.xxx. women, The kings wives.
being all the kings wives and concubines, bearyng in their hands branches of
date trees, singyng and daunsyng: they were all naked, saving that their pryuie
parts were covered with breeches of gossampine cotton: but the virgins, having
their hear hangyng down about their shoulders, tied about the forehead with a
fyllet, were utterly naked. They affirm that their faces, breasts, pappes,
hands, Well favored women.
and other parts of their bodies, were exceedyng smothe, and well
proportioned, but somewhat inclynyng to a lovely broune. They supposed that they
had seen those most beutyfull Dryades, or the natyue nymphs or fayres of the
fountaynes whereof the antiques spoke so much. Driades.
The branches of date trees, which they bore in their right hands when they
daunced, they delivered to the Lieuetenaunt, with low curtesy and smylyng
countenance. Thus enteryng into the kings house, they found a delycate
supper prepared for them, after their manner. When they were well refreshed with
meat, the night drawyng on, they were brought by the kings officers, every
man to his lodgyng, according to his degree, in certain of their houses about
the pallaice, where they rested them in hangyng beds, after the manner of the
country, whereof we have spoken more largely in an other place.

The day following, they brought our men to their common hall, into the which
they come together as often as they make any notable games or triumphs, as we
have said before. Here, after many daunsynges, synginges, maskinges,
runnynges, A pretty pastyme.
wrestlyngs, and other trying of mastryes, suddenly there appeared in a large
plain near unto the hal, two great armies of men of war, which the king
for his pastyme had caused to be prepared, as the Spaniardes use the play with
reeds, which they call Iuga de Canias. As the armies drew near together,
they assailed the one the other as fiercely, as if mortal enemies with their
baners spleade, should fight for their goods, their lands, their lives, their
liberty, their country, their wives and their children, so that within the
momente of an hour, four men were slain, and many wounded. Four men slain
in sport
The battle also should have continued longer, if the king had not, at the
request of our men, caused them to cease. The third day, the Lieuetenant
counsaylyng the king to sow more plenty of gossampine upon the banks near
unto the waters side, that they might the better pay their trybute pryuately,
according to the multitude of their houses, he prepayred to Isabella, to vysite
the sick men which he had left there, and also to see how his works went
forward. In the time of his absence.xxx. of his men were consumed with diverse
diseases. Provision for diseased men.
Wherefore being sore troubled in his mind, and in manner at his wits end,
what he were best to do, for as much as he wanted al things necessary, as
well to restore them to health which were yet acrased, as also vitayles to
maintain ye whole multitude, where as there was yet no ship come from
Spain: at the length, he determined to send abroad the sick men here and
there to sundry Regyons of the island, and to the castelles which they had
erected in the same. For directly from the city of Isabella to saint Dominikes
tower, that is, from the north to the south, through the island, The castles or
towers of hispaniola.
they had builded thus many castles. First, xxxvi. miles distant from Isabella,
they builded the castle of Sperantia. From Sperantia.xxv. miles, was the
castle of saint Katharine. From saint Katharines.xx. miles, was saint James
tower. Other.xx. miles from saint James tower, was a stronger fortress then
any of the other, which they called the tower of Conception, which he made the
stronger, because it was situat at the roots of the golden mountains of
Cibana, in the great and large plain, The golden mountains of Cibana.
so fruiteful and well inhabited as we have before described. He builded also
an other in the mydde way between the tower of Conception, and saint Dominikes
tower, the which also was stronger then the tower of Conception, because it
was within the lymittes of a great king, having under his dominion five
thousand men, whose chief city and head of the Realm, being called Bonauum,
he wylled that the castle should also be called after the same name. Therefore
leauyng the sick men in these castles, and other of the island houses nere
unto the same, he him self repaired to saint Dominikes, exacting trybutes of
all the kings which were in his way. When he had tarried there a few days,
there was a rumor spredde, that all the kings about the borders of the tower
of Conception, had conspyred with desperate minds to rebel against the
Spaniardes. The kings rebel.
When the Lieutenaunt was certified hereof, he took his journey toward them
immediately, not being discoraged either by the length of the way, or
feebleness of his souldyers, being in manner foreweried with travail. As he
drew nere unto them, he had aduertysement that king Guarionexius was chosen by
other princes to be the Captain of this rebellion, and that he was enforsed
thereto half unwilling, being seduced by persuasions and prouocations: the
which is more lykely to be true, for that he had before had experience of the
power and policy of our men. They came together at a day appointed,
accompanied with.xv. thousand men, armed after their manner, An army of xv.
thousand Barbarians.
once again to prove the fortune of war. Here the Lieutenaunt, consultyng
with the Captain of the fortress and the other soldiers of whom he had the
conducte, determined to set upon them unawares in their own houses, before
they could prepare their army. He sent forth therefore to every king a
Centurion, that is, a captain of a hundred, which were commanded upon a
sudden to invade their houses in the night, and to take them sleepyng, before
the people (being scattred here and there) might assemble together. Thus
secretly enteryng into their vyllages, not fortified with walls, The kings
are taken prisoners.
trenches, or bulwarks, they broke in upon them, took them, bound them, and led
away every man his prisoner according as they were commanded. The Lieuetenant
him self with his hundred men, assailed king Guarionexius as the worthier
personage, whom he took prisoner, as did the other captains their kings, and
at the same hour appointed. Fourteen of them were brought the same night to
the tower of Conception. Shortly after, when he had put to death two of the
kings which were the chief autours of this new reuolte, king Guarionexius
is pardoned.
and had suborned Guarionexius and the other kings to attempt the same, least
the people for sorrow of their kings should neglecte or forsake their
country, which thing might have been great incommoditie to our men, who by
thincrease of their seeds and fruits were oftentimes aided, he freely
pardoned and dismissed Guarionexius and the other kings, the people in the
mean time flocking together about the tower, to the number of five thousand
without weapons, with pitiful houling for the deliverance of their kings: The
air thundered, and the earth trembled through the vehemency of their outcry.
The Lieutenaunt warned Guarionexius and the other kings, with threatenynges,
with rewards, and with promyses, never thereafter to attempt any such thing.
Then Guarionexius made an oration to the people, of ye great power of our men,
of their clemency toward offenders, and liberality to such as remain
faithful, desyring them to quiet their minds, and from thencefoorth neither
in deed nor thought to interpryse any thing against the Chrystians, but to
obey and serve them, except they would daily bring them selves into further
calamities. When the oration was fynyshed, they took him up, and set him on
their shoulders, and so carried him home to his own palace: and by this
means, this Region was pacifyed for a while. But our men, with heavy
countenance wandered up and down, as desolate in a strange country, lackyng
vittailes, and worn out of apparel, whereas.xv. months were now passed
sense the Admirals departure, Lack of vytayles.
during which time, they could hear nothing out of Spain. The Lieuetenaunt
comforted them all that he could with fair words and promyses. In the mean
time, Beuchius Anacauchoa (the king of the West parts of the Region of Xaragua
(of whom we spoke before) sent messengers to the Lieuetenaunt, to signifye unto
him, that he had in a redynes the gossampine cotton, and such other things as
he wylled him to prepare for the payment of his trybute. Whereupon the
Lieuetenaunt took his journey thither, and was honorably received of the king
and his sister, sometime the wife of Caunaboa the king of Cibana, bearyng no
less rule in the governance of her brothers kingdom, then he him self: For
they affirmed her to be a wise woman, of good manners, and pleasant in company.
She earnestly persuaded her brother, by thexample of her husband, to love and
obey the Christians. This woman was called Anacaona. He found in the palace of
Beuchius Anacauchoa.xxxii. kings, xxxii. kings.
which had brought their tributes with them, and abode his coming. They
brought with them also, beside their tribut assigned them, further to demerite
ye favor of our men, great plenty of vitailes, as both kinds of bread,
cunnies, and fishes, already dried, because they should not putrify: Serpents
eaten.
Serpents also of that kind which we said to be esteemed among them as most
delicate meat, and like unto Crocodiles saving in bygnes. These serpents they
call Iuannas, which our men learned (somewhat to late) to have been engendered in
the island: For unto that day, none of them durst adventure to taste of them, by
reason of their horrible deformity and lothsomnes. Yet the Lieuetenant, being
entysed by the pleasantnes of the kings sister, determined to taste of the
serpents. But when he felt the flesh thereof to be so delycate to his
tongue, he fell to amayne without al fear: the which thing his companions
perceiving, were not behind him in greedynesse, insomuch that they had now
none other talk, then of the sweetness of these serpents, which they
affirm to be of more pleasant taste, then either our Phesantes or Partriches:
but they lose their taste, except they be prepared after a certain fashion, as
do Peacockes and Phesantes, except they be enterla^ded before they be roasted.
They prepare them therefore after this manner: First, taking out their
bowelles, The dressing of serpents to be eaten.
even from the throat to the thyghes, they wash and rub their bodies very
clean both within and without, then rolling them together on a circle,
inuolued after the manner of a sleepyng snake, they thruste them into a pot, of
no bigger capacity then to hold them only, this done, putting a little water
unto them, with a portion of the Island Pepper, they seethe them with a soft
fire of sweet wood, and such as makes no great smoke: Of the ^atte of them
being thus sodde, is made an exceedyng pleasant broth or pottage. They say
also, that there is no meat to be compared to the eggs of these serpents,
which they use to seethe by them selves: they are good to be eaten as soon as
they are sodde, Serpents eggs eaten.
and may also be reserved many days after. But having said thus much of their
entertaynement and dayntie fare, let us now speak of other matters. When the
Lieuetenaunt had filled one of the Island houses with the Gossampine cotton
which he had received for tribute, Gossopine cotton.
the kings promised furthermore to give him as much of their bread as he
would demand: he gave them hearty thanks, and gently accepted their friendly
proffer. In the mean time, while this bread was a geatheryng in sundry
regions, to be brought to the palace of Beuchius Anachaucoa king of Xaragua,
he sent messengers to Isabella, for one of the two Carauelles which were
lately made there, intendyng to send the same again thither laden with bread.
The Maryners glad of these tidings, sailed about the Island, and in short
space brought the ship to the coasts of Xaragua. The sister of king Beuchius
Anacauchoa, that wise and pleasant woman Anacuona (the wife sometime of
Caunaboa the king of the golden house of the mountains of Cibana, Queen
Anacaona.
whose husband dyed in the way when he should have been carried into Spain)
when she heard say that our ship was arrived on the shore of her native
country, persuaded the king her brother, that they both might go together to
see it: for the place where the ship lay, was not paste.vi. miles distant
from Xaragua. They rested all night in the midway, in a certain vyllage in the
which was the treasury or jewel house of Anacaona. The treasury of Queen
Anacaona.
Her treasure was neither gold, silver, or precious stones, but only things
necessary to be used, as chayres, stools, settels, disshes, potingers, pottes,
pannes, basins, treyes, and such other household stuff and instruments,
workemanly made of a certain black and hard shyning wood, which that
excellent learned physician, John baptist Elisius, affirms to be Hebene.
Whatsoever portion of wit nature has given to the inhabitants of these
islands, Hebene wood.
the same does most appear in these kind of works, in which they show
great art and cunnyng, but those which this woman had, were made in the island
of Guanabba, situate in the mouth of the west side of Hispaniola: The Island of
Guanabba.
In these they grave the lively images of such fantasies as they suppose they
see walk by night, which the antiques called Lemures: Also the images of men,
serpents, beasts, and what so ever other thing they have once seen. What
would you think (most noble prince) that they could do, Cunnyng Artificers.
if they had the use of Iron and steel? For they only first make these soft in
the fire, and afterward make them holowe and carue them with a certain stone
which they find in the ryuers. A stone in the steed of Iron.
Of stools and chayres, she gave the Lieuetenaunt fourteen, and of vessels
partayning to the table and kitchen, she gave him threescore, some of wood,
and some of earth, also gossampyne cotton redye spunne, four great bottomes of
exceeding weight. The day following, when they came to the sea side, where was
an other village of the kings, the Lieuetenaunt commanded the ship boat to
be brought to the shore. The king also had prepared two Canoas, painted after
their manner, one for him self, and certain of his gentelmen, an other for his
sister Anacaona and her waiting women: but Anacaona desired to be carried in the
ship boat with the Lieuetenaunt. When they now approached near unto the
ship, certain great pieces of ordinance, were discharged of purpose, the
sea was filled with thunder, Gunnes.
and the air with smoke, they trembled and quaked for fear, supposyng that
the frame of the world had been in danger of falling, but when they saw the
Lieuetenant laugh, and look chearefully on them, they called again their
spirits, and when they yet drew nearer to the ship, and heard the noise of
the fluites, shawlmes, and drums, they were wonderfully astonished at the
sweet harmony thereof. Musical instruments.
Entryng into the ship, and beholding the foreshyp and the stern, the top
castle, the maste, the hatches, the cabbens, the keele, and the tacklynges, the
brother fyxyng his eyes on the sister, Ignorance causes admiration.
and the sister on the brother, they were both as it were dumme and amazed, and
wyste not what to say for to much woondryng. While beholding these things,
they wandered up and down the ship, the Lieutenaunt commanded the ankers to
be loosed, and the sails to be hoysed up. Then were they further astonyshed,
when they saw so great a mole to move as it were by it self, without ores,
and without the force of man: for there arose from the earth such a wind, as
a man would have wyshed for of purpose. Yet furthermore, when they perceived
the ship to move sometime forward, and sometime backward, sometime toward
the right hand, and sometime toward the left, and that with one wind, and
in manner at one instant, they were at their wits end for to much
admiration. These things finished, and the ships laden with bread, and such
other rewards, they being also recompensed with other of our things, he
dismissed not only the king Beuchius Anachauchoa and his sister, but likewise
all their servants and women, replenished with joy and wondering. After
this, he him self took his journey by foot with his soldiers to the city of
Isabella, where he was advertised that one Roldanus Ximenus, a noughty fellow
(whom before, being his servant, he had preferred to be captain of the myners
and laborers, and after made him a Judge in causers of controversy) had used
himself outragiously, and was maliciously minded against him, and further, The
intemperancie and malice of a servile wit advanced.
the cause of much mischief in his absence. For king Guarionexius (who a while
before was pardoned of his former rebellion, and persuaded the people to obey
the Spanyardes) was by his noughtie usage, and such other as were confedered
with him, so accensed to revenge the injuries which they sustained at his
hands, beside the abominable acts which they, following only the law of
nature, abhorred to admit, Ciguanians.
that he, with his famylie, famylyers, and ditionaries, of desperate mind
fled to the mountains, being distaunt from Isabella only ten leagues
westwarde, toward the north side of the sea. These mountains, and also the
inhabitauntes of the same, they call by one name, Ciguaios. The great king of
all the kings and regions of these mountains is called Maiobanexius, and his
court or palace is named Capronus: the mountains are rough, high, and such as
no man can pass to the tops thereof, they are also bending, and have their
corners reaching down to the sea. Between both the corners of the mountains,
is there a great plain, by the which many rivers fall from the mountains
into the sea, the people are very fierce and warlike men, having their
original of the Canibales: for when they descend from the mountains to the
playnes, to keep war with their borderers, they eat all such as they kill.
Guarionexius therefore, fleeing to this king of these mountains, gave him many
presents of such things as are wanting in his country, therewith declaring
how vilely, villanously, and violently he had been used of our men, with whom he
could nothing prevail, neither by fair means, nor by foul, another by
humility, nor by stoutnesse, and that to be the cause of his resorting, to him
at that time, most humbly desyring him to be his defense against thoppressions
of such myscheuous people. Maiobanexius hereuppon, made him promise to aid
and help him against the Christians all that he might. The Lieutenant therefore
made haste to the fortress of Conception, whither, as soon as he was come, he
sent for Roldanus Xeminus, who with such as followed him, lay in certain of
the Island villages, xii. miles distant from the fortress. At his coming, the
Lieuetenaunt asked him what al these sturres and tumultes meant? He answered
without abashment, Your brother the Admiral has to do therewith, and shall
answer for the fame before the king, for we perceive that the king has so
put him in trust, that he has had no regard to us: here we peryshe for
hunger, while we follow you, and are driven to seek our unhappy food in the
desartes: Your brother also assigned me assystaunt with you in gouernyng the
Island. Wherefore, sith you have na more respect unto us, we are determined no
longer to be under your obedience. When Roldanus had spoken these words, and
such other, the Lieuetenaunt would have laid hands on him, but he escaped
his fyngers, and fled to the West parts of the region of Xaragua, having
with him a train of threescore and ten men, which were of his confederacy.
Here this fylthy synke of rebels thus conspired, playde their vages, and
lived with loose brydles in all kind of myscheefe, robbyng the people,
Licenciousnesse in liberty.
spoiling the country, and rauishyng both wives and virgins. While these
things were doing in the Island, the Admiral had eight ships appointed him
by the king, of the which he sent two laden with vyttualles, from Cales or
Gades of Hercules pyllers, Hercules pyllers.
directly to the Lieuetenant his brother. These shyps by chance arrived first
on that side of the Island where Roldanus Xeminus ranged with his companions.
Roldanus in short time had seduced them, promysyng them in the steed of
mattockes, A violent persuasion.
wenches pappes: for labor, pleasure: for hunger, abundance: and for
weerynesse and watching, sleep and quietness. The fury of Guarionexius.
Guarionexius in the mean time assembled a power of his friends and
confederates, and came oftentimes down into the plain, and slew as many of
the Christian men as he could meet conuenientlye, and also the Island men
which were their friends, wasting their ground, destroying their seeds, and
spoiling their vyllages. But Roldanus and his adherentes, albeit they had
knowledge that the Admiral would shortly come, yet feared they nothing,
because they had seduced the new men which came in the first ships. While
the Lieuetenaunt was thus tossed in the myddest of these storms, in the mean
time his brother the Admiral set forward from the coasts of Spain: but not
directly to Hispaniola, for he turned more toward the south. The third voyage
of Colonus the Admiral.
In the which voyage, what he did, what coasts both of the land and sea he
compassed, and what new regions he discovered, we will first declare: for to
what end and conclusion the said tumultes and seditions came, we will express
in the end of the book following. Thus fare ye well.

The syxt book of the first Decade, to Lodouike Cardinal of Aragonie.
COlonus the Admiral, the third day of the Calendes of June, in the year of
Christ 1498. hoysed up his sails in the haven of the town Barramedabas, not
far distant from Cales, and set forward on his voyage with eight ships
laden with vittualles and other necessaries. He diuerted from his accustomed
race, which was by the Islands of Canarie, by reason of certain frenchmen
pirates and rouers on the sea, which lay in the right way to meet with him.
French men pirates.
In the way from Cales to the Islands of Canarie, about fourscore and ten
miles toward the left hand, is the Island of Madera, more southward then the
city of Civil by four degrees, The island of Madera.
for the Pole Artike is eleuate to Civil.xxxvi. degrees, but to this Island
(as the Mariners say) only.xxxii. He sailed therefore first to Madera, and
sendyng from thence directly to Hispaniola the residue of the ships laden
with vittualles and other necessaries, he him self with one ship with
deckes, and two Merchant Carauelles, coasted toward the South to come to the
Equinoctial line, and so forth to follow the tracte of the same toward the
West, to the intent to search the natures of such places as he could find
under or near unto the same, leaving Hispaniola on the north side on his right
hand. In the middle of this race, lie xiii. Islands of the Portugales, which
were in old time called Hesperides, and are now called Caput Viride, or
Cabouerde, these are situate in the sea, right over against the inner parts of
Ethiope, Westwarde two days saylyng. One of these the Portugales call
Bonauista. With the Snayles, or rather the Tortoyses of this Island, many
leprous men are healed and cleansed of their leprosy. Healing of the leper.
Departing suddenly from hence, by reason of the contagiousnesse of the air,
he sailed.CCCClxxx. miles toward the West southwest, which is in the midst
between the West and the South. Contagious air and extreme heat.
There was he so vexed with maladies and heat (for it was the month of June)
that his shyps were almost set on fire: The hoopes of his barrels cracked and
brake, and the fresh water ran out: the men also complained that they were
not able to abide that extremity of heat. Here the north pole was eleuate
only.v. degrees from the Hozizontall. For the space of.viii. days, in the
which he suffered these extremites, only the first day was fair, but all the
other, clowdy and rayny, yet nevertheless fervent hot: Wherefore it
oftentimes repented him not a little, that ever he took that way. Being tossed
in these dangers and vexations eight continual days, at the length an
Eastsoutheast wind arose, and gave a prosperous blaste to his sails. Which
wind following directly toward the west, he found the stars over that
parallel placed in other order, and an other kind of air, as the Admiral him
self toilde me. And they al affirm, that within three days sailing, they
found most temperate and pleasant air. The Admiral also affirms, that from
the clime of the great heat and unwholesome air, he ever ascended by the back
of the sea, as it were by a high mountain toward heaven, yet in all this
time, could he not once see any land: But at the length, the day before the
Calendes of July, the watchman lookyng forth of the top castle of the
greatest ship, cried out aloude for joy that he espied three exceeding high
mountains, exhorting his fellows to be of good cheer, and to put away al
pensiuenes: for they were very heavy and sorrowful, as well for the grief
which they sustained by reason of thintollerable heat, as also that their
fresh water failed them, which ran out at the ryftes of the barels, caused
by extreme heat, as we have said. Thus being well comforted, they drew to the
land, but at their first approach they could not aryue, by reason of the
shalownes of the sea near the shore: Yet loking out of their ships, they
might well perceive that the Region was inhabyted, and well cultured, for they
saw very fair gardens, and pleasant meadows: from the trees and herbs
whereof, when the morning deawes began to rise, there proceaded many sweet
sauoures. Twenty miles distant from hence, they chanced into a haven, very
apt to harborowe ships, but it had no river running into it. Sailing on yet
somewhat further, he found at the length a commodious haven, wherein he might
repair his ships, and make provision of fresh water and fuel. Arenalis
calls this land Puta. The island of Puta.
They found no houses nere unto the haven, but innumerable steps of certain
wild beasts feet, of the which they found one dead, much like a goat.
The day following, they saw a Canoa coming a far of, having in it four and
twenty young men of goodly corporature and high stature, People of comely
corporature, and long hear, near the Equinoctial.
al armed with targets, bows, and arrows: the hear of their heads was long
and plain, and cut on the forehead much after the manner of the Spaniards,
their pryuie parts were covered with fyllets of gossampine cotton, of sundry
colors enterlaced, and were beside al over naked. Here the Admiral,
consydering with him self the corporature of this people, and nature of the
land, he believed the same to be so much the nearer heaven, then other
regions of the same parallel, and further removed from the gross vapors of
the vales, The higher, the colder.
and maryshes, how much the highest tops of the byggest mountains are
distant from the deep vales. For he earnestly affirms, that in all that
navigations, he never went out of the paralels of Ethiope: So great difference
is there between the nature of thinhabitauntes, and of the soyles of diverse
regions, al under one clime or parallel, as is to see between the people and
regions being in the fyrme land of Ethiope, and them of the Islands under the
same clime, having the pole star eleuate in ye same degree. For the
Ethiopians are all black, having their hear curled, more like wool then
hear: but these people of the Island of Puta, (being as I have said under the
clyme of Ethiope) are white, with long hear, and of yelow color Wherefore it
is apparent, the cause of this so great difference, to be rather by the
disposition of the earth, then constitution of heaven. For we know, that snow
falls on the mountains of the Equinoctial, or burnt line, and the same to
endure there continuallye: we know likewise, that the inhabitauntes of the
regions far distant from that line toward the north, are molested with great
heat. The Admiral, that he might alure the young men to him with gentleness,
showed them lookyng glasses, fair and bright vessels of copper, hawks belles,
and such other things unknown to them. But the more they were called, so
much the more they suspected craft and deceyte, and fled backewarde: Yet did
they with great admiration behold our men and their things, but still having
their ores in their hands ready to flee. When the Admiral saw that he could
by no means allure them by gifts, he thought to prove what he could do with
musical instruments, and therefore commanded that they which were in the
greatest ship, should play on their drums and shawlmes. Musical instruments.
But the young men supposing this to be a token of battle, left their ores,
and in the twinclyng of an eye had their arrows in their bows, and their
targets on their arms: and thus directing their arrows toward our men,
stood in expectation to know what this noise might mean. Our men likewise
preparyng their bows and arrows, approached toward them by little and little.
But they departing from the Admirals ship, and trusting to the dexterity of
their ores, came so near one of the less ships, that one of them plucked
the cloak from the governor of the ship, and as well as they could by
signs, required him to come alande, promisyng faith that they would commune
with him of peace. But when they saw him go to the Admirals ship, whyther he
went to ask leave that he might commune with them, suspecting hereby some
further deceyt, they leapt immediatlye into the Canoa, and fleedde as swyft as
the wind, so that to conclude, they could by no means be allured to
familiarity: Wherefore the Admiral thought it not convenient to bestow any
long time there at this voyage. No great space from this Island, ever toward
the West, The violent course of the water from the East to the West.
the Admiral says he found so outrageous a fall of water, runnyng with such a
violence from the East to the West, that it was nothing inferior to a myghtie
stream falling from high mountains. He also confessed, that since the first
day that ever he knew what the sea meant, he was never in such fear.
Proceedyng yet somewhat further in this dangerous voyage, he found certain
gulfes of eight miles, as it had been the entrance of some great haven, into
the which the said violent streams did fall. These gulfes or streyghtes he
called Os Draconis, that is, the Dragons mouth: and the Island directly
oueragaynst the same, he called Margarita. The gulf called Os Draconis.
Out of these strayghtes, issued no less force of fresh water, which
encounteryng with the salt, did strive to pass forth, so that between both
the waters, was no small conflycte: But entryng into the gulf, at the length
he found the water thereof very fresh and good to drink. The Admiral him
self, and they which were his companions in this byoage, being men of good
credit, and perceauing my dilygence in searchyng for these matters, told me
yet of a greater thing, that is, A sea of fresh water.
that for the space of.xxvi. leagues, amountyng to a hundredth and four miles,
he sailed ever by fresh water, insomuch that the further he proceaded,
especially toward the west, he affirmed the water to be the fresher. After
this, he came to a high mountain inhabited only with Monkeyes or Marmasits,
Marmasets. Monkeyes.
on that part toward the East: For that side was rowgh with rockye and stony
mountains, and therefore not inhabited with men. Yet they that went a land to
search the country, found nere unto the sea, many fair fields, well tylled
and sown, but no people, nor yet houses or cotages: Parhappes they were gone
further into the country, to sow their corn, and apply their husbandry, as
we often see our husbandemen to leave their stations and villages for the same
purpose. In the west side of that mountain, they espied a large plain,
whither they made have, and cast anchor in the broad river. As soon as the
inhabitants had knowledge that a strange nation was arrived in their coasts,
The fair and large region of Paria.
they came flockyng without all fear to see our men. We understood by their
signs and poyntynges, that this Region was called Paria, and that it was very
large: in so much that the further it reaches toward the weste, to be so
much the better inhabited and replenished with people. The Admiral therefore,
taking into his ship four of the men of that land, searched the west parts
of the same. By the temperatenes of the air, the pleasau^tnes of the ground,
and the multitude of people which they saw daily more and more as they sailed,
they coniectured that these things portended some great matter: as in deed
their opinion failed them not, as we will further declare in his place. The
son not yet risen, but beginning even now to rise, being one day allured by
the pleasauntnes of the place, and sweet savors which breathed from the
land to the ships, they went a land: Here they found a greater multitude
of people, then in any other place. As our men approached toward them, there
came certain messengers from their Cacici, Humane people.
that is, the kings of the country, to desire the Admiral in the name of
their princes to come to their palaces without fear, and that they and al
theyrs should be at his commandment. When the Admiral had thanked them,
and made his excuse for that time, there came innumerable people with their
boats to the ships, having for the most part cheynes about their necks,
garlandes on their heads, and braselettes on their arms of pearls of India,
and that so commonly, that our women in plays and tryumphes, have not greater
plenty of stones of glass and crystal in their garlands, crowns, girdels,
and such other tyrementes. Being asked where they gathered them, they poynted
to the next shore by the sea banks. They signified also, by certain
scornful iestures which they made with their mouths and hands, that they
nothing esteemed pearls. Taking also baskettes in their hands, they made
signs that the same might be filled with them in short space. But because the
corn wherewith his ships were laden to be carried into Hispaniola, had taken
hurt by reason of the salt water, he determined to defer this mart to a more
convenient time: Yet he sent to land two of the ship boats laden with men, to
the intent to fetch some garlands of pearls for exchange of our things, and
also somewhat to search the nature of the Region, and disposition of the
people. They enterteyned our men gentelly, and came flocking to them by heaps,
as it had been to behold some strange monsters. First there came to meet our
men, two men of gravity, whom the multitude followed: One of these was well in
age, and the other but young. They think it was the father, with his son
which should succeed him. When the one had saluted and embrased the other,
they brought our men into a certain round house, near unto the which was a
great court. Chayers and stools of Hebene.
Hither were brought many chayers and stools made of a certain black wood,
and very cunnyngly wrought. After that our men and their Princes were set,
their waytyng men came in laden, some with sundry delycate dysihes, and some
with wine: But their meat, was only fruits, and those of diverse kinds, and
utterly unknown to us. Their wine was both white and read, not made of
grapes, but of the lycour of diverse fruits, and very pleasant in drynkyng.
After this banquet made in the old man's house, the young man brought them to
his tabernacle or mantion place, where was a great company both of men and
women, but they stood disseuered the one from the other. They are white, even
as our men are, White men near the Equinoctial.
saving such as are much conversant in the sun. They are also very gentle,
and full of humanity toward strangers. They cover their privy parts with
gossampine cotton, wrought with sundry colors, and are beside all naked. There
was few, or none, that had not either a collar, a chain, or a bracelet of
gold and pearls, and many had all. Being asked where they had that gold,
they poynted to certain mountains, seemyng with their countenance to
dissuade our men from going thither: For putting their arms in their mouths,
and grynnyng as though they bytte the same, still poyntyng to the mountains,
they seemed to insinuate that men were eaten there: but whether they meant by
the Canibales, or wild beasts, our men could not well perceive. They took it
exceedyng greeuouslye, that they could neither understand our men, nor our
men them. When they which were sent to land, were returned to the ships
about three of the clock at after noone the same day, bryngyng with them
certain garlandes, and collers of pearls, they loosed their ankers to
depart, mindyng to come again shortly, when all things were set in good
order in Hispaniola: but he was prevented by another, which defeated him of
the reward of his travail. He was also hyndered at this time by reason of the
shalownesse of the sea, Shalownesse of the sea.
and violent course of the water, which with continual tossyng, bruised the
greatest ship as often as any great gale of wind arose. To avoid the
dangers of such shalowe places and shelfes, he ever sent one of the smallest
Carauelles before to try the way with soundyng, The use of Carauels or
Brigandines.
and the byggest ships followed behind. The regions being in the large
province of Paria, for the space of.CCxxx. miles, are called of the
inhabitants, Cumana, and Manacapana: from these regions distant. lx. leagues,
is there an other region called Curiana. When he had thus passed over this long
tract of sea, supposing still that it had been an Island, and doubtyng that he
might pass by the West to the North directly to Hispaniola, A river of
marvelous deapth and breadth.
he chanced into a river of.xxx. cubits deapth, and of such breadth as has
not lightly ben heard of. For he affyrmeth it to be.xxviii. leagues. A little
further toward the West, yet somewhat more southwarde, as the bendyng of the
shore required, he entered into a sea full of herbs or weeds. The seed of
the herbs which swymme on the water, are much like the berryes of the tree
called Lentiscus, which bears the sweet gum called Mastix: they grew so
thycke, that they sometime in manner stayed the ships. The Admiral reported,
that here there is not one day throughout all the year much longer or shorter
then an other, and that the North pole is here eleuate only five degrees as at
Paria, in whose tracte all these coasts lie. The elevation of the Pole a^
Paria.
He also declared certain things as concerning the variete of the north pole:
the which because they seem contrary to thopinyons of all the Astronomers, I
will touch them but with a dry foot, as says the proverb. Note a secret
as concerning the Pole star.
But it is well known (most noble prince) that which we call the pole star,
or north star (called of the Italians Tramontana) is not the very point of
the pole Artyke, upon the which the axes or extremities of heavens are turned
about. The which thing may well be proved, if when the stars first appear,
you behold the pole star through any narowe hole: For so, An experience.
applying your instrument thereto in the morning, somewhat before the day spring
have blemished their light, if then you look through the same hole, you shall
perceive it to be moved from the place where you saw it first. But how it
comes to pass, that at the beginning of the euenyng twilight it is eleuate
in that Region only five degrees in the month of June, and in the morning
twylyght to be eleuate.xv. degrees by the same quadrant, I do not understand,
A marvelous secret.
nor yet do the reasons which he brings, in any point satysfye me. For he
says, that he hereby coniectured, that the earth is not perfectly round: but
that when it was created, there was a certain heap raised thereon, much
higher then the other parts of the same. So that (as he says) it is not
round after the form of an apple or a bal (as other think) but rather like a
pear as it hangs on the tree, and that Paria is the Region which possesses
the superminent or highest part thereof nearest unto heaven: In so much that he
earnestly contendeth, the earthly Paradyse to be sytuate in the tops of those
three hills, which we said before, that the watchman saw out of the top
castle of the ship, and that the outrageous streams of the fresh waters
which so violentlye isshue out of the said gulfes, and strive so with the
salt water, fall headlong from the tops of the said mountains: But of this
matter, it shall suffyce to have said thus much. Let us now therefore
return to the history from which we have digressed. When he perceived him
self to be thus inwrapped in so great a gulf beyond his expectation, so that
he had now no hope to find any passage toward the north, whereby he might
sail directly to Hispaniola, he was enforced to turn back the same way by
the which he came, and directed his vyoage to Hispaniola by the north of that
land lying toward the East. They which afterward searched this land more
curyouslye, will it to be part of the continent or firm land of India, and
not of Cuba as the Admiral supposed: For there are many which affirm that
they have sailed round about Cuba. But whether it be so or not, or whether
envying the good fortune of this man, they seek occasyon of quarelyng against
him, Time reuealeth ^l things.
I can not judge: But time shall speak, which in time appointed, reuealeth
both truth and falsehod. But whether Paria be continent or not, the Admiral
does not much contend, but he supposes it to be continent: He also affirms
that Paria is more southwarde then Hispaniola, by eight hundred fourscore and
two miles. At the length he came to Hispaniola (to see his soldiers which he
left with his brethren) the third day of the calendes of September, in the
year.1498. but (as often times chances in humane things) among his so many
prosperous, pleasant, and luckye affairs, fortune myngled some seeds of
wormwood, and corrupted his pure corn with the malicious weeds of cockle.

The seventh book of the first decade, to the same Lodouike Cardinal. etc.
WHen the Admiral was now come to the Island of Hispaniola, he found all
things confounded and out of order. For Roldanus (of whom we spoke before)
refused in his absence to obey his brother, The Spaniardes rebel in the
Admiralles absence.
trusting to the multitude of such as were confedered with him, and not only
behaved him self proudely against the Admiralles brother and Lieuetenant,
sometime his master, but also sent letters to his reproach to the king of
Spain, therein accusyng both the brethren, laying heinous matters to their
charges. But the Admiral again sent messengers to the king, which might
inform him of their rebellyon, instantly desyring his grace to send him a
new supplye of men, whereby he might suppress their lecentiousnes, and punish
them for their mischeuous acts. They accused the Admiral and his brother to
be unjust men, cruel enemies, The Spaniardes accuse the Admiral.
and shedders of the Spanyshe blood, declaryng that upon every light occasyon
they would rack them, hang them, and head them, and that they took pleasure
therein, and that they departed from them, as from cruel tyrants and wild
beasts reioycyng in blood, also the kings enemies: affyrmyng likewise, that
they well perceived their intent to be none other then to usurp thempire of the
Islands, which thing (they said) they suspected by a thousand conjectures,
and especially in that they would permit none to resort to the gold mines,
but only such as were their familiers. The Admiral on the contrary part, when
he desired aid of the king to infring their insolency, The Admiral^ answer.
avouched that al those his accusers, which had devised such lies against him,
were noughtie fellows, abominable knaves and vilains, thieves and bands,
ruffians, adulterers, and rauishers of women, false perjured vagaboundes, and
such as had been either convict, in prysons, or fled for fear of judgment:
so escaping punishment, but not leaving vice, wherein they still continued, and
brought the same with them to the island, living there in like manner as before,
in theft, lechery, and all kinds of mischief, and so given to Idleness and
sleep, that whereas they were brought thither for myners, laborers, and
scullyans, they would not now go one furlong from their houses, except they
were borne on men's backs, like unto them which in old time were called
Ediles Curules: For, to this office they put the miserable island me^, whom they
handled most cruelly. For least their hands should discontinue from sheddyng
of blood, These had the custodies of the temples.
and the better to try their strength and manhod, they used now and then for
their pastyme, to strive among them selves, and prove who could most cleanely
with his swoorde at one stroke stryke of the head of an innocent: So that he
which could with most agilitie make the head of one of those poor wretches
to flee quyte and clean from the body to the ground at one strocke, A cruel
and deuillyshe pastyme.
he was the best man, and counted most honorable. These things, and many such
other, the one of them laid to the others charge before the king. While these
things were dooyng, the Admiral sen^ his brother the Leauetenaunt with an
army of fourscore and ten footmen, and a few horsemen (with three
thousand of the Island men, which were mortal enimyes to the Ciguauians) to
meet the people of Ciguaua, with King Guarionexius their graunde captain,
who had done much myscheefe to our men, and such as favored them. Therefore
when the Lieutenaunt had conducted his army to the banks of a certain great
river runnyng by the plain, which we said before to lie between the corners
of the mountains of Ciguaua and the sea, he found two scoutes of his enemies
lurkyng in certain bushes, whereof the one, castyng him self headlong into
the sea, escaped, and by the mouth of the river swamme over to his companions:
the other being taken, declared that in the woodde on the other side the river,
there lay in camp six thousand Ciguauians ready, unawares to assail our men
passing bye. Wherefore the Lieutenaunt finding a shalow place where he might
pass over, he with his whole army entered into the river, the which thing when
the Ciguauians had espied, they came runnyng out of the wooddes with a terrible
cry, and most horrible aspect, much like unto the people called Agathyrsi, of
whom the poet virgil speaks: For they were all painted and spotted with
sundry colors, and especial with black and red, which they make of certain
fruits nooryshed for the same purpose in their gardens, with the juice whereof
they paynt them selves from the forhead, even to the knees, Hear made long and
black by art.
having their hear (which by art they make long and black, if nature deny it
them) wreathed and rolled after a thousand fashions, a man would think them
to be deuylles incarnat newly broke out of hell, they are so like unto
helhoundes. As our men waded over the river, they sho^te at them, and hurled
darts so thycke, that it almost took the light of the son from our men:
insomuche that if they had not borne of the force thereof with their targettes,
the matter had gone wrong with them. Yet at the length, many being wounded,
they passed over the river: which thing when the enemies saw, they fled,
whom our men pursuyng, slew some in the chase, but not many, by reason of
their swyftnesse of foot. Thus being in the wooddes, they shot at our men
more safely, for they being accustomed to the wooddes, and naked without any
let, passed through the bushes and shrubbes, as it had been wild bores or
Hearts, whereas our men were hyndered by reason of their apparel, targets,
long iauelins, and ignorance of the place. Wherefore, when he had rested there
all that night in vain, and the day following he saw no stirring in the
wooddes, he went (by the counsel and conducte of the other Island men which
were in his army) immediately from thence to the mountains, in the which king
Maiobanexius had his chief mansion place, in the village called Capronum, King
Maiobanexius.
by the which name also the kings palace was called, being in the same village.
Thus marching forward with his army, about twelve miles of, he encamped in
the village of another king, which the inhabitauntes had forsaken for fear of
our men: Yet making diligent search, they found two, by whom they had
knowledge that there was ten kings with Maiobanexius in his palace of
Capronum, with an army of eight thousand Ciguauians. At the Lieutenants first
approach, he durst not give them battle, An army of eight thousand Ciguauians.
until he had somewhat better searched the region: yet did he in the mean
time skyrmyshe with them twyse. The next night about mydnyght, he sent forth
scoutes, and with them guides of the Island men which knew the country: Whom
the Ciguauians espying from the mountains, prepared them selves to the
battle, with a terrible cry or alarm after their manner, but yet durst not
come out of the woods, supposing that the Lieuetenant with his main army had been even at hand. The day following, when he brought his army to the place
where they encamped, leaping out of the wooddes, they twyse attempted the
fortune of war, fiercely assayling our men with a main force, and wounding
many before they could coouer them with their targettes: Yet our men put them
to flight, slew many, and took many, the resydue fled to the wooddes,
where they kept them still as in their most safe hold. Of them which were
taken, he sent one, and with him another of the Island men, which was of his
part, to Maiobanexius, with commandment in this effect, The Lieuetenaunt
brought not hither his army (O Maiobanexius) to keep war either against you,
or your people, for he greatly desires your friendship: but his intent is, that
Guarionexius, who has persuaded you to be his aid against him, to the great
destruction of your people, and undoing of your country, may have due
correction, as well for his disobedience toward him, as also for rays^ng
tumultes among the people: Wherefore he requires you, King Guarionexius.
and exhorts you to deliver Guarionexius into his hands, the which thing if
you shall perform, the Admiral his brother will not only gladly admyt you to
his freendshyp, but also enlarge and defend your dominion. And if herein you
refuse to accomplish his request, it will follow, that you shall shortly
repent you thereof: For your kingdom shall be wasted with sword and fire, and
you shall abide the fortune of war, whereof you have had experience with
favor, as you shall further know heareafter to your pain, if with
stubbernesse you provoke him to show the vttermoste of his power. When the
messenger had thus done his arant, Maiobanexius answered, that Guarionexius
was a good man, endued with many virtues as all men knew, and therefore he
thought him worthy his aid, especially in as much as he fled to him for
succoure, and that he had made him such promise, whom also he had proved to be
his faithful friend: again, that they were noughty men, violent, and cruel,
Natural hatred of vice.
desiring other men's goods, and such as spared not to shed innocents blood:
in fine, that he would not have to do with such myscheuous men, nor yet enter
into frendshyppe with them. When these things came to the Lieuetenauntes ear,
he commanded the village to be burnt where he him self encamped, with many
other villages there about: and when he drew nere to the place where
Maiobanexius lay, he sent messengers to him again, to common the matter with
him, and to will him to send some one of his most faithful friends to
entreat with him of peace. Whereupon the king sent unto him one of his chief
gentelmen, and with him two other to wait on him. When he came to the
Lieuetenauntes presence, he friendly required him to persuade his lord and
master in his name, and earnestly to admonish him, The Lieuetenaunts
gentelnesse toward Maiobanexius.
not to suffer his florishyng kingdom to be spoiled, or him self to abide the
hasarde of war for Guarionexius sake: and further to exhort him to deliver
him, except he would procure the destruction both of him self, his people,
and his country. When the messenger was returned, Maiobanexius assembled the
people, declaring unto them what was done: but they cried out on him to
deliver Guarionexius, and began to curse the day that ever they had received
him, thus to disturb their quietness. Maiobanexius answered them, that
Guarionexius was a good man, A rare faithfulness in a barbarous king.
and had well deserved of him, giving him many princely presents, and had also
taught both his wife and him to sing and dance, which thing he did not little
esteem, and was therefore fully resolved in no case to forsake him, or against
al humanity to betray his friend, which fled to him for succoure, but rather
to abide al extremities with him, then to minister occasion of obloquie to
slaunderers, to report that he had betrayed his ghest, whom he took into his
house with warranties. Thus dimissing the people, sighing and with sorrowful
hearts, he called Guarionexius before him, promising him again, that he would
be partaker of his fortune while life lasted: in so much that he thought it not
best to send any further word to the Lieuetenaunt, but appointed him whom
before he sent to him, to keep the way with a garrison of men, to the intent,
that if any messengers should be sent from the Lieuetenaunt, to slay them by
the way, and admit none to communication, or further entreatie of peace. In the
mean time, the Lieutenaunt sent two, whereof the one was a captive Ciguauian,
and the other an Island man, of them which were friends to our men: and they
were both taken and slain. The Lieuetenauntes messengers are slain.
The Lieutenaunt followed them only with ten footmen and four horsemen,
finding his messengers dead in the way, he was further provoked to wrath, and
determined more extremely to deal with Maiobanexius, and therefore went forward
incontinently with his whole army to his chief palace of Capronum, where he
yet lay incampe. At his approach, al ye kings fled. every man his way, and
forsook their captain Maiobanexius, who also with all his famylye, fled to ye
rough mountains. Some of the Ciguauians sought for Guarionexius to slay him,
for that he was the cause of all these troubles: but his feet saved his life,
for he fled in time to the mountains, where he lurked in manner alone among
the desolate rocks. Whereas now the Lieuetenauntes soldiers were foreweryed
with long war, with watching, labor, and hunger (for it was now three
months sense the wars began) many desired leave to depart to the tower of
Conception, where they had graneges, and exercised tillage. He gave them their
passeports with alowance of vittayles, and so that only thyrtie remained with
him. These three months war, they continued very paynefull and myserablye:
So that during all that time, they had none other meat but only Cazibi, The
Spaniardes are painful in the wars.
that is, such roots whereof they make their bread, and that but seldom to
their fill: also Vsias, that is, little beasts like Conyes, if by chance now
and then they took some with their hounds. Their drink was none other then
water, such as they found, sometime sweet, and sometime muddy, saueryng of the
maryshes. Among these delicates, that little sleep that they had, was ever for
the most part abroad under the firmament, and that not without watchemen, and
in continual remoouing, as the nature of war requires. A desperate adventure
with thirty men.
With these few therefore, the Lieuetenaunt determined to search the
mountains, dens, and caves, if he could in any place find the steps of
Maiobanexius or Guarionexius. In the mean time certain of his men (whom
hunger enforced to go a hunting, to prove if they could take any conies)
chanced upon two of Maiobanexius familyers, which were sent to certain
villages of his, to make provision of bread. These he enforced to declare where
their lord lay hid, and used the same also for guides, to bring our men to the
place. Twelve of our men took this enterprise in hand, painting them selves
after ye manner of the Ciguauians: So that by this stratageme or policy, they
came suddenly upon Maiobanexius, A policy.
and took him prisoner, with his wife, children, and family, and conueighed
them to the tower of Conception to the Lieuetenaunt. Within a few days after,
hunger compelled Guarionexius to come out of the dens, whom certain of the
people fearing the Lieuetenaunt, bewrayed to our hunters. The Lieuetenaunt
being certified hereof, sent forth a band of foot men, commanding them to
lie in ambushe until such time as Guarionexius went from the playnes to the
mountains, and then suddenly to entrappe him. They went as they were
commanded, took him, and brought him away with them, and by this means were
all the regions near about pacified and quieted. A certain noble woman of
near kynred to Maiobanexius, and wife to another king, whose dominion was yet
untouched, followed him in all these adversities. They affirm this woman to be
the fairest and most beautiful, that ever nature brought forth in the Island:
Whom, A beautiful woman.
when the king her husband, who loved her most ardently (as her beauty
deserved) heard say that she was taken prisoner, he wandered up and down the
desartes like a man out of his wit, not knowing what to do or say. But at
the length, he came to the Lieutenaunt, promisyng most faythfullye, that he
would submit him self and all that he could make, under his power, so that he
would restore him his wife. The Lieutenaunt accepted the condition, and
restored him his wife, with certain other rulers and gentlemen which he had
taken prisoners before: charging them, and bynding them with an oath, to be
ever ready at his commandment. Shortly after, this king of his own free
motion, came again to the Lieutenaunt, bryngyng with him five thousand men
without weapons, saving only such instruments as they use in tyllage of their
ground. He brought with him also seeds to sow, wherewith at his own charge,
he caused such plenty of their corn and fruits to grow in sundry places of
the larg vale, whereof we spoke before, that shortly after, were seen many
fair and fruitful feeldes that came thereof: and for his gentelnesse being
rewarded of the Lieuetenaunte with certain of our things, he departed
ioyfullye. When the report hereof came to the Ciguauians, The kings submit
them selves to the Lieuetenaunt.
it moved the minds of the kings to hope of clemency, whereupon they came
together to the Lieuetenaunt with humble submission and faithful promise, ever
after to be under his obedience, desyryng him to restore unto them their king
with his family. At their request, the kings wife and his household was set
at liberty, but the king kept still as a prisoner. These things did the
Lieutenaunt in the Island, not yet knowing what his adversaries and accusers
had laid to his charge before the king of Spain: who being disquieted with
their quarelinges and accusations, and especially for that by reason of their
discention, of so great abundance of gold and other things, there was as yet
but little brought into Spain, appointed a new governor, which should see a
redress in these things: A new governor of the Island.
and either to punyshe such as were fautie, or else to send them to him. What
was found against the Admiral and his brother, or against his adversaries
which accused him, I do not well know. But this I am sure of, that both the
brethren are taken, brought, and cast in prison, with their goods confiscate.
But as soon as the king understood that they were brought bound to Cales, he
sent messengers in post, with commandment that they should be loosed and
come freely to his presence: whereby he declared that he took their troubles
grievously. It is also said, that the new governor sent letters to the king,
written with the Admiralles hand in strange and unknown sypheringes, to his
brother the Lieuetenaunt being absent, wyllyng him to be in a redynes with a
power of armed men to come and aid him, if the Gouernoure should proffer him
any violence. Whereof the governor having knowledge (as he says) being also
advertised that the Lieuetenaunt was gone to his brother before the men which
he had prepared were in a redines, apprehended them both unawares, before the
multitude came together. What will follow, time, the most true and prudent
Judge will declare. Thus fare ye well.

The eygth book of the first Decade, to Cardinal Lodouike.
The Ocean sea heretofore unknown.
THe great, rich, and plentiful Ocean sea, heretofore unknown, and now
found by Christophorus Colonus the Admiral, by thautoritie and furtherance of
the Catholyke king, I have presented unto your honor (right noble Prince) like
a golden chain vnworkmanly wrought: but you shall now receive a precious jewel
to be appendaunt thereto. Therefore among such as were pylottes or governors
under the admyrall, and had dyligently marked the courses and dyfferences of
the winds, many had lycences granted them of the king to seek further at
their own charges, upon condition to pay him faithfully his portion, which is
the fyfte part. But because among all other, one Petrus Alphonsus, called
Nignus by his surname, The navigations of Petrus Alphonsus.
sailed toward the south with more prosperous fortune then any of the other, I
think it best first to speak somewhat of his voyage. He therefore with only
one ship, well furnished at his own charges, after that he had his passeporte,
with commandment in no case to cast anchor past fyftye leagues distant from
any place where the Admiral had touched, sailed first to Paria, where the
Admiral found both the men and women so laden with cheines, garlandes, and
braselettes of pearls, as we have said before. Coastyng therefore along by the
same shore, according to the kings commandment (yet leaving behynd him the
regions of Cumana and Manacapana) he came to the regions which thinhabitantes
thereof call Curiana, where he found a haven (as he says) much like the port of
Gades or Cales: into the which enteryng, he saw a far of certain houses one
the shore, and perceived, when he drew near, that it was a village of only
eight houses. Proceading yet further for the space of three miles, he espied an
other village well replenyshed with people, where there met him fyftye naked
men on a company, having with them a certain ruler, who desired Alphonsus to
come to their coasts. He brought with him at this time, many hawks belles,
pynnes, nedels, braselettes, cheynes, garlandes, and rings, with counterfeit
stones and glasses, and such other tryfelles, the which within the moment of an
hour, he had exchaunged for fyfteene ounces of their pearls, Pearls for
tryfles.
which they wore about their necks and arms. Then they yet more ernestly
desired him to sail to their coasts, promysyng him that he should there have
as many pearls as he would desire. He condiscended to their request: and the
day following, Great plenty of pearls.
came to the place where they appointed him: Lying there at anchor, a great
multitude of people resorted to him, instantly requyring him to come alande.
But when he considered the innumerable multitude of people which was there
assembled, and he had only.xxxiii. men in his company, he durst not commit him
self to their hands, but gave them to understand by signs and tokens, that
they should come to the ship with their Canoas: for their boats (which the
men of the island call Canoas) are made only of one whole piece of wood as in the
Islands, yet more rude, and not so artificially as theyrs are: these they call
Gallitas. These swarmed therefore to the ship as fast as they might, bringyng
with them great plenty of pearls (which they call Tenoras) exchanging the same
for our marchaundies. He found this people to be of gentle nature, simple,
and innocent, being conversant with them in their houses, for the space of xx.
days. Their houses are made of wood, covered with the leaves of date trees.
Their meat for the most part, is the shelfyshes in the which the pearls are
engendered, Shel fyshes in which pearls are engendered.
whereof their sea costs are full. They have also great plenty of wyld
beasts, as hearts, wyld bores, and connies like unto hares, both in color
and bigness, stock doves also, and turtle doves: likewise geese and duckes,
which they norishe in their houses as we do. Peacockes flee about in manner in
every wood and grove, but they are not distinct with sundry colors as ours
are: for the cocks are like unto the hens. These people of Curiana are
crafty hunters, and exceeding cunning archers, so that they will not lightly
miss any beast or bird that they shoot at. Our men consumed certain days
hear very plesauntely: during which time, whosoever brought them a peacocke,
had for the same four pinnes: he that brought a pheasaunte, Their manner of
bargayning.
had two, and for a stock dove, or turtle dove, one, and for a goose, a small
looking glass, or a little stone of glass. Thus they bought and sold with
profering and bydding, denying and refusing, as it had been in a great market.
When pinnes were proffered them, they asked what they should do with them,
being naked: But our men satisfied them with a crafty answer, declaring by
tokens that they were very necessary, The use of pynnes.
to pick their teeth, and to pull thorns out of their flesh. But above al
things, Hawks belles in great estimation.
hawks belles were most esteemed among them, for their sound and fair color,
and would therefore give much for one of them. Our men, lodging in their
houses, heard in the night season horrible noyses and rorynges of wild beasts
in the wooddes, which are full of exceeding great and high trees of sundry
kinds: Roaring of wild beasts.
but the beasts of these woods, are not noisome to men, for the people of the
country goo daily a huntyng naked, with their bows and arrows, yet has it
not ben hard of, that any man has been slain of any wild beast. As many
hearts or wild bores as our men would desire them to bring, they would kill
in the woods with their arrows, Hearts and wild bores.
and not to fail to bring them. They lack kyne, goats and sheep. Their
bread is made of roots, as is theyrs of the Islands. This nation, has black
hear, gross and somewhat curlde, yet long also. They keep their teeth very
white, and for that purpose use to carry a certain herb between their lyppes
for the most part of the day, and to wash their mouthts when they cast it
away. The women do all their busynes at home in their howses, and have also
the cure of tyllage of the ground: but the men apply them selves to the wars
and huntyng, to play, syngyng and daunsyng. They have sundry kinds of water
pottes, iugges, and drinkyng cups made of earth in other places about them,
and brought thither for exchaung of other things: For they use fayres and
markettes for the same purpose, and are greatly desirous of such things, as
are not brought forth or made in their country, as nature has given a
disposytion to al men, to desire and be delyted with new and strange things.
Many of them had hangyng at their pearls the images of certain beasts and
birds, very artifitiously made of gold, Cunnyng artificers.
but not pure: these also are brought them from other places for exchang of
other things. The gold whereof they are made, is native, and of much like
finenes to that whereof the florens are coined. Base gold.
The men of this country, enclose their privy members in a gourde, cut
after the fashion of a coddepice, or else cover the same with the shell of a
tortoyse, tied about their loins with laces of gossampine cotton: In other
places of that tract, they thrust the synew within the sheeth thereof, and bind
the skin fast with a string. The great wild beasts whereof we spoke before,
and many other things which are not found in any of the Islands, testify that
this region is part of ye continet or firm land. But the chiefest conjecture
whereby they argue the same, is, Tokens of the continent or firm land.
that by the coasts of that land, from Paria toward the west, they sailed
about three. M. miles, findyng no sign or token of any end. These people of
Curiana (which some call Curtana) being demanded where they had such plenty
of gold, signified that it was brought them from a region called Canchieta,
The golden region of Canchieta.
or Cauchieta, being distant from them six suns, that is, six days journey
westwarde: and that their images of gold were made in the same region.
Whereupon our men directed their voyage thither immediately, and aryued there at
the Kalendes of November, in the year of Christ a thousand and five hundred.
The people of the country resorted to them without fear, bryngyng with them
of the gold which we said to be native in that region. This people had also
collers of pearls about their necks, which were brought them from Curiana for
exchange of their marchandises. None of them would exchange any of those
things which they had out of other countries: as neither the Curians gold,
nor the Canchietans pearls: yet among the Canchietans they found but little
gold ready geathered. They took with them from thence certain very fair
Marmasets or Munkeyes, and many Popyngayes of sundry colors. In the month
of November, the air was there most temperate, and nothing cold. The guardens
of the north pole were out of sight to both these people, they are so near the
Equinoctial. The Equinoctial line.
Of the degrees of the pole, they can give none other account. These people
are well disposed men, of honest conditions, and nothing suspicious, for almost
all the night long they resorted to the ship with their boats, and went
aboorde ship without fear, as did the Curians. They call pearls, Corixas.
They are somewhat ielous, for when any strangers come among them, they ever
place their women behind them. In this region of Canchieta, the gossampine
trees grow of them selves commonly in many places, Gossampine trees.
as do with us elmes, wyllowes, and sallowes: and therefore they use to make
breeches of cotton, wherewith they cover their privy parts in many other
regions thereabout. When they had yet sailed on forward by the same coasts,
there came forth against them about two thousand men, armed after their
manner, forbyddyng them to come alande. These people were so rude and savage,
that our men could by no means allure them to familiarity. Our men
therefore, contented only with their pearls, returned back ye same way they
came, where they remained with the Curians continually for the space of.xx.
days, and filled their bellies well with good meat. And here it seems to me
not far from my purpose, to declare what chanced unto them in their return
when they came now within the sight of the coast of Paria. They happened
therefore in the way, at Os Draconis, and the gulfes of Paria (whereof we spoke
before) to meet with a navy of xviii. Canoas of Canibales, which went a rouing
to hunt for men: Canibales in the gulfes of Paria.
who as soon as they had espied our men, assailed their ship fiercely, and
without fear enclosed ye same, disturbing our men on every side with their
arrows: but our men so feared them with their gunnes, that they fled
immediately, who^ our men following with the ship boat, took one of their
Canoas, and in it only one Canibal (for the other had escaped) and with him
another man bound, who with tears runnyng down his cheeks, and with gesture
of his hands, eyes, and head, signified that six of his companions had been
cruelly cut in pieces, and eaten of that mischeuous nation, and that he should
have been likewise handled the day following: wherefore they gave him power over
the Canibal, to do with him what he would. Then with the Canibals own clubbe,
Death for death.
he laid on him all that he might drive with hand and foot, grinning and
f^etting as it had been a wyld bore, thinkyng that he had not yet sufficiently
revenged the death of his companions, when he had beaten out his brains and
guts. When he was demanded after what sort the Canibales were wont to
invade other countries, he answered, that they ever used to carye with them in
their Canoas, a great multitude of clubbes, the which, wheresoever they do
land, How the Canibales fortify their camp.
they pytch in the ground, and encampe them selves within the compass of the
same, to lie the more safely in the night season. In Curiana they found the
head of a captain of the Canibales, nailed over the door of a certain
governor for a token of victory, as it had been the standerde or helmet taken
from the enemy in battle. In these coasts of Paria is a region called
Haraia, in the which great plenty of salt is geathered after a strange sort:
Haraia.
for the sea being there tossed with the power of the wyndes, dryueth the salt
waters into a large plain by the sea side, where, afterward when the sea
waxes calm, and the sun begins to shine, the water is coniealed into
most pure and white salt, wherewith innumerable shyypes might be laden, if men
did resort thither for the same before there fale any rain: For the rain
melts it, and causes it to synke into the sand, and so by the poores of the
earth, to return to the place from whence it was driven. Other say, that the
plain is not filled from the sea, but of certain sprynges whose water is more
sharp and salt then the water of the sea. Springes of salt water.
Thinhabitantes do greatly esteem this bay of salt, which they use, not only
for their own commodity, but also woorking the same into a square form like
unto brickes, they sell it to strangers for exchange of other things which
the lack. The bodies of princes dried and reserved.
In this Region, they stretche and dry the dead bodies of their kings and
noble men, laying the same upon a certain frame of woodde, much like unto a
hurdle or grediren, with a gentell fire under the same, by little and little
consumyng the flesh, and keeping the skin hole with the bones enclosed
therein. These dried carcases, they have in great reverence, and honor them
for their houshoulde and famylier gods. They say that in this place they saw a
man, and in an other place a woman, thus dried and reserved. When they departed
from Curiana, the.viii. day of the Ides of February, to return to Spain, they
had threescore and.xvi. pounds weight (after.viii. ounces to the pound) of
pearls, which they bought for exchange of our things, amounting to the value
of five shillinges. Departing therefore, they consumed threescore days in their
journey (although it were shorter then from Hispaniola) by reason of the
continual course of the sea in the west, which did not only greatly stey the
ship, but also somtymes drive it back. But at the length they came home so
laden with pearls, that they were with every maryner, in manner as common as
chafe. But the master of the ship, Petrus Alphonsus, being accused of his
companyons that he had stowlen a great multitude of precious pearls, and
defrauded the king of his portion which was the fifth part, was taken of
Fernando de Vega, a man of great lerning and experience, and governor of
Gallecia, where they aryued, and was there kept in prison a long time. But he
still denies that ever he deteyned any part of the pearls. Many of these
pearls were as bygge as hasell nuttes, Orient pearls ^s bygge as ^asel nuts.
and as orient (as we call it) as they be of the East parts: Yet not of so
great price, by reason that the holes thereof are not so perfect. When I my
self was present with the right honorable duke of Methyna, and was bidde^ to
dynner with him, in the city of Civil, they brought to him above a hundred
and twenty ounces of pearls to be sold, which surely did greatly delight me
with their fayrenes and brightness. Some say, that Alphonsus had not these
pearls in Curiana, being distant from Os Draconis more then a hundred and
twenty leagues, but that they had them in the regions of Cumana and
Manacapana, nere unto Os Draconis and the island of Margarita: for they deny
that there is any pearls found in Curiana. But since the matter is yet in
controversy, The Island of Margarita.
we will pass to other matters. Thus much you have, whereby you may
conjecture, what commodity in time to come may be looked for from these new
lands of the west Ocean, whereas at the first discovering, they show such
tokens of great riches. Thus fare ye well.

The.ix. book of the first Decade to Cardinal Lodoutke.
VIncentiagnes Pinzonus, and also Aries Pinzonus, his neuiew by his brother
side, The navigations of Vincentius, and Aries Pinzonus.
which accompanied the Admiral Colonus in his first vyage, and were by him
appointed to be masters of two of the small ships which the Spaniards call
Carauelas, being moved by the great riches and amplitude of the new lands,
furnyshed of their own charges four Carauels, in the haven of their own
country, which the Spanyardes call Palos, bordering on the west Ocean. Having
therefore the kings license and passeport to depart, they loosed from the haven,
about the Calendes of December, in the year.1499. This haven of Palos, is
threescore and twelve miles distant from Gades, commonly called Cales,
and.lxiiii. miles from Civil. All thinhabitantes of this town, not one
excepted, are greatly given to searching of the sea, and continually exercised
in sailing. They also directed their viage first to the island of Canarie by the
islands of Hesperides, The Islands of Canarie. Cabouerde.
now called Cabouerde, which some call Gorgodes Meducias. Sailing therefore
directly toward the south from that island of Hesperides which the Portugales
(being possessers of the same) call Sancti Iacobi, and departing from thence at
the Ides of January, they followed the southwest wind, S. James Island.
being in the myddest between the south and the west. When they supposed that
they had sailed about three hundredth leagues by the same wind, they say that
they lost the sight of the North star: The north pole out of sight.
and were shortly after tossed with excedyng tempests both of wind and sea,
and vexed with intolerable heat: Yet sailed they on further (not without
great danger) for the space of two hundred and forty leagues, following yet
the same wynd by the lost pole. Wherefore, whether habitable regions be under
the Equinoctial line or not, let these men and the oulde writers, as well
Philosophers as poets and cosmographers discuss. Habitable regions under the
Equinoctial line.
For these me^ affirm it to be habitable, and meruelously replenished with
people: and they, that it is uninhabitable by reason of the son beams
depending perpendicularly or directlye over the same. Yet were there many of
the old writers, which attempted to prove it habitable. These maryners being
demanded, if they saw the south pole, they answered that they knew no star
there like unto this pole, that might be decerued about the point: but that
they saw an other order of stars, and a certain thick mist rysyng from the
horizontall line, which greatly hyndered their sight. They contend also, that
there is a great heap or rysyng in the myddest of the earth, which takes
away the sight of the south pole, until they have utterly passed over the
same: but they verily believe that they saw other images of stars, much
differing from the situation of the stars of our hemispherie, or half circle
of heaven. How so ever the matter be, as they inform us, we certify you. At
the length, the seventh day of the calendes of Februarye, the espied land a
far of, and seeing the water of the sea to be trobelous, sounding with their
plummet, they found it to be.xvi* fathames deep. Going a land, and tarying
there for the space of two days, they departed, because they saw no people
stering, although they found certain steps of men by the sea side. Thus
grauing on the trees and the stones nere unto the shore, the kings name and
theyrs, and the time of their coming thither, they departed. Not far from
this station, following the fyers on the land by night, they found a nation
lying under the open fyrmament, after the manner of war. Our men thought it
not best to trouble them until the morning. There fore, at the rysyng of the
son, forty of our men well armed, went toward them: against whom came
forth.xxxii. of them, with bows, slings and darts, even ready to fight. The
other company followed them, armed after the same manner. Our men affirm that
they were of higher stature then either the Almaynes or Pannonians. People of
high stature.
They beheld our men with frownyng and threatenyng countenance: but our men
thought it not good to fall to bickering with them, uncertain whether it were
for fear, or because they would not drive them to flight. Wherefore they went
about to allure them by fair means and rewards: but they refused all kind of
gentelnes, and stood ever in a redines to fight, declaring the same by signs
and tokens. Thus our men resorted to their ships, and they to the place from
whence they came, without any further business. The same night about mydnyght,
they fled, and left the place void where they lay in the camp. A vagabounde
kind of men.
Our men suppose them to be a vagabund and wandering nation, like unto the
Scythians, without houses or certain dwelling places, living only with the
fruits of the earth, having their wives and children following them. Such as
measured their footesteppes in the sand, affirm with great oaths, that one of
their feet is almost as long as two feet of our men of the mean sort.
Sailing on yet further, Giantes.
they found an other river, but not of deapth sufficient to bear the
Carauels: they sent therefore the four ship boats to land, full of armed
men to search the country. They espied upon a high hill nere unto the sea
side, a great multitude of people, to whom our company sent forth one man
with certain of our things to allure them to exchange. And when he had cast a
hawks bell toward them, they cast down a wedge of gold a cubit long: the
which as he sto^ped to take up, they suddenly enclosed him, and carried him away,
But he was shortly after rescued by his companions, to some of their pains:
for they slew eight of our men, and wounded many a far of, with their
arrows, and darts made of wood, hardened at the ends with fire. After this
they encompassed our ship boats within the river, and came rashly within the
reach of our men, laying hold on the boats sides, where they were thrust
through, and hewn in pieces as it had been sheep, Desperate ^oldnesse.
by reason they were naked. Yet would they not for all this give over, but
took from our men one of their boats, having no men in it: for the governor
thereof being slain with an arrowe, the other fled and escaped. And thus
they left this fierce and warlyke people, saylyng toward the northwest, along
by the same coasts, with sorrowful hearts for the death of their companyons.
When they had sailed about.xl. leagues, they chanced into a sea of such
fresh water, that they filled their barelles and hoggesheades therewith. A sea
of fresh water.
Searching the cause hereof, they understood that a vehement course of rivers
descended with great vi^^^nce from the tops of certain great hills. They
say also that there lies within the sea, many fortunate and fruitful
Islands, Many fruitful Islands.
and well inhabited, and that thinhabitantes of this tracte are men of meek
nature, and such as do not refuse strangers, yet little profitable to them,
because they have no marchandyes for their purpose, Humane people.
as gold, or precious stones: for lack whereof, they brought from thence
thyrtie captives to sell for slaves. Thinhabitantes call this region
Mariatambal. The region of the east part of that river, is called Camomorus,
and that of the west part Paricora, in the midlande whereof, thinhabitantes
signified that there is great plenty of gold: For, following this river
directly toward the North (as the bending of the shore required) they recovered
again the sight of the north pole. All the coaste of this tracte, parteyneth
to Paria, Regions of Paria.
the which (as we said before) was first found by Colonus him self, and has
in manner in every place great abundaunce of pearls. Gold and pearls
They say that these coasts are adioynyng unto, and all one with Os Draconis,
and also borderyng upon the regions of Cumana, Manacapana, Curiana, Cauchieta,
and Cuchibachoa: Wherefore they thought it to be part of the firm land of
India, beyond the river of Ganges. For the great and large compass thereof,
does not permit that it should be an island, albeit the whole earth uncovered
with water, largely taken, may be called an Island. From the point of that land
where they lost the sight of the north pole, saylyng by a continual tracte
about three hundred leagues toward the west side of Paria, they say that
(almost in the mid way) they chanced into a river called Maragnonum, which
they affirm to be of such exceedyng breadth, that it might seem incredible,
if the antiques did not make mention of the like. Being demanded of me if it
were not salt water where it divided the land, they answered that the water
thereof was very fresh and sweet, and that the further it ran, to be so
much the fresher: also full of Islands and wholesome fyshe: they dare auouche
the breadth thereof to be more then thirty leagues. Yet if we well weigh and
consider the largeness and wideness of Boriostomea and Spiriostomea, the
mouths of the famous river of Ister (now called Danubius) and how far they
violate or corrupt the salt water with their freshness, we shall cease to
marueyle, although this other river be greater: for who can diminish the power
of nature, but that it may make this bigger then the other, and another bygger
then this? And I suppose this to be the river whereof Colonus the Admiral made
mention in the description of his voyage in these coasts. But we shall
hereafter have further knowledge hereof: let us now therefore return to the
commodities of these regions. The commodities of the regions and Islands about
Paria. Brasile.
They found in many Islands about Paria, great wooddes of Brasile trees, and
brought away with them three thousand pounds weight thereof. They say that
the Brasile of Hispaniola, is much better then this to dye cloth with a more
fair and durable color. From hence, following the winds (which the Spaniards
call Northuest, and the Italians Graeco) they passed by many Islands very
fruiteful, yet left desolate and wasted by reason of the cruelty of the
Canibales: for they went alande in many places, they found the ruins of many
destroyed houses: yet in some places they found men, but those exceedyng
fearful, fleeyng to the mountains, rocks, and wooddes at the sight of every
stranger or ship, and wanderyng without houses or certain abydyng places,
for fear of the Caniballes laying wait and huntyng after them. Canibales.
Here they found those great trees which of them selves in diverse places bring
forth that fruit or spice, which the Apothecaries call Cassia Phistula, and
that of no less goodness, Trees of Cassia fistula.
then that which the physicians minister to such as be diseased with the ague,
but it was not ripe at their being there. They affirm that there are trees of
such bygnesse, that.xvi. men joining hands together, and standing in
compass, can scarcely embrace some of them. Among these trees is found that
monstrous beast with a snoute like a fox, A monstrous beast.
a tail like a marmasette, ears like a bat, hands like a man, and feet like
an ape, bearyng her whelps about with her in an outward bellye much like
unto a great bag or purse. The dead carkas of this beast, you saw with me,
and turned it over and over with your own hands, marueylyng at that new
belly, and wonderful provision of nature. They say it is known by experience,
that she never lets her whelps goo out of that purse, except it be either to
play, or to suck, until such time that they be able to get their living by
them selves. They took this beast with her whelps: But the whelps dyed
shortly after in the ships, Yet the damme lived certain months: but at
the length, not being able to abide so great alteration of air, and change of
meat, she died also in the way. But of this beast, we have saidt enough. Let
us now therefore return to the aucthours of these things. These two Pinzoni,
the uncle and the neuiew, sustained many great troubles and horrible tempests
and perilles in this navigations. For when they had now sailed by the coasts
of Paria about six hundred leagues, and (as they supposed) beyond the city of
Cathay, and the costs of East India beyond the river of Ganges, there rose
suddenly so fierce a tempest in the month of July, that of the four Carauels
which they had with them, two were drowned even before their eyes: and the
third lying at anchor, with like sodennes carried out of their sight throwgh the
violence of the tempest: the fourth also lying at anchor, was so shaken and
broosed, that all the seames thereof were almost loosed: Yet came they to land
out of this last ship, but utterly despayryng of the ship. Wherefore consultyng
with them selves what was best to be done in so extreme a case, and how to
provide them a safe dwelling place in those Regions, being out of all hope how
to depart from thence, Extreme remedy in a desperate case.
they determined to slay all the inhabytauntes of the country nere about them,
least they with the other should conspyre together to kill them, but their
fortune was better: For the Carauel which the tempest had carried away, was come
to them again. This had in it.xviii. men: And the other that remained, was
saved and repaired. With these two therefore, they took their voyage directly
to Spain, and thus being tossed with tempests, and vexed with adversities,
they returned to their natyue country of Palos, to their wives and children,
the day before the Calendes of October, with the loss of many of their dear
friends and neighbors. They brought with them Cinamome and ginger: but not very
good, Cinamome and Ginger.
because they were not there fully seasoned with the heat of the son, before
they brought them from thence. They brought also certain precious stones,
which Baptista Elysius that excellent philosopher, and your lordshyppes
physician, affirms to be true Topases. After these men's return, Topases.
other of their neighbors being moved thereto by a certain emulation, to prove
if their fortune would be any better, like men of good courage, Men of noble
courage.
being nothing discomforted by the hard fortune of their neighbors, knowing
that it often times chances, that that which is one man's undoing, is an other
man's making, attempted a new voyage toward the south by ye costs of Paria,
Another voyage.
following the steps of Colonus the Admiral, who had first discovered the same.
They also brought with them great plenty of Cassia fistula, and found that
precious medicine called of the Spaniards Animae album, Animae album
whose perfume is of most excellent effect to heal the reumes, murres, and
heaviness of the head. As touching this vyage, as yet I know no other news that
I thought worthy to certify you of, wherefore, I will now make an end of this
book, because you put me so often in remembrance of your departure: Yet to
accomplish the Decade, I will declare somewhat of the superstitions of
Hispaniola. The superstitions of Hispaniola.

The errors of the old gentilitie.


You shall now therefore understand the illusions wherewith the people of the
Island have been seduced after the errors of the old gentilitie, and wandered
in the ignorance and blyndnesse of humane nature, corrupted by the
disobedience of our first parents, which has remained in all nations upon
the face of the earth, except where it has pleased GOD by the light of his
spirit by his word, to power upon his elect the grace of renouation, by the
light whereof the natural darkness receives some clearenesse as in a glass,
until imperfection shall be abolished. Our men therefore were long in the Island
of Hispaniola, before they knew that the people thereof honored any other
thing then the lyghtes of heaven, or had any other religion: but when they had been now long conuersaunt with them, and by understanding their language, drew
to a further familiarity, they had knowledge that they used diverse rites and
superstitions: I have therefore geathered these few things following, out of a
book written by one Ramonus an Heremite, whom Colonus had left with certain
kings of the Island to instruct them in the Christian faith. And because in
manner their whole religion is none other thing then idolatry, I will begin at
their idolles. It is therefore apparent by the images which they honor openly
and commonly, Idolatry and idolles.
that there appear unto them in the night seasons, certain fantasies and
illusions of evil spirits, seducing them into many fond and foolish errors:
for they make certain images of Gossampine cotton, Illusions of evil spirits.
Images of gossampine catton.
folded or wreathed after their manner, and hard stopped within. These images
they make syttyng, much like unto the pyctures of spirits and deuyls which
our paynters are accustomed to paynt upon walls: but forasmuch as I me self
sent you four of these images, you may better presently signify unto the king
your uncle, what manner of things they are, and how like unto painted
deuylles, then I can express the same by writing. These images, the
inhabitants call Zemes, whereof the least, made to the likeness of young
deuyls, they bind to their foreheades when they go to the wars against
their enemies, Young deuyls.
and for that purpose have they those stringes hangyng at them which you see.
Of these, they believe to obtain rain, if rain be lackyng, likewise fair
weather: for they think that these Zemes are the mediators and messengers of
the great god, whom they acknowledge to be only one, eternal, without end,
omnipotent, and invisible. Thus every king has his particular Zemes, which he
honors. They call the eternal god by these two names, Iocauna and
Guamaonocon, as their predecessors taught them, affyrmyng that he has a
father called by these five names: that is, Attabeira, Mamona, Guacarapita,
Liella, Guimazoa. Now shall you hear what they fable on the earth as touching
the original of man There is in the Island, a region called Caunana, where they
feign that manknyde came first out of two caves of a mountain: and that the
byggest sort of men came forth of the mouth of the byggest cave, and the least
sort out of the least cave. The rock in the which these caves are, they call
Canta. The greatest den, they name Cazibaxagua, and the less, Amaiauna. They
say, that before it was lawful for men to come forth of the cave, Fables
much like Ouide his transformations.
the mouth of the cave was kept and watched nyghtly by a man whose name was
Machochael: this Machochael, departing somewhat far from the cave, to the
intent to see what things were abroad, was suddenly taken of the sun, (whose
sight he was forbidden) and was turned into a stone. They feign the like of
diverse other, that whereas they went forth in the night season a fyshyng so
far from the cave, that they could not return before the rysyng of the sun
(the which it was not lawful for them to behold) they were transfourmed into
Myrobalane trees, which of them selves grow plentifully in the Island. They say
furthermore, that a certain ruler called Vagoniona, sent one forth of the
cave to go a fyshyng, who by like chance was turned into a Nyghtingale, The
Nyghtyngale.
because the sun was risen before he came again to the cave: and that
yearly about the same time that he was turned into a bird, he does in the
night with a mournyng song bewail his mysfortune, and call for the help of
his master Vagoniona: And this they think to be the cause why that byrd
syngeth in the night season. But Vagoniona* being sore troubled in his mind for
the loss of his familiar friend whom he loved so entirely, leauyng the men in
the cave, brought forth only the women with their suckyng children, leauyng
the women in one of the Islands of that tracte, called Mathinino, and carried the
children away with him: The Island of Mathinino.
which poor wretches oppressed with famine, faynted and remained on the bank
of a certain river, where they were turned into frogs, and cried toa, toa,
that is, mamma, mamma, as children are wont to cry for the mothers pappe.
Children turned into Frogs
And hereof they say it comes that frogs use to cry so pitifully in the
spryng time of the year: And that men were scattered abroad in the caves of
Hispaniola without the company of women. They say also, that where as Vagoniona
himself was accustomed to wander in diverse places, and yet by a special grace
never transfourmed, descended to a certain fair woman whom he saw in the
bottom of the sea, A special grace.
and received of her certain pibble stones of marble (which they call Cibas)
and also certain yellowe and bright plates of latton, which they call Guaninos.
These things to this day are had in great estimation among the kings, as
goodly iewelles, and most holy relics. Holy relics.
But now (most noble prince) you shall hear a more pleasant fable. There is
a certain cave called Iouanaboina, in the territory of a certain king whose
name is Machinnech: A holy cave.
This cave they honor more religiously then did the Greeks in time paste,
Corinth, Cyrrha, or Nysa, and have adourned it with pyctures of a thousand
fashions. In thentrance of this cave they have two graven Zemes, whereof the one
is called Binthaitel, and the other Marohu. Being demanded why they had this
cave in so great reverence, they answered earnestly, because the sun and the
moon came first out of the same to give light to the world: The original of
the sun and moon.
they have religious concourse to these caue^, as we are accustomed to go on
Pylgrimage to Rome, or Uaticane, Compostella, or Jerusalem, as most holy and
head places of our religion. They are also subject to another kind of
superstition: for they think that dead folks walk in the night, and eat the
fruit called Guannaba, Walkyng spirits.
unknown unto us, and somewhat like unto a Quinse: affyrmyng also that they
are co^uersant with living people, even in their beds, and to deceive women
in taking upon them the shape of men, showing them selves as though they would
have to do with them: but when the matter comes to actual deed, sodaynely to
vanishe away. If any do suspect that a dead body lies by him, A remedy
agayest walking spirits.
when he feels any strange thing in the bed, they say he shall be out of doubt
by feelyng of the belly thereof: affyrmyng that the spirits of dead men may
take upon them all the members of man's body, saving only the nauel. If therefore
by the lack of ye nauel he do perceive that a dead body lies by him, the
feelyng is immediately resolved. They believe verily, that in the night, and
oftentimes in their iourneys, and especially in common and high ways, dead
men do meet with the living: Against whom, if any man be stowte and out of
fear, the fantasy vanysheth incontinentlye: but if any fear, the fantasye
or vision does so assault him and stryke him with further fear, that many
are thereby astonyshed, and have the lymmes of their bodies taken. The
inhabitauntes being demanded of whom they had those vain superstitions, they
answered, that they were left them of their forefathers, as by descent of
inheritance, and that they have had the same before the memory of man,
composed in certain rymes and songues, which it was lawful for none to
learn, but only the kings sons, who committed the same to memory, because
they had never any knowledge of letters. These they sing before the people on
certain solemn and festival days, as most religious ceremonies: while in
the mean time they play on a certain instrument made of one whole piece of
wood, somewhat holowe like a tymbrel. Their priests and divines (whom they call
Boitios) instruct them in these superstitions: Priests and divines.
Physicians.
These priests are also physicians, deuysyng a thousand crafts and
subtilties how to deceive the simple people which have them in great
reverence: for they persuade them that the Zemes use to speak with them
familiarlye, Ignorance is norished with superstition.
and tell them of things to come. And if any have been sick, and are recovered,
they make them believe that they obtained their health of the Zemes. These
Boitii bind them selves to much fasting, and outward cleanlynesse, and
pourgynges, especially when they take upon them the cure of any prince, for
then they drink the powder of a certain herb, by whose quality they are
driven into a fury, at which time (as they say) they learn many things by
revelation of the Zemes. Then puttyng secretly in their mouths, A powder of
marvelous effect.
either a stone, or a bone, or a piece of flesh, they come to the sick
person, commaundyng al to depart out of that place, except one or two, whom it
shall please the sick man to appoint: this done, they go about him three or
four times, greatly deformyng their faces, lyps, and northrils, with sundry
fylthy gestures, blowing, breathyng, and suckyng the forehead, temples, A
strange manner of curyng.
and neck of the patient, whereby (they say) they draw the evil air from
him, and suck the disease out of his veins: then rubbyng him about the
shoulders, thyghes, and legs, and drawyng down their hands close by his
feet, holdyng them yet fast together, they run to the door being open,
where they unclose and shake their hands, affyrmyng that they have driven away
the disease, and that the pacient shall shortly be perfectlye restored to
health. After this, coming behind him, he conueigheth a piece of flesh out
of his own mouth like a iuggeler, and shows it to the sick man, saying,
Behold, you have eaten to much, you shall now be whole, because I have taken
this from you. But if he entende yet further to deceive the patient, Angry gods.
he persuades him that his Zemes is angry, either because he has not builded
him a chapel, or not honored him religiously, or not dedicated unto him a
grove or garden. And if it so chance that the sick person dye, his kynsfolks,
by witchcrafte, They make the dead to speak.
enforce the dead to confess whether he dyed by natural desteny, or by the
negligence of the Boitius, in that he had not fasted as he should have done,
or not ministered a convenient medicine for the disease: so that if this
physician be found fautie, they take reu^nge of him. Of these stones or bones
which these Boitii carry in their mouths, if the women can come by them, they
keep them religiously, beleeuyng them to be greatly effectual to help women
trauaylyng with child, and therefore honor them as they do their Zemes. For
diverse of the inhabitants honor Zemes of diverse fashions: some make them of
wood, as they were admonyshed by certain visions appearing unto them in the
woods: Other, which have received answer of them among the rocks, make them
of stone and marble. Some they make of roots, to the similitude of such as
appear to them when they are geatheryng the roots called Ages, whereof they
make their bread, as we have said before. These Zemes they believe to send
plenty and fruitfulnes of those roots, as the antiquity believed such fayries
or spirits as they called Dryades, Fayries or spirits of the gentiles, much
like to the papists.
Hamadryades, Satyros, Panes, and Nereides, to have the cure and providence of
the sea, woods, sprynges, and fountaynes, assignyng to every thing their
peculier gods: Even so do thinhabitantes of this Island attribute a Zemes to
every thing, supposyng the same to give ear to their inuocations. Wherefore,
as often as the kings ask counsel of their Zemes as concerning their wars,
increase of fruits, or scarcenes, or health and sickness, they enter into the
house dedicate to their Zemes, where, snuffing up into their nosthryls the
powder of the herb called Cohobba (wherewith the Boitii are driven into a
fury) they say that immediately they see the houses turned topsye turuie, The
powder of the herb Cohobba.
and men to walk with their heels upward, of such force is this powder,
utterly to take away al sense. As soon as this madness ceasseth, he embraces
his knees with his arms, holdyng down his head. And when he has remained
thus a while astonyshed, he lyfteth up his head, as one that came new out of
sleep: and thus lookyng up toward heaven, first he fumbleth certain
confounded words with him self, then certain of the nobility or chief
gentlemen that are about him (for none of the common people are admitted to
these mysteries) with loud voices give tokens of rejoicing that he is returned
to them from the speech of the Zemes, Secret mysteries.
demaundyng of him what he has seen. Then he openyng his mouth, doateth that
the Zemes spoke to him during the time of his trance, declaryng that he had
revelations either concerning victory or destruction, famine or plenty,
health or syckenesse, Revelations.
or whatsoever happens first on his tongue. Now (most noble Prince) what
need you hereafter to marueyle of the spirit of Apollo so shaking his
Sibylles with extreme fury: The spirit of Apollo. The Sibylles,
you had thought that the superstitious antiquity had peryshed. But now
whereas I have declared thus much of the Zemes in general, I thought it not
good to let pass what is said of them in particular. They say therefore that
a certain king called Guamaretus, had a Zemes whose name was Corochotum, who
(they say) was oftentimes wont to descend from the highest place of the house
where Guamaretus kept him fast bound. They affirm, that the cause of this his
breakyng of his bands and departure, was either to hyde him self, or to go
seek for meat, or else for the act of generation: and that sometimes being
offended that the king Guamaretus had been negligent and slack in honoring
him, he was wont to lie hyd for certain days. They say also, that in the
kings vyllage there are sometime children borne having two crowns, Children
with two crowns.
which they suppose to be the children of Corochotum the Zemes. They feign
likewise, that Guamaretus being overcome of his enemies in battle, and his
village with the palace consumed with fire, Corochotus brake his bands, and
was afterward found a furlong of, safe and without hurt. He has also
another Zemes called Epileguanita, made of wood, in shape like a four footed
beast: who also is said, Wandering images.
often times to have gonne from the place where he is honored, into the
wooddes. As soon as they perceive him to be gone, a great multitude of them
geather together to seek him, with devout prayers: and when they have found
him, bring him home religiously on their shoulders to the chapel dedicated
unto him. But they complain, that sense the coming of the Christian men into
the Island, he fled for altogether, and could never sense be found, whereby
they diuined the destruction of their country. They honored an other Zemes in
the lykenes of a woman, on whom waited two other like men, as they were
mynisters to her. A woman Zemes of great power.

Mediators.


One of these, executed thoffice of a mediator to the other Zemes, which are
under the power and commandment of this woman, to raise wyndes, clouds, and
rain. The other is also at her commandment a messenger to the other Zemes,
which are joined with her in governance, to geather together the waters which
fall from the high hills to the valleies, that being loosed, they may with
force bruste out into great floodes, and ouerflowe the country, if the people
do not give due honor to her Image. There remains yet one thing worthy to
be noted, wherewith we will make an end of this book. It is a thing well
known, and yet fresh in memory among the inhabitants of the island, that
there was sometime two kings (of the which one was the father of Guarionexius,
of whom we made mention before) which were wont to absteyne five days
together continualy from meat and drink, to know somewhat of their Zemes of
things to come, and that for this fasting being acceptable to their Zemes, A
marvelous illusion of the devil.
they received answer of them, that within few years there should come to
the island a nation of men covered with apparel, which should destroy all the
customs and ceremonies of the island, and either slay al their children, or
bring them into servitude. The common sort of the people understood this oracle
to be meant of the Canibales, and therefore when they had any knowledge of their
coming, they ever fled, and were fully determined never more to adventure the
battle with them. But when they saw that the Spanyardes had entered into the
Island, consultyng among them selves of the matter, they concluded that this
was the nation which was meant by thoracle. Wherein, their opinyon deceived them
not, for they are now all subject to the Chrystians, all such being slain as
stobernely resysted: The idolles abolyshed.
Nor yet remains there any memory of their Zemes, for they are all brought
into Spain, that we might be certyfyed of their illusions of evil spyrites
and Idolles, the which you your self (most noble Prince) have seen and felt
when I was present with you. I let pass many things because you put me in
remembrance that to morrow you take your journey toward your country, to bring
home the queen your aunt, whom you accompanied hither at the commandment of
king Frederike your uncle. Wherefore I bid you farewell for this time, desyryng
you to remember your Martyr, whom you have compelled in the name of the king
your uncle, to geather these few things out of a large feelde of hystories.

The tenth and last book of the first Decade, as a conclusion of the former
books: written to Inacus Iopez Mendocius, County of Tendilla, and viceroy of
Granata.
AT the first beginning and new attempt, when Colonus had taken upon him the
enterprise to search the Ocean sea, I was earnestly moved and required by the
letters of certain of my friends and noble men of Rome, to write those things
as should happen. For they whispered with great admiration, that where as
there were many new lands found, and nations which lived naked and after the
law of nature, they could hear no certentie thereof, being greatly desirous of
ye same. In this mean time had fortune overthrown Ascanius (his brother
Lodouike being cast out of Millane by the frenchmen) whose authority would not
suffer me to be idle, Millane in the hands of the french men,
but ever to have my pen in hand. To him I wrote the two first books of this
decade, beside many other of my hid commentaries which you shall see shortly:
but fortune did no less withdraw my mind from writing, then disturb Ascanius
from power. As he was tossed with contrary storms, and ceased to persuade me:
even so slacked my feruentnesse to enquire any further, until the year of
Christ* 1500 when the Court remained at Granata where you are viceroy: At
which time, Lodouike the Cardinal of Aragonie, neuiew to king Frederike by his
brothers side (being at Granata with the queen Parthenopea the sister of our
Catholic king) brought me king Frederikes letters, whereby he exhorted me to
finishe the other books which followed the two epistle books, which I write
to Ascanius: For they both acknowledged that they had the copye of all that I
writ to cardinal Ascanius. And albeit that even then I was sick (as you
know) yet took I the burden upon me, and applied my self to writing. I have
therefore chosen these few things, out of a great heap of such as seemed to
me most worthy to be noted among the large wrytynges of the aucthoures and
searchers of the same. Wherefore, forasmuch as you have endeavored to wrest out
of my hands the whole example of all my works, to add the same to the
innumerable volumes of your lybrarie, I thought it good now to make a brief
rehersall of those things which were done from that year of a thousand and
five hundred, even unto this year which is the tenth from that: The history
following, conteyneth the acts of ten years.
For I entend to write more largely of these things heareafter, if god grant
me life. I had written a whole book by it self of the superstytions of the
people of the island, supposyng therwyth to have accomplyshed the whole Decade
consisting of ten books. But I have added this to the tenth as a perpendyculer
line, and as it were a back guide or rerewarde to the other: So that you may
knytte the first tenth to the nynth, and impute this to occupye the place of
the tenth to fill up the Decade. This order have I appointed, lest I should be
compelled often times to write over the whole work, or send you the same
defaced with blottes and interlyning. But now let us come to our purpose. The
ship masters and mariners ran over many coasts during these ten years: But
ever followed such as were first found by Colonus. For rasyng continually alonge
by the tract of Paria, Paria part of the fyrme land of East India.
which they believe to be part of the firm land or continent of east India,
some of them chanced upon certain new lands toward the east, and some
toward the west, in which they found both gold and frankensence. For they
brought from thence many jewels and ouches of gold, Gold and Frankencense.
and great plenty of frankensence, which they had of the people of those
countries, partlye for exchange of some of our things, and partlye by force,
over coming them by war. Yet in some places, although they be naked, The
fierceness of the naked people.
they overcame our men, and slew whole armies. For they are exceedyng fyerce,
and use venomous arrows, and long staves like iauelens, made hard at the end
with fire. They found many beasts, both creepyng and four footed, much
dyfferyng from ours, varyable and of sundry shapes innumerable: yet not
hurtful, except Lions, Tigers, and Crocodiles. This I mean in sundry regions
of that great land of Paria, but not in the islands: no not so much as one,
for all the beasts of the islands, are meek and without hurt, except men,
which (as we have said) are in many islands deuourers of man's flesh. There
are also diverse kinds of fowls. And in many places battes of such bygnes,
that they are equal with turtle doves. These battes, have oftentimes assalted
men in the night in their sleep, and so bytten them with their venomous teeth,
that they have been thereby almost driven to madness, in so much that they have been compelled to flee from such places, as from ravenous Harpies. In an other
place, where certain of them slept in the night season on the sands by the sea
side, a monster coming out of the sea, came upon one of them secretelye, and
carried him away by the myddest out of the sight of his fellows, to whom he
cried in vain for help, A man devoured of a monster of the sea.
until the beast leapt into the sea with her pray. It was the kings pleasure
that they should remain in these lands, and build towns and fortresses:
whereunto they were so well wyllyng, that diverse proffered them selves to take
upon them the subduyng of the land, making great suite to the king that they
might be appointed thereto. The coast of this tracte is exceedyng great and
large, Note the largeness of the new Islands.
and the regions and lands thereof extend marvelous far, so that they
affirm the continent of these regions with the Islands about the same, to be
thryse as bygge as al Europe, beside those lands that the Portugales have
found southwarde, which are also exceedyng large. Therefore doubtless Spain
has deserved great praise in these our days, in that it has made known unto
us so many thousands of Antipodes which lay hid before, and unknown to our
forefathers: Antipodes.
and has thereby ministered so large matter to write of, to such learned
wits as are desirous to set forth knowledge to the commodity of men: to
whom I opened a way when I geathered these things rudelye together as you see:
the which, nevertheless I trust you will take in good part, as well for that I
can not adourne my rudeness with better vesture, as also that I never took
pen in hand to write like an hystoriographer, but only by epistles scribeled
in haste, to satisfy them, from whose commandments I might not draw back
my foot. But now I have digressed yenough, let us now therefore return to
Hispaniola. Our men have found by experience, that the bread of the Island is
of small strength to such as have been used to our bread made of wheat, and
that their strengthes were much decayed by vsyng of the same: The nature of
the place, alters the forms and qualities of things.
wherefore the king has of late commanded that wheat should be sown there
in diverse places, and at sundry times of the year: It grows into holow
reeds, with few ears, but those very bygge and fruitful. They find the
like softness and delicateness to be in herbs, which grow there to the
height of corn. Neat or cattle, become of bygger stature, and exceedyng fat,
but their flesh is more unsavory, and their bones (as they say) either
without marow, or the same to be very wateryshe: but of hogs and swyne, they
affirm the contrary, that they are more wholesome, and of better taste, by
reason of certain wild fruits which they eat, being of much better
nourishment then maste. There is almost none other kind of flesh commonly
sold in the market. The multitude of hogs are exceedyngly increased, and
become wild as soon as they are out of the swyneheardes keepyng. They have
such plenty of beasts and fowls, Plenty of beasts and foul.
that they shall hereafter have no need to have any brought from other places.
The increase of al beasts grow bigger then the brood they came of, by reason
of the ranknes of the pasture, although their feeding be only of grass,
without either barley or other grain. But we have said yenough of Hispaniola.
They have now found that Cuba (which of long time they thought to have been
firm land, Cuba is an Island.
for the great length thereof) is an Island: yet is it no maruayle that the
inhabitants them selves told our men when they searched the length thereof,
that it was without end. For this nation being naked, and content with a
little, and with the limittes of their own country, is not greatly curious to
know what their neighbors do, or the largeness of their dominion, nor yet
knew they if there were any other thing under heaven, beside that which they
walked on with their feet. Cuha is from the East into the West, much longer
then Hispaniola, and in breadth from the North to the South, The (...) of Cuba.
much less then they supposed at the first: for it is very narowe in respect
of the length, and is for the most part very fruitful and pleasant.
Eastwarde, not far from Hispaniola, there lies an Island less then
Hispaniola more then by the half, which our men called Sancti Iohannis, The
Island of Burichema, of S. Iohannis. Gold mines.
being in manner square, in this they found exceedyng rich gold mines: but
being now occupied in the gold mines of Hispaniola, they have not yet sent
laborers into the Island. But the plenty and revenue of gold of al other
regions, give place to Hispaniola, where they give them selves in manner to
none other thing then to geather gold, of which work this order is
appointed. To every such witty and skilful man as is put in trust to be a
surueyour or ouerseer of these works, there is assigned one or more kings of
the Island, with their subjects. These kings according to their league, come
with their people at certain times of the year, and resort every of them to
the gold mine to the which he is assigned, where they have al manner of
dygging or mining tools delivered them, and every king with his men, have a
certain reward allowed them for their labor. For when they depart from the
mines to sowyng of corn, and other tyllage (whereunto they are addict at
certain other times, lest their food should fail them.) they receive for
their labor, Tyllage,
one a ierkin, or a dublet, another a shyrt, another a cloak or a cap: for they
now take pleasure in these things, and go no more naked as they were wont to
do. And thus they use the help and labor of the inhabitauntes, both for the
tyllage of their ground, and in their gold mines, as though they were their
servants or bondemen. They bear this yoke of servitude with an evil will, but
yet they bear it: they call these hired laborers, Anaborias: yet the king
does not suffer that they should be used as bondemen, and only at his
pleasure, they are set at liberty, or appointed to work.At such time as they
are called together of their kings to work (as soldiers or pyoners are
assembled of their centurions) many of them stele away to the mountains and
wooddes, where they lie lurkyng, They abhor labor.
being content for that time to live with wild fruits, rather then take the
pains to labor. They are docible and apt to learn, They are docible.
and have now utterly forgotten their old superstitions. They believe godly,
and bear well in memory such things as they have learned of our ^ayth. The
kings children.
Their kings children are brought up with the chiefest of our men, and are
instructed in letters and good manners, When they are grown to man's age, they
send them home to their countries to be example to other, and especially to
govern the people, if their fathers be dead, that they may the better set
forth the Christian religion, and keep their subjects in love and obedience.
By reason whereof, they come now by fair means and gentel persuasions, to the
mines which lie in two regions of the island, The two chief gold mines of
Hispaniola.
about thyrtie miles dystaunt from the city of Dominica, whereof the on is
called Sancti Christophori: and the other being distant about fourscore and
ten miles, is called Cibaua, not far from the chief haven called Portus
Regalis. These regions are very large, in the which in many places here and
there, are found sometime even in the upper crust of the earth, and sometime
among the stones, certain round pieces or plates of gold, sometime of small
quantytie, and in some places of great wayght: in so much that there has been
found round pieces of three hundred pound weight, and one of three
thousand, three hundred and ten pound weight, the which (as you hard) was
sent whole to the king in that ship in the which the governor Boadilla was
coming home into Spain, the ship with all the men being drowned by the way, A
costly shypwracke.
by reason it was over laden with the weight of gold and multitude of men,
albeit, there were mo then a thousand persons which saw and handeled the piece
of gold. And whereas here I speak of a pound, I do not mean the common
pound, but the sum of the ducate of gold, with the coin called Triens,
which is the third part of a pound. Pesus.
which they call Pesus. The sum of the weight hearof, the Spanyardes call
Castelanum Aureum. All the gold that is dug in the mountains of Cibaua and
Port Regale, is carried to the tower of Conception, where shoppes with all
things appertayning are ready furnished to fine it, The fynyng and distributing
of gold.
melt it, and cast it into wedges. That done, they take the kings portion
thereof, which is the fyfte part, and so restore to every man his own which he
got with his labor. But the gold which is found in saint Christophorus mine
and the regions there about, is carried to the shoppes which are in the vyllage
called Bonauentura. In these two shops, is moulten yearly above three hundred
thousand pound wayght of gold. Three hundred thousand weight of gold molten
yearly in Hispaniola.
If any man be known deceytfullye to keep back any portion of gold, whereof
he has not made the kings officers privy, he forfeyteth the same for a fine.
There chances among them oftentimes many contentions and controversies, the
which unless the magistrates of the Island do fynyshe, the case is removed by
appellation to the high counsel of the court, from whose sentence it is not
lawful to appeal in all the dominions of Castyle. But let us now return to
the new lands, The new lands.
from whence we have digressed. They are innumerable, diverse, and exceedyng
fortunate. Wherefore the Spanyardes in these our days, and their noble
enterpryses, do not give place either to the factes of Saturnus, or Hercules,
or any other of the ancient princes of famous memory, which were canonized
among the gods, called Heroes, for their searchyng of new lands and
regions, and bryngyng the same to better culture and civility. Oh God,
Enlargyng of the Christian religion.

The original of true nobility.


how large and far shall our posterity see the Christian religion extended?
how large a camp have they now to wander in, which by the true nobility
that is in them, or moved by virtue, will attempt either to deserve like
praise among men, or reputation of well doing before God? What I conceive in my
mind of these things, I am not able to express with pen or tongue. I will
now therefore so make an end of this perpendiculer conclusion of the whole
Decade, as myndyng hereafter to search and geather every thing particulerly,
that I may at further leisure write the same more at large. For Colonus the
Admiral, with four ships, and a hundred, threescore, and ten men, appointed by
the king, discovered in the year of Christ.1520. the land oueragaynst the
West corner of Cuba, distant from the same about a hundred and thirty leagues:
in the myddest of which tracte, lies an Island called Guanassa. The Island of
Guanassa.
From hence he directed his voyage backwarde toward the East, by the shore of
that coast, supposyng that he should have found the coasts of Paria, but it
chanced otherwise. It is said also that Vincencius Agnes (of whom we have
spoken before) and one Johannes Daiz (with diverse other, The voyage of Johannes
Diaz.
of whose voyages I have as yet no certain knowledge) have ouerrunne those
coasts: but if God grant me life, I trust to know the truth hereof, and to
advertise you of the same. Thus fare ye well.

The end of the first Decade.
The first book of the second Decade, to Leo Bishop of Rome, the tenth of
that name, of the supposed continent or firm land.
SInce the time that Galeatius Butrigarius of Bononie, and Johannes Cursius of
Florence (most holy father) came to the Catholic king of Spain, the one of
your holiness embassage, and the other for the affairs of his common wealth,
I was ever for the most part in their company, and for their virtues and
wisdom had them in great reverence. And whereas they were greatly given to
study, and continual reuoluing of diverse auctours, they chanced upon
certain books, negligently let slyppe out of my hands, entreatyng of the
large lands and regions hitherto lying hyd, and almost West Antipodes, found
of late by the Spanyardes. Yet being allured and delyted with the newness and
strangeness of the matter, West Antipodes.
although rudely adourned, they commended the same, therewith earnestly
desyryng me in their own names, and requiring me in the name of your
holiness, to add hereunto al such things as were found after that time, and
to give them a copy thereof, to send to your holiness, that you might thereby
understand, both how great commodities is chanced to the progeny of
mankind, as also increase of the millitant congregation in these our days,
The increase of the Christian congregation.
by the fortunate enterpryses of the kings of Spain. For like as rased and
vnpaynted tables, are apt to receive what fourmes soever are first drawn
thereon by the hand of the paynter, even so these naked and simple people, do
soon receive the customs of our religion, and by conversation of our men,
shake of their fierce and native barbarousnesse. I have thought it good
therefore to satisfy the request of these wise men, espetially vsyng
thaucthorytie of your name, whereunto not to have obeyed, I should esteem my
self to have committed a heinous offense. Wherefore I will now briefly
rehearse in order, what hyd coasts the Spanyardes ouerran, who were
thaucthours thereof, where they rested, what further hope they brought, and
finallye what great things those tractes of lands do promise in time to
come. In the declaration of my decade of the ocean, which is now prynted and
dyspersed throughout Chrystendome unawares to me, I described how Christophorus
Colonus found those islands whereof we have spoken, and that turnyng from
thence toward the left hand southward, he chanced into great regions of
lands, and large seas, dystant from the Equinoctial line, only from five
degrees to ten: Of lands distant from the Equinoctial, from five degrees to
ten.
where he found broad ryuers and exceeding high mountains covered with snow,
and hard by the sea banks, where were many commodious and quiet havens. But
Colonus being now departed out of this life, the king began to take care, how
those lands might be inhabited with Christian men, The death of Colonus.
to thincrease of our faith: Wheruppon he gave license by his letters patentes
to al such as would take the matter in hand, and espetially to two, whereof
Diego Nicuesa was one, A general license.
and the other was Alphonsus Fogeda. Wherefore about the Ides of December, The
navigations of Alphonsus Fogeda.
Alphonsus departing first with three hundred soldiers from the island of
Hispaniola (in the which we said the Spaniardes had builded a city, and
planted their habitation) and saylyng in manner full south, he came to one of the
havens found before, which Colonus named Portus carthaginis, both because of
the island standing against the course of the stream, and also that by reason
of the largeness of the place and bendyng sides, it is much like to the haven
of Spain called Carthago. The inhabytantes call the Island Codego, as the
Spanyardes call the Island of their haven Scombria. This region is called of the
inhabitants Caramairi, in the which they affirm both the men and women to
be of goodly stature, but naked. The region of Caramairi.
The men have their hear cut round by their ears, but the women were it
long, both the men and women are very good archers. Our men found certain
trees in this province, which bore great plenty of sweet apples, but hurtful,
for they turn into woormes when they are eaten. Apples which turn into
worms.

A tree whose shadow is hurtful.


Especially the shadow of the tree is contagious, for such as sleep under it
any time, have their heads swollen, and lose their sight: but if they sleep
but a while, their sight comes again after a few days. This port is
distant four hundred, fyftie, and six miles from that port of Hispaniola
which the Spanyardes call Beata, in the which also they furnishe them selves
when they prepare any voyage to seek other new lands. When Fogeda had
entered into the haven, he enuaded, slew, and spoiled the people, whom he found
naked and scattered: for they were given him for a pray by the kings letters
patentes, because they had been before time cruel against the Christians, and
could never be allured to permytte them quietlye to come within their
dominions. Here they found gold, but in no great quantity, nor yet that
pure: they make of it certain breast plates and brooches which they wear for
comeliness. But Fogeda not content with these spoils, vsyng certain
captives, which he had taken before, for guydes, entered into a vyllage twelve
miles dystant from the sea side further into the land, into the which they
were fled when he first enuaded. Here he found a naked people, Warlyke people.
but apt to war: for they were armed with targettes, shieldes, long swoordes
made of wood, and bows with arrows typt with bone, or hardened with fire. As
soon as they had espied our men, they with their ghestes who^ they had
receiceyued, assailed them with desperate minds, being thereto more earnestly
provoked, beholding the calamity of these which fled unto them, by the
violence done to their women and children, in the spoil and slaughter. In this
conflyct our men had the overthrow: in the which, one Johannes de Lacossa
(being in authority next unto Fogeda the captain, and also the first that
geathered gold in the sands of Vraba) was slain with fifty soldiers:
Arrows infected with poison.
for these people infecte their arrows with the deadlye poison of a certain
herb. The other with their captain Fogeda being discomfited, fled to the
ships. While they remained thus in the haven of Carthago, sorrowful and
pensive for the loss of their companions, The navigations of Diego Nicuesa.
the other captain Diego Nicuesa, (whom they left in Hispaniola, preparyng him
self toward the voyage in the haven Beata) came to them with five ships,
and seven hundred fourscore and fyfteene men. For the greater number of
souldyers followed Nicuesa, both because free lybertye was given them to choose
which of the capytaynes them list, and also that by reason of his age, he was
of greater aucthorytie: But esspetially because the rumoure was that Beragua
being by the kings commission appointed to Nicuesa, The regions of Vraba and
Beragua.
was rycher in gold then Vraba assygned to Alphonsus Fogeda. Therefore, at the
arryual of Nicuesa, they consulted what was best to be done: and determined
first to revenge the death of their fellows. Wheruppon, setting their
battle in array, they marched in the night toward them which slew Cossa
with his companyons. Thus stealyng on them unawares in the last watch of the
night, The Spanyardes revenge the death of their companions.
and encompassyng the vyllage where they lay, consystyng of a hundred houses
and more, having also in it thryse as many of their neighbors as of them
selves, they set it on fire, with diligent watch that none might escape. And
thus in short time they brought them and their houses to ashes, and made them
pay the ransom of blood with blood: for of a great multitude of men and
women, A great slaughter.
they spared only six children, all other being destroyed with fire or sword,
except few which escaped privily, they learned by these reserved children,
that Cossa and his fellows were cut in pieces, and eaten of them that slew
them. By reason whereof, they suppose that these people of Camairi took their
original of the Caribes, otherwise called Canibales. Canibales.
Here they found some gold among the ashes. The hunger of gold.
For the hunger of gold did no less encourage our men to adventure these
peryls and labors, then did the possessyng of the lands. These things thus
finished, and the death of Cossa and his fellows revenged, they returned to the
haven. After this, Fogeda which came first, first likewise departing with his
army to seek Vraba, committed to his governance, sailed by an Island called
Fortis, lying in the mydway between Vraba and the haven of Carthago: into the
which dessending, The Island Fortis.
he found it to be an Island of the Canibales, bryngyng with him from thence
two men and seven women, for the residue escaped. Here he found in the cotages
of them that fled, a hundred, fourscore, and ten drammes of gold, Wrought
gold.
cast and wrought in diverse fourmes. Saylyng forward from hence, he came to
the East coasts of Vraba, which the inhabitauntes call Carihana, from whence
the Caribes or Canibales of the Islands are said to have their name and
original. Here he began to build a fortress, and a vyllage near unto the
same, therein intendyng to place their first habitation. Shortly after, being
instructed by certain captyues, that there was about twelve miles further
within the land, a certain vyllage called Tirufi, having in it a rich gold
mine, he determined to destroy the village, to the which when he came, he
found the inhabitants ready to defend their right, and that so stoutlye, that
encounteryng with them, he was repulsed with shame and damage: for these people
also use bows and venomous arrows. Within a few days after, being enforced
for lack of vittualles to invade another village, he him self was strycken in
the thygh with an arrowe. Some of his fellows say, that he was thus wounded of
one of the inhabitauntes whose wife he had led away captive before. They say
also that he had first frendlye communed with Fogeda for redeeming of his wife,
and had appointed a day to bring a portion of gold for her ransom, and that
he came at the day assigned, not laden with gold, but armed with bows and
arrows, with eight other confederate with him, which had been before partakers
of the injuries done to them first at the haven of Carthago, and afterward at
the burning of the vyllage, in revenge whereof, they had desperately consecrated
them selves to death: But the matter being known, the captain of this
conspiracy was slain of Fogeda his companions, and his wife deteyned in
captivity. Fogeda also through the maliciousness of the venime, consumed and
was dried up by little and little. While these things chanced thus, they espied
Nicuesa the other captain, to whom Beragua the region of the West side of
Vraba was assigned to inhabit. Nicuesa.
He gave wynd to his sails to take his voyage toward Beragua, the day after
that Fogeda departed out of the haven of Carthago. He with his army that he
brought with him, coasted ever along by the shore, until he came to the gulf
Coiba, whose kings name is Careta. The gulf Coiba.
Here he found their language to be in manner nothing like unto that of
Hispaniola, or of the haven of Carthago: whereby he perceived that in this
tracte, there are many languages differyng from their own borderers. Nicuesa
departing from Coiba, went to the province or Lieuetenauntshyp of Fogeda his
companion. Within a few days after, he him self entryng into one of those
merchant ships which the Spanyardes call Carauelas, commanded that the
bigger vessels should follow far behind. He took with him two small ships
commonly called Bergandines or Brigandines. I have thought it good in all the
discourse of these books, to use the common names of things, because I had
rather be plain then curious, especially forasmuch as there do daily arise
many new things unknown to the antiquity, whereof they have left no true
names. After the departure of Nicuesa, there came a ship from Hispaniola to
Fogeda, the captain whereof, was one Barnardino de Calauera, Barnardino de
Calauera.
who had stolen the same from Hispaniola with threescore men, without leave or
advice of the Admiral and the other governors. With the vyttualles which this
ship brought, they refreshed them selves, and somewhat recovered their
strengthes, much weakened for lack of meat. Fogeda his companions whyspered
and muttered against him daily more and more, that he fed them forth with
vain hope: for he had told them that he left Ancisus in Hispaniola (whom he
chose by the kings commission to be a judge in causes, because he was learned
in the law) to come shortly after him with a ship laden with vyttualles, and
that he marueyled that he was not come many days since. And herein he said
nothing but truth: for when he departed, he left Ancisus half redye to follow
him. But his fellows supposyng that all that he had said of Ancisus had been
feigned, some of them determined privily to steal away the two Brigandines from
Fogeda, and to return to Hispaniola. But Fogeda having knowledge hereof,
prevented their device: for leauyng ye custody of the fortress with a
certain noble gentleman called Francisco Pizarro, he him self thus wounded,
with a few other in his company, entered into the ship whereof we spoke
before, and sailed directly to Hispaniola, both to heal the wound of his
thygh, if any remedy might be found, Fogeda returns to Hispaniola.
and also to know what was the cause of Ancisus tarying: leauyng hope with his
fellows (which were now brought from three hundred to threescore, partly by
famine, and partly by war) that he would return within the space of.xv.
days, Famine.
prescribyng also a condition to Pizarro and his companions, that it should not
be imputed to them for treason, to depart from thence if he came not again at
the day appointed, with vyttuales, and a new supplye of men. These.xv. days
being now past, whereas they could yet hear nothing of Fogeda, and were daily
more and more oppressed with sharp hunger, they entered into the two
Brigandines which were left, and departed from that land. And as they were now
saylyng on the main sea toward Hispaniola, a tempest sodaynely arysyng,
swalowed one of the Brigandines with all that were therein. Some of their
fellows affirm, that they plainly saw a fyshe of huge greatness, swimmyng
about the Brigandine (for those seas bring forth great monsters) and that with
a stroke of her tail, A Brigandine drowned with the stroke of a fyshe.
she broke the rudder of the ship in pieces, which faylyng, the Brigandine
being driven about by force of the tempest, was drowned not far from the
Island called Fortis, lying between the coasts of the haven Carthago and Vraba.
As they of the other Brigandine would have landed in the Island, they were
driven back with the bows and arrows of the fierce barbarians. Proceeding
therefore on their voyage, they met by chance with Ancisus, between the
haven of Carthago, The region of Cuchibacoa.
and the region of Cuchibacoa in the mouth of the river which the Spanyardes
called Boium gatti, that is, the house of the catte, because they saw a catte
first in that place: Boium, in the tongue of Hispaniola, is a house. Ancisus
came with a ship laden with all things necessary, both for meat, and
drink, and apparel, bryngyng also with him an another Brigandine. This is he
for whose coming the captain Fogeda looked for so long. He loosed anchor from
Hispaniola in the Ides of September: and ye fourth day after his departure, he
espied certain high mountains, the which for the abundance of snow which
lies there continually in the tops thereof, the Spaniards called Serra Neuata,
Serra Neuata.
when Colonus the first fynder of those regions passed by the same. The fifth
day he sailed by Os Draconis* Os Draconis.
They which were in the Brigandine, told Ancisus that Fogeda was returned to
Hispaniola: but Ancisus supposyng that they had fained that tale, commanded
them by thauctoritie of his commission to turn back again. The Brigandiners
obeyed and followed him: yet made they humble suite unto him that he would
grant them that with his favor they might either go again to Hispaniola, or
that he him self would bring them to Nicuesa: and that they would for his
gentleness, declared toward them in this behalf, reward him with two
thousand drammes of gold: for they were rich in gold, Rich in gold, and
poor in bread.
but poor in bread. But Ancisus assented to neither of their requests,
affyrmyng that he might by no means go any other way, then to Vraba the
province assigned to Fogeda. Whereupon, by their conduct, he took his voyage
directly toward Vraba, But now let it not seem tedious to your holiness, to
hear of one thing worthy to be remembered, which chanced to this Lieuetenant
Ancisus as he came thither: for he also cast anchor in the coasts of the region
of Caramairi, which we said to be famous, by reason of the haven of Carthago,
and of the goodly stature, strength, and beauty both of men and women being in
the same. Here he sent certain to go alande on the shore both to fetch fresh
water, and also to repair the ship boat which was sore bruised. In this mean
time, a great multitude of the people of the country, armed after their
manner, came about our men, as they were occupied about their business, and
stood in a redynesse to fight, for the space of three days continually,
during which time, neither durst they set upon our men, nor our men assail
them. Thus both parties keepyng their array, stood still three whole days, the
one gasyng on the other. Yet all this time our men applied their work, placyng
the shypwryghtes in the myddest of their army. As they stood thus amassed, two
of our company went to fill their water pottes at the mouth of the river near
unto them both, where suddenly there came forth against them a captain of the
barbarians with ten armed men, which enclosed them, and with terrible
countenance bent their arrows against them, but shot them not of. One of our
men fled, but the other remained, calling his fellow again, and rebukyng him
for his fearfulness. Then he spoke to the barbarians in their own language,
which he had learned being conuersaunt with the captives that were carried from
thence long before. They marueylyng to hear a stranger speak in their native
tongue, put of their fierceness, and fell to friendly communication, demaundyng
who were the captains of that company which were aryued in their land. He
answered that they were strangers passing by, and that he marueyled why they
would attempt to drive them from their coasts, and disturb their shyps:
arguyng them of folly and cruelty, and further threatnyng their ruin and
destruction, except they would use them selves more frendely toward them. For
he advertised them that there would shortly come into their land armed men,
in number like unto the sands of the sea, and that to their utter destruction,
not only if they resysted them not, but also except they received them, and
entertained them honorably. In the mean time, Ancisus was enfourmed that his
men were deteyned: wherefore suspectyng some deceyte, The use of targets
against venomous arrows.
he brought forth all his target men, for fear of their venomous arrows: and
setting them in battle array, he marched forward toward them which stayed
his men. But he which communed with the barbarians, geuyng him a sign with
his hand to proceed no further, he stayed, and calling to him the other, he
knew that all was safe: for the barbarians proffered him peace, because they
were not they whom they suspected them to have been, meaning by Fogeda and
Nicuesa, who had spoiled the vyllage standing there by the sea side, and carried
away many captives, and also burnt another vyllage further within the land.
And therefore (as they said) the cause of their coming thither, was to
revenge those injuries, if by any means they could, yet that they would not
exercise their weapons against the innocent: The barbarians have respect to
justice.
for they said, it was ungodly to fight against any, not being provoked. Laying
apart therefore their bows and arrows, they enterteyned our men gentelly, and
gave them great plenty of salted fyshe, Salted fyshe.
and bread of their country, and filled their vessels with Syder made of their
country fruits and seeds, not inferior to wine in goodness. Thus Ancisus
having entered into friendship, Wine of fruits and seeds.
and made a league of peace with thinhabitantes of Caramairi, which were before
sore provoked by other captains, he lanched from that land, and directed his
course to Vraba by the Island Fortis, having in his ship a hundred and fyftie
fresh men, which were substitute in the place of such as were dead: also
twelve Mares, and many swine, and other beasts both males and females for
increase. Likewise, Artyllerie.
fyftie pieces of ordinance, with great multitude of targettes, swoordes,
iauelyns, and such other weapons for the wars, but all this with evil
speed, and in an evil hour: for as they were even now entryng into the
haven, the governor of the ship which sat at the helm, stroke the ship
upon the sands, Ancisus shypwracke.
where it was so fast enclosed and beaten with the waves of the sea, that it
opened in the myddest, and all lost that was therein, a thing surely miserable
to behold: for of all the vyttualles that they had, they saved only twelve
barrelles of meal, with a few cheeses, and a little bysket bread, for all the
beasts were drowned, and they them selves escaped hardly and half naked, by
help of the Brigandine and ship boat, carrying with them only a few weapons.
Thus they fell from one calamity into another, being now more careful for
their lives then for gold. Yet being brought alive and in health to that land
which they so greatly desired, they could do no less then to provide for the
susteynyng of their bodies, because they could not live only by air: and
whereas their own failed, they must needs live by other men's. Yet among these
so many adversities, one good chance offered it self unto them: for they
found, not far from the sea side, a grove of Date trees, among the which,
and also among the reeke or weeds of the marshes, A grove of date trees.
they espied a multitude of wild bores, with whose flesh they fed the^ selves
well certain days. Wild bores.
These they say to be less then ours, and with so short tails, that they
thought they had been cut of. They differ also from ours in their feet: for
their hinder feet are whole undivided, and also without any hoof. But they
affirm that they have proved by experience, their flesh to be of better
taste and more wholesome then ours. During this time, they fed also of Dates,
and the roots of young Date trees, which they eat likewise in Civil and
Granata, where they call them Palmitos, of ye leaves whereof they make bees^mes
in Rome. Sometimes also they eat of the apples of that region, which have the
taste of pruines, and have also stones in them, Apples of a strange kynd^.
and are but little and of read color: I suppose them to be of that kind,
whereof I ate in the city of Alexandria in Egypt, in the month of Apryll, the
trees whereof, the Jews that dwell there, being learned in the law of Moses,
Cedars of Libanus.
affirm to be the Cedars of Libanus, which bear old fruits and new all
the year, as does the orange tree. These apples are good to be eaten, and have
a certain sweetness myxte with a gentle sharpness, as have the fruits
called Sorbes. Thinhabytantes plant these trees in their orchyardes and
gardens, and noryshe them with great diligence as we do cheries, peaches, and
quinses. This tree in leaves, heyght, and trunk, is very like unto the tree
that bears the fruit called Zizipha, which the Apothecaries call Iuiuba. But
whereas now the wild bores began to fail them, they were again enforced to
consulte and provide for the time to come: Whereupon with their whole army,
they entered further into the land. The Canibales of this prouynce, are most
expert archers. Ancisus had in his company, a hundred men. They met by the
way with only three men of thinhabitantes, Men of desperate boldness.
naked, and armed with bows and venomous arowes, who without all fear,
assailed our men fyercesly, wounded many, and slew many, and when they
emptyed their quiuers, fled as swyftely as the wind: For (as we have said)
they are exceeding swyfte of foot by reason of their loose gooing from their
chyldes age, they affirm that they let slyp no arrowe out of their bows in
vain. Our men therefore returned the same way that they came, much more
unfortunate then they were before, and consulted among them selves to leave the
land, especialy because the inhabytantes had overthrown the fortress which
Fogeda builded, and had burnt thyrtie houses of the vyllage, as soon as
Pizarrus and his company left of Fogeda, and forsaken the land. By this
occasion therefore, being driven to seek further, they had intelligence that
the west side of that goulfe of Vraba, The gulf of Vraba.
was more fruitful and better to inhabit. Wherefore, they sent the one half
of their men thither with the brigandine, and left the other near to the sea
side on the east part. This gulf, is fourteen miles in breadth, and how
much the further it enters into the fyrme land, it is so much the narower.
Into the gulf of Vraba, there fall many ryuers, but one (as they say) more
fortunate then the river of Nilus in Egypt. The great river of Darien.
This river is called Darien, upon the banks whereof, being very fruitful of
trees and grass, they intended to plant their new colonye or habitation. But
the inhabytantes marueylyng at the brigandyne being bigger then their canoas,
and specially at the sails thereof, first sent away their children and weakesse
sort of their people with their baggage and household stuff, and assembled all
such together both men and women, as were meet for the wars. Thus being
armed with weapons and desperate minds, they stood in a redynesse to fight,
and tarried the coming of our men upon a little hill, as it were to take the
advantage of the ground: our men judged them to be about five hundred in
number. Then Ancisus the captain of our men, and Lieuetenaunt in the steed of
Fogeda, setting his men in order of battle array, and with his whole company
kneeling on his knees, they all made humble prayers to GOD for the victory,
and a vow to the image of the blessed virgin which is honored in Civil, by
the name of Sancta Maria Antiqua, promysyng to send her many golden gifts,
and a stranger of that country: also, to name the vyllage Sancta Maria
Antiqua after her name: likewise to erecte a temple called by the same name, or
at the least to dedicate the king of that province his palace to that use, if
it should please her to assist them in this dangerous enterprise. This done, all the soldiers took an oath, The soldiers make an oath.
that no man should turn his back to his enemies. Then ye captain
commanding them to be in a redynesse with their targets and iauelyns, and the
trumpetter to blow the battle, they fiercely assailed their enemies with a
larome: but the naked barbarians, not long able to abide the force of our men,
were put to flight, The barbarians are driven to flight.
with their king and captain Cemaccus. Our men entered into the vyllage, where
they found plenty of meat, such as the people of the country use,
sufficient to assuage their present hunger, as bread made of roots, with
certain fruits unlike unto ours, which they reserve for store, as we do
Chestnuttes. Of these people, the men are utterly naked, but the women, from
the nauel downewarde are covered with a fine cloth made of gossampine cotton.
This region is utterly without any sharpness of winter: for the mouth of this
river of Darien, The river of Darien, but vii. degrees from the Equinoctial
line.
is only eight degrees distaunt from the Equinoctial line, so that the common
sort of our men, scarcely perceive any dyfference in length between the day
and night all the whole year: but because they are ignorant in astronomy,
they can perceive no small dyfference. Therefore we need not much pass if
the degree differ somewhat from their opinion, forasmuch as the dyfference can
not be great. The day after that they aryued at the land, they sailed along by
the river, where they found a great thycket of reeds, continuyng for the
space of a mile in length, supposing (as it chanced in deed) that the
borderers thereabout which had fled, had either lain lurkyng there, or else to
have hid their stuff among those reeds: Whereupon, armyng them selves with
their targets, for fear of the people lying in ambushe, they searched the
thycket diligently, Gold found in a thycket of reeds.
and found it without men, but replenyshed with household stuff and gold.
They found also a great multitude of shetes, made of the silk or cotton of
the gossampine tree: likewise diverse kinds of vessels and tools made of wood,
Breast plates of gold.
and many of earth: also many breast plates of gold, and ouches wrought after
their manner, to the sum of a hundred and two pound weight: for they also
take pleasure in the beauty of gold, and work it very artificially, although
it be not the price of things among them as with us. They have it out of other
regions, for exchange of such things as their country brings forth: The
golden regions are for the most part barren.
for such regions as have plenty of bread and gossampine, lack gold, and
such as bring forth gold, are for the most part rough with mountains and
rocks, and therefore barren: and thus they exercise marchandies without the
use of money. Reioysyng therefore with double gladness, as well in that they
saw great likeness of gold, as also that fortune had offered them so fair
and fruiteful a country, they sent for their fellows whom they had left before
in the East side of the gulf of Vraha. Yet some say, that the air is there
unwholesome, because that part of the region lies in a low valley, environed
with mountains and maryshes.

The second book of the second Decade, of the supposed continent.
I Have described to your holiness where Fogeda with his company (to whom the
large tractes of Vraba was assigned to inhabit) intended to fasten their
foot. Let us now therefore leave them of Vraba for a while, and return
again to Nicuesa, to whom the governance and Lieutenauntshyp of the most
large province of Beragua (being the West side of the gulf of Vraba) was
appointed. We have declared how Nicuesa, departing with one Carauel and two
Brigandines, from Vraba the jurisdiction of his friend and companion Fogeda,
directed his course Westwarde to Beragua, leaving the bygger ships somewhat
behind him, to follow him a far of, but he took this device in an evil
hour, for he both lost his fellows in the night, and went past the mouth of
the river Beragua, which he cheefely sought. One Lupus Olanus a Cantabrian,
Lupus Olanus
and governor of one of the great ships, had the conduct of one of the
Brigandines: he coming behind, learned of the inhabitauntes, which was the
way Eastwarde to the gulf of Beragua, ouerpassed and left behind of Nicuesa.
Olanus therefore directyng his course toward the East, met with the other
Brigandine, which had also wandered out of the way by reason of the darkness of
the night. The governor of this Brigandine, was one Petrus de Vmbria. Petrus
de Vmbria.
Thus both being glad of their meetyng, they consulted what was best to be
done, and which way they could conjecture their governor had taken his
voyage. After deliberation, they judged that Nicuesa could no more lack some
to put him in remembrance of Beragua, then they them selves were mindful
hereof, hopyng also to find him there. They sailed therefore toward Beragua,
where they found within.xvi. miles distant, a river which Colonus named
Lagartos, because it nourysheth great Lysards, which in the Spanishe tongue
are called Lagartos. The river Lagartos.
These Lysards are hurtful both unto man and beast, and in shape much like unto
the Crocodiles of the river Nilus in Egypt. In this river they found their
companions and fellows of their error, lying at anchor with the great ships,
which followed behind by the governors commandment. Here the whole
assembly being careful and disquieted by reason of the governors error,
after consultation, by the advice of the captains of the Brigandines, who had
rased near unto the coasts of Beragua, they sailed directly thither. Beragua,
The golden river of Beragua.
in the language of the inhabitants of the same province, is as much to say, as
the golden river. The region it self is also called by the same name, taking
name of the river. In the mouth of this river, the greatest vessels cast
anchor, and conueyghed all their victuales and other necessaries to land with
their ship boats, and elected Lupus Olanus to be their governor in steed of
Nicuesa whom they had lost. By thaduyce therefore of Olanus and the other under
capytaines, that all hope of departure might be taken from the souldyers which
they had now brought thither, and to make them the more wylling to inhabit
that land, they utterly forsook and cast of those ships being now rotten
for age, and suffered them to be shaken and broosed of the surges of the sea.
Yet of their soundeste plankes, with other new, made of the trees of that
Region (which they say to be exceeding big and high) they framed a new
carauell shortelye after, which they might use to serve for their necessity.
But Beragua was found by the unfortunate destenye of Petrus de Vmbria, The
enterprise and death of Petrus de Vmbria
For he, being a man of prompt wit and apt forwardness to attempt things
(in which sometime fortune will bear a stroke notwithstanding our providence)
took upon him thaduenture to search the shore, to the intent to find a way
for his fellows where they might best come aland. For this purpose, he chose
him.xii. maryners, and went aboorde the ship boat which served the greatest
ships. The flowyng of the sea, raged and rored there, with a horrible
whurling, as we read of the dangerous place of Scylla in the sea of Cicilie,
The dangerous place of Scilla in the sea of Cicile.
by reason of the houge and ragged rocks reaching into the sea, from which
the waves rebounding with vyolence, make a great noise and roughness on the
water, which roughness or reflowing, the Spaniardes call Resacca, In these
dangers wretched Vmbria wresteled a while, but in short space, a wave of the
sea almost as bygge as a mountain, reboundyng from the rocks, overwhelmed
the boat, and devoured the same with the men, even in the sight of their
fellows: So that of them all, only one escaped by reason he was expert in
swimming. For getting hold of the corner of a rock, and susteyning the rage
of the sea until the next day when it waxed caulme, and the shore was dry by
the fall of the water, he escaped and resorted to his company. But Vmbria with
the other eleven, were utterly cast away. The resydue of the company, durst
not commit them selves to the ship boats, but went alande with their
brygantines. Where remaining a few days, and saylyng along by the river, they
found certain vyllages of the inhabitauntes, which they call Mumu. Here they
began to build a fortress, and to sow seeds after the manner of their
country, in a certain vale of fruiteful ground, because in other places the
region is barren. As these things were thus doing in Beragua, one of their
company standing upon the top of a high rock of especial, and lyftyng his
eyes toward the West, began to cry, Lynnen sails, lynnen sails. And the
nearer it drew toward him, he perceived it to be a ship boat, coming with a
little sail: yet received they it with much rejoicing, for it was the fysher
boat of Nicuesa his Carauel, and of capacity to carry only five men, and had
now but three in it, which had stolen it from Nicuesa, because he refused to
give credit to them that he had passed Beragua, and left it behind him
Eastwarde. For they seeing Nicuesa and his fellows to consume daily by famine,
thought that they would prove fortune with that boat, if their chance might
be to find Beragua, as in deed it was. Debatyng therefore with their fellows
of these matters, they declared how Nicuesa erred and lost the Carauel by
tempest, and that he was now wanderyng among the maryshes of unknown coasts,
full of misery and in extreme penury of all things, The miserable case of
Nicuesa
having now lived for the space of threescore and ten days, only with
herbs and roots, and seldom with fruits of the country, contented to
drink water, and yet that oftentimes faylyng, because he was instant to
travail Westwarde by foot, supposyng by that means to come to Beragua.
Colonus the first fynder of this main land, had coasted along by this tracte,
and named it Gracia Dei, but thinhabitantes call it Cerabaro. Through this
region, there runs a river, which our men named Sancti Matthei, distant
from the West side of Beragua, The river of S. Matthei.
about an hundred and thyrtie miles. Here I let pass the name of this river,
and of many other places by the names which thinhabitantes use, because our
men are ignorant thereof. Thus Lupus Olanus the conductor of one of the shyps
of Nicuesa, and now also vice Lieuetenaunt in his steed, after that he had
received this information of the Maryners, sent thither a Brigandine under
their guydyng. These Maryners therefore, which came in the fyssher boat,
found Nicuesa, and brought him to the place where Olanus lay, The
rigocousnesse of Nicuesa.
whom at his coming he cast in prison, and accused him of treason, because he
usurped the authority of the Lieuetenauntshyp, and that for the desire he had
to bear rule and be in authority, he took no care of his errors: also that
he behaved him self negligently, demaundyng furthermore of him, what was the
cause of his so long delay. Likewise he spoke to all the under officers
sharply, and with a troubled mind, and within few days after, commanded
them to trusse up their packes, and make them ready to depart. They desired him
to quiet him self, and to forbear them a while, until they had reaped the
corn that they had sown, which would shortly be ripe: for all kind of
corn waxes ripe there every fourth month after it is sown. Corn waxes
ripe every fourth month
But he utterly denied to tarry any whyt, but that he would forthwith depart
from that unfortunate land, and plucked up by the roots all that ever was
brought into the gulf of Beragua, and commanded them to direct their course
toward the East. After they had sailed about the space of sixteen miles, a
certain young man, whose name was Gregory, a Genues borne, and of a child
brought up with Colonus, called to remembrance that there was a haven not
far from thence: and to prove his sayings true, he gave his fellows these
tokens, that is, that they should find upon the shore, an anchor of a lost
ship half covered with sand, and under a tree next unto the haven a spryng
of clear water. They came to the land, found the anchor and the spryng, and
commended the wit and memory of the young man, that he only among many of
the Maryners which had searched those coasts with Colonus, The commendation of
a young man brought up with Colonus. Portus Bellus.
bore the thing so well in mind. This haven Colonus called Portus Bellus.
Where as in this voyage for lack of vyttualles, they were sometimes enforced
to go alande, they were evil entreated of thinhabitantes: by reason whereof,
their strengthes were so weakened with hunger, that they were not able to keep
war against naked men, Weakness of hunger.
or scarcely to bear their harness on their backs: and therefore our men
lost twenty of their companions, which were slain with venomous arrows. They
consulted to leave the one half of their fellows in the haven of Portus
Bellus, and the other part Nicuesa took with him toward the East, where about
twenty and eight miles from Portus Bellus, he intended to build a fortress
hard by the sea side, upon the point or cape, which in time past Colonus
named Marmor, but they were so feeble by reason of long hunger, Cape Marmor.
that their strength served them not to sustain such labor, yet he erected a
little tower, able to resyst the first assault of the inhabitauntes: this tower
he called Nomen Dei. From the time that he left Beragua, what in the journey
among the sandy playnes, Nomen Dei.
then also for hunger while he builded the tower, of the few which remained
alive, he lost two hundred. And thus by little and little, the multitude of seven
hundred, fourscore, and five men, was brought now to scarcelye one hundred.
While Nicuesa lived with these few miserable men, there arose a contention
among them of Vraba, as concerning the Lieuetenantshyppe: for one Vascus
Nunnez, by the judgment of al men, trustyng more to his strength then wit,
styrred up certain light fellows against Ancisus, saying that Ancisus had not
the kings letters patentes for that office, and that it was not sufficient that
he was aucthorised by Fogeda, and therefore forbode that he should execute the
office of the Lieuetenauntshyp, and wylled them to choose certain of their
own company, by whose counsel and authority they might be governed. Thus
being divided into factions, by reason that Fogeda their captain came not
again, whom they supposed to be now dead of his venomous wound, they
contended whether it were best to substitute Nicuesa in his place. The wysest
sort, such as were familier with Nicuesa, and could not bear the insolency
of Vascus Nunnez, thought it good that Nicuesa should be sought out throughout
all those coasts: for they had knowledge that he departed from Beragua,
because of the barrenness of the ground, and that by the example of Ancisus,
and such other as had made shypwracke, it were possible that he might wander
in some secret place, and that they could not be quiet in their minds, until
they knew the certayntie whether he with his fellows were alive or dead. But
Vascus Nunnez, fearyng lest at the coming of Nicuesa, he should not be had in
authority among his fellows, said they were mad men to think that Nicuesa
lived, and although he were alive, yet that they had no need of his help: for
he avouched that there was none of his fellows, that were not as meet to rule
as Nicuesa. While they were thus reasonyng to and fro, The navigations of
Rodericus Colmenaris.
one Rodericus Colmenaris aryued in those coasts with two great ships,
having in them threescore fresh men, with great plenty of vyttualles and
apparel. Of the navigations of this Colmenaris, I entend to speak somewhat
more. He therefore departed from the haven of Hispaniola, called Beata (where
they prepare and furnyshe them selves which make any voyage into these lands)
about the Ides of October, in the year.1510. and landed the.ix. of November in
a region in the large province of Paria, found by Colonus between the haven
Carthago, and the region of Cuchibachoa. In this voyage, what by the roughness
of the sea, and fierceness of the barbarians, he suffered many incommodities:
for when his fresh water failed, he sailed to the mouth of a certain river
which thinhabitantes call Gaira, being apt to receive ships. This river had
his course from the top of an exceedyng high mountain covered with snow, An
exceedyng high mountain covered with snow.
higher then the which, all the companions of this captain Rodericus say, that
they never saw: And that by good reason, if it were covered with snow in that
region, which is not past ten degrees distant from the Equinoctial line. As
they began to draw water out of their ship boat, a certain king made toward
them, apparelled with vestures of gossampine cotton, Apparelled men.
having twenty noble men in his company apparelled also: which thing seemed
strange to our men, and not seen before in those parties. The kings apparel
hong loose from his shoulders to his elbowes, and from the gyrdle downewarde,
it was much like a woman's kyrtle, reaching even to his heels. As he drew
near toward our men, he seemed freendly to admonyshe them to take none of the
water of that river, affyrmyng it to be unwholesome for men, and showed them
that not far from thence, there was a river, of good water. They came to the
river, and endeuouryng to come near the shore, they were driven back by
tempest. Also the burbuling of the sand, declared the sea to be but shalow
there. They were therefore enforced to return to the first river where they
might safely cast anchor. This king laid wait for our men: for as they were
fyllyng their barrelles, he set on them with about seven hundred men (as our
men judged) armed after their manner, although they were naked: for only the
king and his noble men were apparelled. They took away the shypboate, and
broke it in manner to chips: so fiercely assaylyng our men with their venomous
arrows, that they slew of them forty and seven, Spanyardes slain with
venomous arrows.
before they could cover them selves with their targets. For that poison is of
such force, that albeit the wounds were not great, yet they dyed thereof
immediately, for they yet knew no remedy against this kind of poison, as they
after learned of the inhabitauntes of Hispaniola: for this Island brings
forth an herb which quenches and mortifieth the violent poison of the
herb, wherewith their arrows are infected, so that it be ministered in time. A
remedy against venomous arrows
Yet of our company which went for water, seven escaped that conflycte, and
hid them selves in a hollow tree, lurkyng there until night, yet escaped
they not the hands of their enemies: for the ship departed from thence in
the night season, and left them there, supposyng that they had been slain. Thus
by many such peryls and dangers (which I lightly ouerpasse, because I will
not be tedious to your holiness) he aryued at the length at the haven of
Vraba, The haven of Vraba.
and cast anchor at the East side thereof, from whence not long before, our men
departed to the West side, by reason of the barrenness of that soil. When he
had continued a while in the haven, and saw no man styrryng, marueyled at the
scilence of the places (for he supposed there to have found his fellows) he
could not conjecture what this should mean: and thereupon began to suspect
that either they were dead, or that they had changed the place of their
habitation. To know the certayntie hereof, he commanded all the great
ordinance, and other small gunnes which he had in his ships, to be charged,
and fyers to be made in the night upon the tops of the rocks. Thus the fyers
being kyndled, he commanded all the gunnes to be shot of at one instant, by the
horrible noise whereof, the gulf of Vraba was shaken, although it were.xxiiii.
miles distant, for so broad is the gulf. This noise was heard of their
fellows in Dariena, and they aunsweared them again with mutual fyers.
Wherefore, by the following of these fyers, Colmenaris brought his ships to
the West side. Here those wretched and miserable men of Dariena, which now
through famyne and feebleness, held their weerie souls in their teeth, ready
to depart from their bodies, by reason of the calamities which befell unto them
after Ancisus shipwreck, lifting up their hands to heaven, with the tears
running down their cheeks both for joy and sorrow, embraced Rodericus and his
fellows with such kind of reioycyng, as their present necessity seemed to
require: for whereas they were before his coming, without vittuals, and almost
naked, he brought them abundance of meat, drink, and apparel. It rests now
(most holy father) to declare what came of the dissension among them of Vraba,
as concerning the governance after the loss of their captains.

The third book of the second Decade, of the supposed continent.
ALl the chief officers in Beragua, and such as were most politic in
counsel, determined that Nicuesa should be sought out, if by any means he
could be found. Wheruppon they took from Ancisus the governor, refusyng the
coming of Nicuesa, a Brigandine which he made of his own charges: and
agreed, against both the will of Ancisus, and the master of fence Vaschus
Nunnez, that Nicuesa should be sought forth to take away the strife as touching
the government. They elected therefore Colmenaris (of whom we spoke before) to
take this matter in hand, willing him to make diligent search for Nicuesa in
those coasts where they supposed he erred: for they heard that he had
forsaken Beragua, the region of an unfruitful ground. They gave him therefore
commandment to bring Nicuesa with him, and further to declare unto him that
he should do right good service to come thither, in taking away the occasion of
their seditions. Colmenaris took the thing upon him the more gladly, because
Nicuesa was his very friend, supposyng his coming with vittualles should be
no less thankful to Nicuesa and his company, then it was to them of Vraba.
Furnishyng therefore one of his own ships which he brought with him, and
also the Brigandine taken from Ancisus, he frayghted the same with part of the
vittuals and other necessaries which he brought with him before from Hispaniola
to Vraba. Thus coursyng along by all the coasts and gulfes near thereabout, at
the length, at the point called Marmor, he found Nicuesa, of al living men
most unfortunate, Nicuesa is found in a miserable case.
in manner dried up with extreme hunger, fylthy and horrible to behold, with
only threescore men in his company, left alive of seven hundred. They al seemed
to him so miserable, that he no less lamented their case, then if he had found
them dead. But Colmenaris comforted his friend Nicuesa, and embracyng him with
tears and cheareful words, relieved his spirits, and further encouraged him
with great hope of better fortune, declaryng also that his coming was looked
for, and greatly desired of all the good men of Vraba, for that they hoped
that by his authority, their discord and contention should be finished.
Nicuesa thanked his friend Colmenaris after such sort as his calamity
required. Thus they took ship together, and sailed directly to Vraba. But so
variable and unconstant is the nature of man, that he soon grows out of use,
becomes insolent and unmindful of benefits after to much felicity: for
Nicuesa after thus many tears and weepyngs, Insolency oft^ much felicity.
after diverse bewaylynges of his unfortunate destenye, after so many
thankesgeuyng, yea after that he had fallen down to the ground and kyssed the
feet of Colmenaris his savior, he began to quarrel with him before he came yet
at Vraba, reproving him and them al for the alteration of the state of things
in Vraba, and for the geatheryng of gold, affyrmyng that none of them ought to
have laid hand of any gold without the advice of him or Fogeda his
companyon. When these sayings and such like, came to the ears of them of
Vraba, they so styrred up the minds of Ancisus Lieuetenaunt for Fogeda, and
also of Vaschus Nunnez of the contrary part, against Nicuesa, that shortly
after his aryuall with his threescore men, they commanded him with threatnyng
to depart from thence: but this pleased not the better sort. Yet fearyng lest
tumult should be among the people, whom Vaschus Nunnez had styrred to factions,
the best part was feign to give place to ye greatest. This wretched man
therefore Nicuesa thus drowned in miseries, was thrust into the Brigandine
which he him self brought, and with him only seventeen men, of his
threescore which remained alive. He took ship in the Calendes of March, in
the year.1511. intendyng to go to Hispaniola to complain of the rashness of
Vaschus Nunnez and of the violence done to him by Ancisus: But he entered into
the Brigandine in an unfortunate hour, for he was never seen after. They
suppose that the Brigandine was drowned with all the men therein. And thus
unhappy Nicuesa falling headlong out of one misery into another, The death of
Nicuesa.
ended his life more miserably then he lived. Nicuesa being thus vylely
rejected, and their vyttuals consumed which Colmenaris brought them, falling in
manner mad for hunger, they were enforced like ravening woolues seeking their
pray, to invade such as dwelt about their confynes. Vaschus Nunnez therefore,
their new captain of their own election, assemblyng together a hundred and
thirty men, and setting them in order of battle after his swoordplayers
fashion, puffed up with pride, placed his soldiers as pleased him, in the
forewarde and rerewarde, and some, as partizens, about his own person. Famine
enforseth them to fall to spaylyng. Careta king of Coiba.
Thus assosiatyng with him Colmenaris, he went to spoil the kings which were
borderers therabout, and came first to a region about that coast called Coiba
(whereof we made mention before) imperiously and with cruel countenance
commaundyng the king of the region, whose name was Careta (of whom they were
never troubled as often as they passed by his dominions) to give them
vyttualles. But Careta denied that he could give them any at that time,
alleagyng that he had oftentimes aided the Christians as they passed by those
coasts, by reason whereof, his store was now consumed: also that by the
means of the continual war which he kept ever from his childs age with a
king whose name was Poncha, borderyng upon his dominion, he and his family
were in great scarceness of al things. But Vaschus would admyt none of these
excuses, and thereupon took Careta prisoner, spoiled his vyllage, and brought
him bound with his two wives and children, King Careta is taken and spoiled.
and all his family to Dariena. With this king Careta, they found three of the
fellows of Nicuesa, the which when Nicuesa passed by those coasts to seek
Beragua, fearing punishment for their evil deserts, stole away from the
ships lying at anchor: And when the navy departed, committed them selves to
the mercy of Careta* who enterteyned them very friendly. They had now ben
there eighteen months, and were therefore as utterly naked as the people of
the country. During this time, the meat of thinhabitantes seemed unto them
delicate dishes and princely fare, especially because they enjoyed the same
without any strife for mine and thine, Mine and thine the seeds of al
myscheefe.
which two things move and enforce men to such hard shyftes and miseries,
that in living they seem not to live. Yet desired they to return to their
old cares, of such force is education and natural affection toward them
with whom we have been brought up. The vyttuals which Vaschus brought from the
vyllage of Careta, to his fellows left in Dariena, was rather somewhat to
assuage their present hunger, then utterly to take away their necessity. But
as touching Ancisus, Ancisus, Lieuetenant for Fogeda, is cast in prison.
being Lieuetenaunt for Fogeda, whether it were before these things, or after,
I know not: but this I am sure of, that after the reiec^yng of Nicuesa, many
occasions were sought against Ancisus by Vaschus and his factionaries.
Howsoever it was, Ancisus was taken, and cast in prison, and his goods
confiscate: the cause hereof was (as Vaschus alleged) that Ancisus had his
commission of the Lieuetenauntshyp of Fogeda only, whom they said to be now
dead, and not of the king, saying that he would not obey any man that was not
put in off^ce by the king him self by his letters patentes Yet at the request
of the grauest sort, he was somewhat pacified, and dealt more gentelly with
him, having some compassion on his calamities, and thereupon commanded him to
be loosed. Ancisus being at liberty, Ancisus takes his voyage to Hispaniola.
took ship to depart from thence to Hispaniola: but before he had hoysed up
his sail, all the wisest sort resorted to him, humblye desyryng him to return
again, promysyng that they would do their diligence, that Vaschus being
reconciled, he might be restored to his full authority of the
Lieuetenauntshyp: but Ancisus refused to consent to their request, and so
departed. Yet some there were that murmured that God and his angels showed this
revenge upon Ancisus, because Nicuesa was rejected through his counsel. The
reueng^ of God.
How so ever it be, the searchers of the new lands fall headlong into ruin
by their own folly, The inconveniences of discord.
consumyng them selves with civil discord, not weighing so great a matter,
nor employing their best endeavor about the same, as the woorthynesse of the
thing requires. In this mean time, they determined all with one agreement, to
send messengers into Hispaniola to the young Admiral and viceroy, son and
heir to Christophorus Colonus the fynder of these lands, and to the other
governors of the Island (from whom the new lands receive their aid and
laws) to signify unto them what state they stood in, and in what necessity
they lived, also what they had found, and in what hope they were of greater
things, if they were furnished with plenty of vyttualles and other
necessaries. For this purpose they elected, at the assignement of Vaschus, one
Valdiuia, being one of his faction, and instructed by him against Ancisus, and
to be assystant with him, they appointed one Zamudius a Cantabrian, so that
commandment was given to Valdiuia to return from Hispaniola with vittuals,
and Zamudius was appointed to take his voyage into Spain to the king. They
took ship both together with Ancisus, having in mind to certify the king how
things were handled there, much otherwise then Zamudius information. I me
self spoke with both Ancisus and Zamudius at their coming to the court. While
they were occupied about these matters, those wretched men of Dariena loosed
Careta the king of Coiba, upon condition that he should aid them in their
wars against his enemy and theyrs, King Poncha.
king Poncha, borderyng upon his dominions. Careta made a league with them,
promising that as they passed by his kingdom, he would give them all things
necessary, and meet them with an army of men, to go forward with them to
the battle against Poncha. Their weapons are neither bows nor venomed
arrows, as we said thinhabitauntes to have, which dwell eastward beyond the
gulf. They fight therefore at hand with long swords (which they call
Macanas) made of wood, Swords of wood.
because they have no Iron. They use also long staves like iauelyns, hardened
at the ends with fire, or typt with bone, also certain slings and darts.
Thus aftet the league made with Careta, both he and our men had certain days
appointed them to till their ground and sow their seeds. King Careta
conspireth with the Spaniards against king Poncha.
This done, by the aid of Careta, and by his conduction, they marched toward
the palace of Poncha, who fled at their coming. They spoiled his vyllage, and
mitigated their hunger with such vyttuals as they found there: yet could they
not help their fellows therewith, by reason of the far distance of the
place, although they had great plenty: for the vyllage of Poncha was more then
a hundred miles dystant from Dariena, whereas was also none other remedy, but
that the same should have been carried on men's backs to the sea side, being
far of, where they left their ships in the which they came to the village
of Careta. Here they found certain pounds weight of gold, graven and wrought
into sundry ouches. After the sackyng of this vyllage, they resorted toward the
ships, intending to leave the kings of the inlande untouched at this time, and
to invade only them which dwelt by the sea coasts. Not far from Coiba, in
the same tracte, there is a region named Comogra, The region of Comogra,
distant from Dariena.xxx. leagues.
and the king thereof called Comogrus, after the same name. To this king they
came first next after the subuertion of Poncha, and found his palace situate
in a fruiteful plain of.xii. leagues in breadth, at the roots of the further
side of ye next mountains. Comogrus had in his court a certain noble man of
near consanguitie to king Careta, which had fled to Comogrus by reason of
certain dissentions which was between Careta and him, these noble men, they
call Iura. This Iura therefore of Coiba, met our men by the way, and conciled
Comogrus to them, because he was well known to our men, King Comogrus.
from the time that Nicuesa passed first by those coasts. Our men therefore
went quietly to the palace of Comogrus, being distant from Dariena thirty
leagues by a plain way about the mountains. This king Comogrus had seven
sons, young men, of comely form and stature, which he had by sundry wives.
His palace was framed of posts or proppes made of trees fastened together
after a strange sort, The kings palace.
and of so strong building, that it is of no less strength then walls of
stone. They which measured the length of the floor thereof, found it to be a
hundred and fyftie paces, and in breadth, fourscore foot, being roofed and
paued with marvelous art. They found his storehouse furnished with abundance
of delicate vittuals, after the manner of their country, and his wine seller
replenished with great vessels of earth and also of wood, filled with their
kind of wine and syder, for they have no grapes: but like as they make their
bread of those three kinds of roots called Iucca, Wine and syder.
Agis, and Maizium (whereof we spoke in the first Decade) so make they their
wine of the fruits of Date trees, and Syder of other fruits and seeds, as do
the Almaynes, Fleminges, English men, and our Spanyardes which inhabit the
mountains, as the Vascons and Asturians: likewise in the mountains of the
Alps, the Noricians, Sweuians, and Heluecians, make certain drynkes of
barley, wheat, hoppes, and apples. They say also that with Comogrus they
drunk wines of sundry tastes, both white and black. Black wine.
But now you shall hear of a thing more monstrous to behold. Entryng
therefore into the inner parts of the palace, they were brought into a
chamber hanged about with the carcasses of men, tied with ropes of gossampine
cotton. Being demanded what they meant by that superstition, they answered
that those were the carcasses of the father, graundfather, and great
graundfather, with other the auncetours of their king Comogrus, declaryng that
they had the same in great reverence, and that they took it for a godly thing
to honor them religiously, and therefore apparelled every of the same
sumptuously with gold and precious stones, according unto their estate. After
this sort did the antiquity honor their Penates, which they thought had the
governance of their lives. The carcasses of men d^yed.
How they dry these carcasses upon certain instruments made of wood, like
unto hurdells, with a soft fire under the same, so that only the skin
remains to hold the bones together, we have described in the former Decade.
Of Comogrus his seven sons, the eldest had an excellent natural wit. He
therefore thought it good to flatter and please this wanderyng kind of men
(our men I mean) living only by shifts and spoil, lest being offended, and
seeking occasions against him and his family, they should handle him as they
did other which sought no means how to gratify them: Wherefore, he gave
Vaschus and Colmenaris four thousand ounces of gold artificially wrought,
and also fifty slaves, which he had taken in the wars: for such, either
they sell for exchange of other things, or otherwise use them as them
lists, for they have not the use of money. This gold with as much more
which they had in another place, our men weighed in the porche of Comogrus his
palace, to separate the fifth part thereof, The distribution of gold.
which portion is due to the kings Exchequer: for it is decreed, that the
fyft part of both gold, pearls, and precious stones, should be assigned to
the kings treasurers, and the residue to be divided among them selves by
composition. Here as brabblyng and contention arose among our men about the
diuidyng of gold, this eldest son of king Comogrus being present, whom we
praised for his wisdom, coming somewhat with an angrye countenance toward
him which held the ballaunces, he stroke them with his fyste, and scattered
all the gold that was therein about the porche, Young Comogrus his oration.
sharpelye rebukyng them with words in this essecte. What is the matter, you
Christian men, that you so greatly esteem so little portion of gold more then
your own quietness, which nevertheless you entende to deface from these
fair ouches, and to melt the same into a rude mass. If your hunger of gold
be so insatiable, that only for the desire you have thereto, The hunger of
gold.
you disquiete so many nations, and you your selves also sustain so many
calamities and incommodities, living like banished men out of your own
country, I will show you a region flowyng with gold, A region flowing with
gold.
where you may satisfy your rauenyng appetites: But you must attempt the thing
with a greater power, for it stands you in hand by force of arms to overcome
kings of great puissaunce, and rigorous defendours of their dominions. For
beside other, King Tumanama.
the great king Tumanama will come forth against you, whose kingdom is most
rich with gold, and distant from hence only six suns, that is, six days:
for they number the days by the sun. Furthermore, or ever you can come
thither, you must pass over the mountains inhabited of the cruel Canibales,
a fierce kind of men, Canibales.
deuourers of man's flesh, living without laws, wanderyng, and without Empire:
for they also being desirous of gold, have subdued them under their dominion,
which before inhabited the gold mines of the mountains, The gold mines of
the mountains.
and use them like bondemen, vsyng their labor in dyggyng and woorkyng their
gold in plates and sundry images, like unto these which you see here: for we
do no more esteem rude gold unwrought, then we do cloddes of earth, Unwrought
gold not esteemed.
before it be fourmed by the hand of the woorkeman to the similitude either of
some vessel necessary for our use, or some ouche beautiful to be worn.
These things do we receive of them for exchange of other of our things, as
of prisoners taken in war, which they buy to eat, or for sheets and other
things parteynyng to the furniture of household, such as they lack which
inhabit the mountains, and especially for vittualles, whereof they stand in
great need, by reason of the barrennes of the mountains. This journey
therefore must be made open by force of men, and when you are passing over
these mountains (poyntyng with his finger toward the south mountains) you
shall see another sea, where they sail with ships as bygge as yours (meaning
the Carauels) vsyng both sails and ores as you do, although the men be naked
as we are: all the way that the water runs from the mountains, and all that
side lying toward the South, Abundance of gold.
brings forth gold abundauntly. As he said these words, he poynted to the
vessels in which they use to serve their meat, affyrmyng that king
Tumanama, and all the other kings beyond the mountains, Household stuff of
gold.
had such and al other their household stuff of gold, and that there was no
less plenty of gold among those people of the South, then of Iron with us:
for he knew by relation of our men, whereof our swoordes and other weapons
were made. Our captains marueylyng at the oration of the naked young man (for
they had for interpreters those three men which had been before a year and a
half conuersaunt in the court of king Careta) pondered in their minds, and
earnestly considered his sayings, so that his rashness in scatteryng the
gold out of the ballaunces, they turned to mirth and vrbanitie, commendyng his
dooyng and saying therein. Then they asked him friendly, upon what certain
knowledge he spoke those things, or what he thought best herein to be done, if
they should bring a greater supply of men? To this young Comogrus, staying a
while with him self, as it were an Orator preparing him self to speak of
some grave matter, and disposing his body to a iesture meet to persuade, spoke
thus in his mother tongue, Give ear unto me, O you Christians. Albeit that the
greedy hunger of gold has not yet vexed us naked men, yet do we destroy one
another by reason of ambition and desire to rule. Naked people tormented with
ambition.
Hereof spryngeth mortal hatred among us, and hereof comes our destruction.
Our predecessors kept wars, and so did Comogrus my father, with princes
being borderers about him. In the which wars, as we have overcome, so have
we ben overcome, as does appear by the number of bondmen among us, which we
took by the overthrow of our enemies, of the which I have given you fyftie.
Likewise at another time, our adversaries having the upper hand against us,
led away many of us captive, for such is the chance of war. Also, among
our familiers (whereof a great number have been captives with them) behold here
is one which of long time led a payneful life in bondage under the yoke of
that king beyond the mountains, in whose kingdom is such abundance of gold.
Of him, and such other innumerable, and likewise by the resort of free men on
their side coming to us, and again of our men resortyng to them by safe
conduct, these things have been ever as well known unto us, as our own
possessions: but that you may be the better assured hereof, A vehement
persuasion.
and be out of al suspection that you shall not be deceived, make me the guide
of this voyage, byndyng me fast, and keepyng me in safe custody to be hanged
on the next tree, if you find my sayings in any point untrue. Follow my
counsel therefore, and send for a thousand Christian men apt for the
wars, by whose power we may, with also the men of war of Comogrus my
father, armed after our manner, invade the dominions of our enemies: where both
you may be satisfied with gold, and we for our conductyng and aydyng you in
this enterprise, shall think our selves abundantly rewarded, in that you shall
help to deliver us from the injuries and perpetual fear of our enemies.
After these words, this prudent young Comogrus held his peace, and our men
moved with great hope and hunger of gold, A token of hunger.
began again to swalowe down their spyttle.

The fourth book of the second Decade, of the supposed continent.
AFter that they had tarried here a few days, and baptized Comogrus, with all
his family, and named him by the name of Charles, after the king of Spain,
King Comogrus is baptized with his family.
they returned to their fellows in Dariena, leauyng with him the hope of the
thousand soldiers, which his son required to pass over those mountains
toward the South sea. Thus entryng into the vyllage which they had chosen to
inhabit, they had knowledge that Valdiuia was returned within six months
after his departure, but with no great plenty of vyttualles, because he
brought but a small ship: yet with hope that shortly after, there should be
sent them abundance of vyttualles, and a new supplye of men. For young Colonus
the Admiral, and viceroy of Hispaniola, and the other governors of the Island,
acknowledged that hitherto they had no respect to them of Dariena, because they
supposed that Ancisus the Lieuetenaunt had safely arrived there with his ship
laden with vyttualles: wylling them from henceforth to be of good cheer, and
that they should lack nothing hereafter, but that at this present time they
had no bigger ship whereby they might send them greater plenty of necessaries
by Valdiuia. The vyttuals therefore which he brought, served rather somewhat to
mitigate their present necessity, then to satisfy their lack. Wherefore,
within a few days after Valdiuia his return, they fell again into like
scarceness: especially forasmuch as a great storm and tempest which came
from the high mountains, with horrible thunder and lyghtnyng in the month of
November, Horrible thunder and lyghtnyng in the month of November.
brought with it such a floodde, that it partly carried away, and partly
drowned all the corn and seeds which they had sown in the month of
September, in a fruitful ground before they went to king Comogrus. The
seeds which they of Hispaniola call Maizium, and they of Vraba call Hobba,
whereof they make their bread, which also we said to be ripe thryse every
year, because those regions are not bytten with the sharpness of winter by
reason of their neerenesse to the Equinoctial line. It is also agreeable to the
principles of natural philosophy, that this bread made of Maizius or Hobba,
should be more wholesome for the inhabitauntes of those countries then bread
made of wheat, by reason that it is of easier digestion: for whereas cold is
wantyng, the natural heat is not driven from the outward parts into the
inward parts and precordials, whereby digestion is much strengthened. Being
therefore thus frustrate of the increase of their seeds, and the kings near
about them, spoiled of both vyttualles and gold, they were enforced to seek
their meat further of, and therewith to signyfie to the governors of
Hispaniola with what great necessity they were oppressed, and what they had
learned of Comogrus as concerning the Regions toward the South, willing them
in consideration thereof, to advertise the king to send them a thousand
soldiers, by whose help they might by force make way through the mountains,
diuidyng the sea on both sides, if they could not bring the same to pass
quietly. The same Valdiuia was also sent on this message, carrying with him to
the kings treasurers (having their office of receipt in Hispaniola) three
hundred pounds weight of gold, after eight ounces to the pound, for the fyft
portion due to the kings excheker. This pound of eight ounces, the Spaniardes
call Marcha, which in weight amounts to fyftye pieces of gold called
Castellani, but the Castilians call a pound Pesum. We conclude therefore, that
the sum hereof, was.xv. thousand of those pieces of gold called Castellani.
And thus is it apparent by this account, that they received of the barbarous
kings, a thousand and five hundred pounds, of eight ounces to the pound:
all the which they found ready wrought in sundry kinds of ouches, as
cheynes, braselets, tablets, and plates, both to hang before their breasts, and
also at their ears, and nosethryls. Valdiuia therefore took shypping in the
same Carauell in the which he came last, and returned also before the third
day of the Ides of January, in the year of Christ M.D.XI. What chanced to
him in this voyage, we will declare in place convenient. But let us now return
to them which remained in Vraba. After the dismissyng of Valdiuia, being
pricked forward with outrageous hunger, they determined to search the inner
parts of that gulf in sundry places. The extreme angle or point of the same
gulf is distant from the entrance thereof, about fourscore miles. This angle
or corner, the Spaniardes call Culata. Vaschus him self came to this point
with a hundred men, coasting along by the gulf with one brygandine and
certain of the boats of those regions, which the Urabians call Vru, like
unto them which thinhabitauntes of Hispaniola call Canoas. From this point,
there falls aryuer from the East into the gulf, ten times bigger then the
river of Dariena, which also so falls into the same. Saylyng along by the
river about the space of thyrtie miles (for they call it niene leagues) and
somewhat enclynyng toward the right hand Southwarde, they found certain
vyllages of thinhabitauntes, the king whereof was called Dabaiba. Our men also
were certified before, that Cemacchus the king of Dariena, whom they put to
flight in the battle, fled to this Dabaiba, but at the coming of our men,
Dabaiba also fled. It is thought that he was admonyshed by Cemacchus, that he
should not abide the brunte of our men. He followed his counsel, forsook his
villages, and left all things desolate: yet our men found heaps of bows and
arrows, also much household stuff, and many fyshyng boats. But those
maryshe grounds were neither apt for sowyng of seeds, or plantyng of trees,
Maryshe ground.
by reason whereof, they found there few such things as they desired, that
is, plenty of vyttualles: for the inhabitauntes of this region have no bread,
but such as they geat in other countries near about them by exchange for their
fyshe, only to serve their own necessity: yet found they in the houses of
those which fled, gold wrought and graven, amountyng to the sum of seven
thousand of those pieces, which we said to be called Castellani: also
certain Canoas, of the which they brought away two with them, and great
plenty of their household stuff, with certain bundels of bows and arrows.
They say, that from the maryshes of that river, there come certain battes in
the night season, as bygge as turtle doves, inuadyng men, and bytyng them with
a deadly wound, as some of them testify which have been bytten of the same. I
me self communing with Ancisus the Lieuetenant whom they rejected, and among
other things askyng him of the venomous biting of these battes, Ancisus bitten
of a Batte.
he told me that he him self was bytten by one of them on the heel, his
foot lying uncovered in the night, by reason of the heat in summer season,
but that it hurt him no more, then if he had been bitten by any other beast not
venomous. Other say, that the biting of some of them is venomous: yet that the
same is healed incontinently, if it be washed with water of the sea. Ancisus
told me also, that the venomous wounds made by the Canibales arrows infected
with poison, are healed by washing with water of the sea, and also by
cauterisyng with whot irons, and that he had experience thereof in the region
of Caribana, where many of his men were so wounded. They departed therefore
from the point of the gulf of Vraba, not well contented, because they were not
saden with victualles. In this their return, there arose so great a tempest in
that wide gulf, that they were enforced to cast into the sea all the household
stuff, A tempest.
which they took from the poor wretches which lived only by fyshyng. The
sea also swalowed up the two boats that they took from them, wherewith the
men were likewise drowned. The same time that Vaschus Nunnez attempted to
search the point of the gulf toward the south, even then by agreement, did
Rodericus Colmenaris take his voyage toward ye mountains by the east, with
threescore men, by the river of the other gulf. About forty miles distant
from the mouth of the other river, (for they call it twelve leagues) he found
certain vyllages situate upon the banks of the river, whose Chiui (that is)
king, they call Turui. With this king did Colmenaris yet remain, when Vaschus
after his return to Dariena, saylyng by the same river, came to him. Here
refreshyng their whole company with the vittuals of this Turui, they departed
from thence together. King Turui.
Other forty miles from hence, the river encompasseth an Island inhabited with
fyshermen. In this, because they saw great plenty of trees which bear
Cassia fistula, they named the Island Cannafistula. They found in it.lx.
villages of ten cotages apeece. The Island of Cannafistula.
On the right side of the Island there runs another river, whose chanel is
of deapth sufficient to bear Brigandines. This river they called Riuum Nigrum,
from the mouth whereof, about.xv miles distant, they found a town of five.C.
houses severed, whose Chebi (that is) king, was called Abenamachei. They al
forsook their houses, as soon as they heard of our men's coming: but when
they saw that our men pursued them, they turned again, and ran upon them with
desperate minds, as men driven from their own possessions. Their weapons are
swoords of wood, and long staves like iauelins, hardened at the end with fire:
but they use neither bows nor arrows, nor any other of the inhabitauntes of
the West side of the gulf. The poor naked wretches were easyly driven to
flight with our weapons. As our men followed them in the chase, they took the
king Abenamachei, and certain of his noble men. A common soldier of ours,
whom the king had wounded, coming to him when he was taken, cut of his arm at
one stroke with his swoorde: but this was done unawares to the captains. The
number of the Christian men which were here, was about an hundred and fyftie:
the one half whereof the captains left here, and they with the residue rowed
up the river again, with twelve of the boats of those regions, which they
call Vru, as they of Hispaniola call them Canoas as we have said. From the river
of Riuus Niger, and the Island of Cannafistula, for the space of threescore and
ten miles, leauyng both on the right hand and on the left, many rivers falling
into it bygger then it self, they entered into one, by the conductyng of one of
the naked inhabitauntes, being appointed a guide for that purpose. Upon the
bank of this river next unto the mouth of the same, there was a king called
Abibeiba, who because the region was full of maryshes, had his palace builded
in the top of a high tree, King Abibeiba dwells in a tree.
a new kind of buildyng, and seldom seen: but that land brings forth trees
of such exceeding height, that among their branches a man may frame large
houses: as we read the like in diverse auctours, how in many regions where the
Ocean sea rises and ouerfloweth the land, the people were accustomed to flee
to the high trees, The rysyng of the Ocean sea.
and after the fall of the water, to take the fyshe left on the land. This
manner of buyldyng, is to lay beams cross over the branches of the trees, fast
bound together, and thereupon to raise their frame, strongly made against
wind and weather. Our men suppose that they build their houses in trees, by
reason of the great floods and ouerflowyng of rivers, which oftentimes chance
in those regions. These trees are of such heyght, that the strength of no man's
arm, Trees of marvelous height.
is able to hurl a stone to the houses builded therein. And therefore do I give
the better credit to Pliny, Pliny.
and other auctours, which write that the trees in some places in India are so
high by reason of the fruitefulnes of ye ground, abundance of water, and heat
of the region, that no man is able to shoot over them with an arrowe: and by
judgment of all men, Fruitful ground.
it is thought that there is no fruitefuller ground under the sun, then this
is whereof we now entreat. Our men measuryng many of these trees, found
them to be of such bigness, that seven men, yea sometimes eight, holdyng hand
in hand with their arms stretched forth, were scarsely able to fathame them
about: yet have they their cellers in the ground, well replenyshed with such
wynes whereof we have spoken before. For albeit that the vehemency of the wind
is not of power to cast down those houses, or to break the branches of the
trees, yet are they tossed therewith, and swaye somewhat from side to side, by
reason whereof, the wine should be much troubled with moving. All other
necessary things, they have with them in the trees. When the king or any
other of the noble men, dyne or suppe in these trees, their wives are brought
them from the cellers by their servants, which by means of exercise, are
accustomed with no less celerytie to run up and down the stairs adherente
to the tree, then do our waiting boys upon the plain ground fetch us what
we call for from the cobbarde beside our dyning table. Our men therefore came
to the tree of king Abibeiba, and by thinterpretoures called him forth to
communication, giving him signs of peace, and thereuppon wylling him to come
down. But he denied that he would come out of his house, desyring them to
suffer him to live after his fashion: but our men fell from fair words to
threatening, that except he would descend with all his family, they would
either overthrow the tree, or else set it on fire. When he had denied them
again, Abibeiba, the king of the tree, yields to Vaschus.
they fell to hewing the tree with their axes. Abibeiba seeing the chippes fall
from the tree on every side, changed his purpose, and came down with only two
of his sons. Thus after they had entreated of peace, they communed of
geatheryng of gold. Abibeiba aunsweared that he had no gold, and that he
never had any need thereof, nor yet regarded it any more then stones. Gold no
more esteemed then stones.
But when they were instante upon him, he said unto them, If you so greatly
desire gold, I will seek for some in the next mountains, and bring it unto
you: for it is plentifully engendered in those mountains. Then he appointed a
day when he would bring this gold. But Abebeiba came neither at the day, nor
after the day appointed. They departed therefore from thence well refreshed with
his vittuals and wine, but not with gold as they hoped: yet were they
enfourmed the like by Abibeiba and his ditionaries as concerning the gold
mines and the Canibales, as they heard before of king Comogrus. Saylyng yet
further about thyrtie miles, they chanced upon certain cotages of the
Canibales, Canibales.
but utterly void without men or stuff: for when they had knowledge that our
men wandered in the provinces near about them, they resorted to the
mountains, carrying all their goods and stuff with them.

The fyfte book of the second Decade, of the supposed continent.
IN the mean time while these things were done along by the shores or banks
of the river, a certain Decurian, that is, a captain over ten, of the
company of those which Vaschus and Colmenaris had left for a garryson in Riuo
Nigro, in the dominion of king Abinamachei, whether it were that he was
compelled through hunger, or that his fatal day was now come, he attempted
with his soldiers to search the countries near thereabout, and entered into
the vyllage of a king called Abraiba. This captains name was Raia, whom
Abraiba slew with two of his fellows, but the residue fled. Within a few
days after, Abraiba having compassion on the calamity of his kynsman and
neighbor Abenamacheius, being driven from his own possessions (whose arm
also we said before that one of the soldiers cut of at the river of Riuo
Nigro) and now remaynyng with Abraiba, to whom he fled by stealth after he was
taken, went to Abibeiba thinhabitour of the tree, who had now likewise
forsaken his country for fear of our men, and wandered in the desolate
mountains and woods. When he had therefore found him, he spoke to him in this
effect, What thing is this, oh unfortunate Abibeiba? or what nation is this
that so tormenteth us, that we can not enjoy our quiet liberty? how long,
how long I say, shall we suffer their cruelty? were it not much better for us
to dye, then to abide such injuries and oppressions as you, as Abinamacheius
our kinsman, as Cemacchus, as Careta, as Poncha, as I and other princes of our
order do sustain? Can any thing be more intolerable, then to see our wives,
our children, and our subjects, to be led away captives, and our goods to
be spoiled even before our faces? I take the gods to witness, that I speak
not so much for mine own part, as I do for you, whose case I lament: for
albeit they have not yet touched me, nevertheless by thexample of other, I ought
to think that my destruction is not far of. Men good yenough if they had
iron.
Let us therefore (if we be men) try our strength, and prove our fortune
against them which have dealt thus cruelly with Abenamacheius, and driven him
out of his country, let us set on them with all our power, and utterly destroy
them. And if we can not slay the^ al, yet shall we make them afraid either to
assail us again, or at the least diminishe their power: for whatsoever shall
befall, nothing can chance worse unto us then that which we now suffer. When
Abibeiba heard these words, and such otherlyke, he condescended to do in all
things as Abraiba would require: whereupon they appointed a day to bring their
conspiracy to pass, but the thing chanced not according to their desire: for
of those which we said to have passed to the Canibals, there returned by
chance to Riuus Niger, the night before the day appointed to work their
feate, thirty men, to the aid of them which were left there, if any sedition
should rise as they suspected. Therefore at the dawning of the day, the
confederate kings, with five hundredth of their ditionaries armed after their
manner, besieged the village with a terrible alarome, knowing nothing of the
new men which came thither the same night. Here our target men came forth
against them, and first assailed them a far of with their arrows, then with
their pykes, and last with their swoordes: but the naked seelye souls,
perceiuyng a greater number of their adversaries then they looked for, were
soon driven to flight, and slain for the most part like scatteryng sheep.
The kings escaped, they slew many, and took many captives, Captives.
which they sent to Dariena, where they used them for laborers to till and
sow their ground. These things thus happyly atchyued, and that province
quieted, they returned by the river to Dariena, leauyng their thyrtie men for a
garrison, A garryson of thirty men.
under the governance of one Furatado a captain. This Furatado therefore, sent
from Riuo Nigro, where he was appointed governor.xx. of his fellows, and one
woman, with.xxiiii. captives, to Vaschus and his company, in one of the
byggest Canoas of that province. As they rowed down by the river, there came
forth suddenly overthwart the river against them four great Canoas, Eightene
Spanyardes slain and drowned.
which ouerthrewe their boat, and slew as many of them as they could come by,
because they were unprepared, suspecting no such thing. Our men were all
drowned and slain, except two, which hid them selves among certain fagottes
that swamme on the water, in the which they lay lurkyng, and so escaped to
their fellows in Dariena: who by them being aduertysed hereof, began to cast
their wits what this thing might mean, being no less solicitate for them
selves, then meditatyng in what danger their fellows had been in Riuo Nigro,
except by good fortune, those thirty new men which were sent to them, had
come to the vyllage the night before the conspiracy should have been wrought.
Consultyng therefore what was best to be done herein, at the length with
diligent searchyng, they had intelligence that five kings, that is to wit,
The kings which conspired the death of the Christians.
Abibeiba the inhabitour of the tree, and Cemaccus driven from his vyllage
which our men now possessed, Abraiba also and Abenamacheius, kynsemen, with
Dabaiba the king of the fysher men, inhabyting the corner of the gulf which
we called Culata, were al assembled to conspire the Christian men's destruction
at a day assigned: which thing had surely come to pass, if it had not ben
otherwise hyndered by Gods providence. A strange chance.
It is therefore ascrybed to a miracle, and truly not unworthily, if we way
how chance detected and bewrayed the counsel of these kings. And because
it is worthy to be heard, I will declare it in few words. Vascus Nunnez
therefore, who rather by power then by election, usurped the governance in
Dariena, being a master of fence, and rather a rash royster then a politic
captain (although fortune sometime favors fools) among many women which in
diverse of these regions he had taken captive, had one, which in favor and
beutie excelled all other. To this woman her brother often times resorted, who
was also driven out of his country with king Cemacchus, Women can keep no
counsel.
with whom he was very familyer, and one of his chief gentelmen. Among other
communication which he had with his sister whom he loved entierly, he uttered
these words, My dear and well-beloved sister, give ear to my sayings, and
keep most secretelye that which I will declare unto you, if you desire your
own wealth and mine, and the prosperity of our country and kynsefolkes. The
insolency and cruelty of these men which have driven us out of our
possessions, is so intolerable, that the princes of the land are determined
no longer to sustain their oppressions. By the conducting therefore of five
kings (which he named in order) they have prepared a hundred great Canoas, An
army of an hundred Canoas, and five. M. men.
with five thousand men of war by land and by sea, with vituals also in the
village of Tichiri, sufficient to mantayne such an army: declaryng further,
that the kings by agreement, had diuyded among them the goods and heads of
our men, and therefore admonyshed her, Triumph before victory.
at the day appointed by some occasion to conueigh her self out of the way,
lest she should be slain in the confusion of the battle: For the soldier
victourer, is not wont to spare any that comes in his raze. And thus showing
his sister the day assigned to the slaughter, he departed. But the young woman
(for it is the swoorde that women fear, Affection corrupts true judgment.
and observe more then the gravity of Cato) whether it were for the love or
fear that she had to Vaschus, forgetting her parents, her kynsfolkes, her
country, and all her friends, yea and all the kings into whose throtes
Vaschus had thruste his swoorde, she opened all the matter unto him, and
concealed none of those things which her indiscreet brother had declared to
her. When Vaschus therefore had heard the matter, he caused Fuluia, (for so had
they named her) to send for her brother, who came to her immediately, was
taken, and enforced to tell the whole circumstances of the matter: whereupon he
plainly confessed, that king Cemacchus his lord and master, The conspiracy
of the kings is detected.
sent those four Canoas to the destruction of our men, and that these new
conspiracies were attempted by his counsel: likewise that Cemacchus sought
the destruction of Vaschus himself, when he sent him.xl. men, under pretense
of frendshyp, to till and sow his ground, after the manner of the country,
giving them in commandment to slay Vaschus at Marris, whither he resorted to
comfort his laborers, King Cemaechus conspireth the death of Vaschus.
as the manner is of al good husbands, yet durst they at no time execute their
lords commandment upon him, because Vaschus came never among them a foot or
unarmed, but was accustomed to ride to them in harness with a iauelyn in his
hand, and a swoorde by his side. Wherefore Cemacchus being frustrate of his
particular counsel, took this last thing in hand, to his own destruction
and his neighbors: Vaschus pursues the kings with threescore and ten men.
for the conspiracy being detected, Vascus called threescore and ten
soldiers, commanding them to follow him, but declared nothing unto them
whither he went, or what he intended to do. He went forward therefore first
toward Cemacchus, which lay from him only ten miles: but he had knowledge
that he was fled to Dabaiba, the king of the maryshes of Culata. Yet
searching his village, he found a noble man, a ruler under him, and also his
kynsman, whom he took prisoner, with many other of his familiers and friends
both men and women. The same hour that he set forward to seek for Cemacchus,
Rodericus Colmenaris rowed up the river with four of their byggest Canoas, and
threescore men, by the conduction of the maids brother who brought him to the
village of Tichiri, Colmenaris sacketh the vyllage of Tichiri.
in ye which we said al their vittuals to remain which were prepared for their
army. Colmenaris therefore sacked the village, and possessed all their
vittuals, and wine of sundry colors, likewise took the governor thereof
prisoner, and hanged him on the tree in which he dwelt him self, commaundyng
him to be shot through with arrows in the sight of thinhabitantes, Five
rulers hanged and shot through with arrows.
and with him four other rulers to be hanged on gibbets, to the example of
other rebels. This punishment thus executed upon the conspiratours, stroke
the hearts of all thinhabitantes of the province with such fear, that there is
not now a man that dare stir his finger against the wrath of our men. They
live now therefore quietly, and the other kings by their example do the
gladlyer live in subjection, with less offense bearyng the yoke which they can
by no means shake of.

The syxte book of the second Decade, of the supposed continent.
THese things thus fynyshed, assembling al their company together, they
determined with one consent, that a messenger should forthwith be sent to
Hispaniola (from whence they have their laws and aid) to declare the whole
order of al these affairs, first to the Admiral and governor of the Island,
and afterward to the King of Spain, and to persuade him to send those
thousand men which young Comogrus said to be expedient to pass over the
mountains, lying between them and the golden regions toward the South* Vaschus
him self did greatly affect this embassage: but neither would the residue of
his fellows elect him thereto, nor his factionaries suffer him to depart,
as well for that thereby they thought they should be left desolate, as also that
they murmured, that if Vaschus should once go from them, he would never
return to such turmoyles and calamities, by the example of Valdiuia and
Zamudius, who had been now absent sense the month of January, in so much that
they thought they would never come again: but the matter was otherwise then
they took it, as I will show in his place, for they were perished. At the
length after many scrutinies, they elected one John Quicedus, a grave man, well
in years, Johan. Quicedus is sent to Spain.
and treasourer of the kings Exchequer in those provinces: they had conceived
a good opinion of this Quicedus, that all things should be well brought to
pass by his means, as well for his wisdom, as also that they were in good
hope of his return, because he had brought his wife with him to those regions,
whom he left with his fellows for a pledge of his coming again. When they had
thus elected Quicedus, they were again of diverse opinions whom they might
join with him for assistance, affirming that it were a dangerous thing to
commit so weighty a matter to one man's hands, not that they mistrusted
Quicedus, but because the life of man is frail, and the change of the air
perilous, especially to them, having now of long time ben accustomed to the
temperature near unto the Equinoctial, if they should be compelled to return
to ye North, with alteration of air and diet. They thought it therefore good to
appoint a companion to Quicedus, that if by chance the one should fail,
the other might remain, and that if they both escaped, the king should give ye
better credit to the relation of both. After long consultation therefore, they
chose Rodericus Colmenaris, a man of good experience, of whom we have
oftentimes made mention: for from his youth he had travailed over al Europe by
land and by sea, and was present at the doings of al things in Italy agayn^^
the French men, of whose return also, they had no small hope, because he had
many farms, and had tylled and sown much ground in Dariena, by the increase
whereof, he might get much gold by selling the same to his fellows. He left
therefore the charge of al his affairs in Dariena with his partner Alphonsus
Nunnez, a judge of the law, who also was like to have been chosen procuratour
of this voyage before Colmenaris, if one had not put them in remembrance that
he had a wife at Matritis, A wife is a hinderaunce.
fearing lest being overcome with her tears, he would no more return.
Colmenaris therefore, a free man, and at liberty, being associate assystant
with Quicedus, they took shyppyng together in a Brigandine, the fourth day of
the Calendes of November, in the year of Christ.1512. In this voyage, being
tossed with sundry tempests, they were by the violence of the wind cast upon
the West coasts of that large Island, which in the first Decade we called Cuba,
supposed to have been firm land. They were sore oppressed with hunger, for it
was now three months since they departed from their fellows: by reason
whereof, they were enforced to take land, to prove what aid they could get
among the inhabitauntes. Their chance therefore was to arryue in that part of
the Island, where Valdiuia was driven aland by tempest. But oh you wretched men
of Dariena, tarry for Valdiuia, whom you sent to provide to help your
necessities, provide for your selves rather, and trust not to them whose
fortune ye know not. The death of aldiuia.
For when he arrived in Cuba, the inhabitants slew him with all his fellows,
and left the Carauel wherein they were carried, torn in pieces, and half (...)
with sand on the shore, where Quicedus and Colmena^^^ (...) the fragmentes
thereof, bewailed their fellows my^fortune: but they found none of their
carcasses, supposyng that they were either drowned, or devoured of the
Canibales, which oftentimes make incursions into that Island to hunt for men.
But at the length, by two of the Island men which they had taken, they had
knowledge of Valdiuia his destruction, and that the inhabitauntes the more
greedily attempted the same, for that they had heard by the babblyng of one of
his fellows, that he had great plenty of gold: Hurt of lauyshnesse of the
tongue.
for they also take pleasure in the beauty of gold, which they form
artificially into sundry ouches. Thus our men stricken with pensiveness for
the cruel destenie of their fellows, and in vain seeking revenge for their
injuries, determined to forsake that unfortunate land, departing from those
covetous naked barbarians, with more sorrow and necessity then they were in
before. Or ever they had passed the South side of Cuba, they fell into a
thousand mysfortunes, and had intelligence that Fogeda arrived therabout,
leadyng a miserable life, The calamities and death of Fogeda.
tossed and turmoyled with tempests, and vexed with a thousand perplexities:
so that departing from thence almost alone, his fellows being for the most part
al consumed with maladies and famine, he came with much difficulty to
Hispaniola, Maladies and famine.
where he dyed by force of the poison of his venomous wound which he had
received in Vraba as we have said before. But Ancisus elected Lieutenant,
sailed by all those coasts with much better fortune: The prosperous voyage of
Ancisus.
for as he him self told me, he found prosperous wyndes in those parties,
and was well enterteyned of thinhabitantes of Cuba, but this specially in the
dominion of a certain king whose name was Commendator: for whereas he desired
of the Christian men which passed by, to be baptized, demaundyng the name of
the governor of the Island next unto Hispaniola, being a noble man, and a
knight of the order of Galatraua, of which order, A king of Cuba baptized by
the name of Commendator.
all are called Commendatores, this kings desire was to be named after him.
King Commendator therefore friendly received Ancisus, and gave him great
abundance of al things necessary. But what Ancisus learned of their religion
during the time of his remaynyng there, I have thought good to advertise your
holiness. You shall therefore understand, that certain of our men saylyng by
the coasts o^ (...), left with king Commendator a certain poor Maryner being
diseased, who in short space recoueryng his health, and having now somewhat
learned their language, A marvelous history how God wrought miracles by the
simple faith of a Maryner.
began to grow into great estimation with the king and his subjects,
insomuche that he was oftentimes the kings Lieuetenant in his wars against
other princes his borderers. This man's fortune was so good, that al things
prospered well that he took in hand: and albeit that he were not learned, yet
was he a virtuous and well meaning man, according to his knowledge, and did
religiouslye honor the blessed virgin, bearyng ever about with him her pycture
fair painted upon paper, Be not rash in judgment.
and sowed in his apparel near unto his breast, signifiyng unto the king, that
this holiness was the cause of al his victories: persuading him to do the like,
and to cast away all his Zemes, which were none other then the similitudes of
evil spirits, most cruel enemies and deuourers of our souls, and to take
unto him the holy virgin and mother of God to be his patroness, if he desired
all his affairs as well in war as in peace to succeed prosperously: also that
the blessed virgyn would at no time fail him, but be ever redye to help him
and his, if they would with devout hearts call upon her name. The maryner had
soon persuaded the naked nation, and therevppon gave the king (who demanded
the same) his pycture of the virgin, to whom he builded and dedicated a chapel
and an alter, A Chapel builded to the pycture of the virgin Marie.
ever after contemning and rejecting his Zemes. Of these Zemes made of
gossampine cotton, to the similitudes of spirits walking in the night, which
they oftentimes see, and speak with them familyerly, we have spoken
sufficiently in the nyenth book of the first Decade. Furthermore, according to
the institution of this maryner, when the son draws toward the fall, this
king Commendator with all his famyly, both men and women, resort daily to the
said chapel of the virgin Marie, where kneeling on their knees, and
reverently bowing down their heads, holdyng their hands joined together, they
salute the image of the virgin with these words, Aue Maria, Aue Maria, for
few of them can rehearse any more words of this prayer. At Ancisus his being
there, they took him and his fellows by the hands, and led them to this
chapel with rejoicing, saying that they would show them marvelous things.
When they were entered, they poynted with their fyngers to the Image of the
virgyn, al to be set and hanged about with ouches and jewels, and many earthen
pottes, filled some with sundry meats, and some with water, round about all
the tabernacle: for these things they offer to the image in the steed of
sacrifice, One superstititious religion turned into an other, holds still many
things of the first.
according to their old superstition toward their Zemes. Being demanded why
they did thus, they answered, Lest the image should lack meat, if perhaps it
should be a hungered: for they most certainly believe that images may hunger, and
that they do eat and drink. But what aid and help they confess that they
have had of the godly power of this image, that is of the blessed virgyn, it is
a thing worthy to be heard, and most assuredly to be taken for a truth: for
by the report of our men, there is such fervent godly love and zeal in these
simple men toward the holy virgin, Zeal without knowledge is never godly.
that to them being in the danger of war against their enemies, they do in
manner (if I may so term it) compel her to descend from heaven to help them
in their necessities. Mark this blyndnesse.
For such is the goodness of God, that he has left unto men in manner a price
whereby we may purchase him with his holy angels and saints, that is to wit,
burning love, charity, and zeal. This ignorance is to be lamented.
How therefore can the blessed virgin at any time be absent from them which
call for her help with pure faith and fervent love? Commendator him self,
with all his noble men and gentelmen, do testify with one voice, that in a
fought battle in the which this maryner was captain, bearing with him this
picture of the virgin Marie, the Zemes of their enemies turned their backs,
The devil dissembleth to keep his in blyndnesse still.
and trembled in the presence of the virgins image, and in the sight of them
all: for every of them bring their Zemes to the battle, hoping by their
help to obtain the victory. Yea they say further, that during the time of
the battle, they saw not only an Image, but a lively woman clothed in fair
and white apparel, ayding them against their enemies: which thing also the
enemies them selves acknowledged, confessyng that on the contrary part, she
appeared to them shaking a scepter in her hand with threatenyng countenance, A
notable lie of a papistical heretic.
which caused their hearts to shake and faint for fear: but after that this
Maryner departed from them, being taken into a ship of certain Christians
passing by those coasts, Commendator declared that he with all his subjects,
continually observed his institutions: insomuch that being at contention with
another prince, which of their Zemes were most holy and of greatest power, the
matter grew to such extremity, that they tried it with hand strokes: and
that in all these attemptes, the blessed virgin never failed him, One
blasphemy upon another.
but was ever present in the brunt of the battle, and gave him easy victory
with a small power of men, against a maine army of his enemies. Being demanded
with what words they cried upon the virgin Mary when they assailed their
enemies, they answered that they had learned no other words of the Maryners
doctrine, but Sancta Maria adiuua nos. Sancta Maria adiuua nos. That is, holy
Marie help us, holy Marie help us, and this also in the Spanishe tongue: for
he had left these words in the mouths of all men. While they murdered and
destroyed them selves thus on both sides, they fell to entreatie of peace, and
agreed to try the matter, not hand to hand by combatte of certain chosen
for both parties, as the manner was among the Romans and diverse other nations
in the old time, or by any slight or policy, but that two young men should
be chosen, for each party one, with their hands bound fast behind them in
the plain fyelde, both parties being sworn to acknowledge that Zemes to be
the better, which first loosed the bands of the young man which stood bound
for the trial of his religion. Thus diuidyng them selves, and placyng the said
young men before them in the sight of them all, with their hands fast bound
by their enemies, The devil appears in his likeness.
the contrary part called first on their Zemes (that is the devil, to whose
similitude their Images are made) who immediately appeared in his likeness
about the young man that stood bound in the defense of Satan's kingdom. What
likeness?
But as soon as Commendator with his company cried Sancta Maria adiuua nos,
Sancta Maria adiuua nos, forthwith there appeared a fair virgin clothed in
white, at whose presence the devil vanquished immediately. A strange miracle not
to be credited.
But the virgin, having along rod in her hand, and putting the same on the
bands of the young man that stood for Commendator, his hands were loosed
immediately in the sight of them all, and his bands found about the hands of
him that stood for the other party, Another miracle.
insomuch that they them selves found him double bound. But for all this,
were not the enemies satisfied, quarelling that this thing was done by some
sleyght or devise of man, and not by the power of the better Zemes. And
thereuppon required, for thaduoydyng of all suspection, that there might be
eight grave and sage men appointed, Wise men.
for each side four, which should bind the men in the sight of them all, and
also give judgment whether the thing were done without craft or guyle. Oh pure
simplicity and constant faith: oh golden and blessed confidence. Commendator
and his familiers, doubted not to grant their enemies their request, with like
faith wherewith the diseased woman obtained health of the flux of her blood,
Math. xiiii. This is another matter.
and whereby Peter feared not to walk on the sea at the sight of his master
Christ. These young men therefore were bound in the presence of these eight
grave men, and were placed within their lystes in the sight of both parties.
Thus upon a sign given, when they called upon their Zemes, The devil appears
again
there appeared in the sight of them al, a devil with a long tail, a wide
mouth, great teeth, and horns, resemblyng the similitude of the image which
the king being enemy to Commendator honored for his Zemes. As the devil
attempted to loose the bands of his client, the blessed virgin was immediately
present as before at the call of Commendator and his subjects, and with her
rod loosed the bands of her supplyant, The virgin Mary in her own person
overcomes the devil.
which were again likewise found fast tied about the hands of him that
stood for the contrary part. The enemies therefore of Commendator, being
stricken with great fear, and amassed by reason of this great miracle,
confessed that the Zemes of the virgin was better then their Zemes: for the
better proof whereof, these pagans being borderers to Commendator, which had
ever before ben at continual war and enmity with him, when they had
knowledge that Ancisus was arrived in those coasts, they sent Ambassadors
unto him, to desire him to send them priests, of whom they might be baptized:
whereupon he sent them two which he had there with him at that present. They
baptized in one day an hundred and thyrtie of thinhabitantes, sometime enemies
to Commendator, but now his friends, and joined with him in aliance. All such
as came to be baptized, gave the priests of their own liberality, The
priests reward.
either a cock or a hen, but no capons, for they can not yet skill how to
carue their cock chickens to make them capons. Why name you Capons?
Also certain salted fishes, and new fine cakes made of their bread: likewise
certain fowls franked and made fat. When the priests resorted to the
ships, six of these new baptized men accompanied them laden with vittuals,
wherewith they led a joyful Easter: for on the Sunday, two days before saint
Lazarus day, they departed from Dariena, and touched at that time only the cape
or angle of Cuba, near unto the East side of Hispaniola. At the request of
Commendator, Ancisus left with him one of his company, to the intent to teach
him and his subjects, with other his borderers, the salutation of the angel,
which we call the Aue Maria: for they think them selves to be so much the more
beloved of the blessed virgin, as they can rehearse the more words of that
prayer. Thus Ancisus taking his leave of king Commendator, Ancisus voyage to
Spain.
directed his course to Hispaniola, from which he was not far. Shortly after,
he took his voyage to Spain, and came to Valladoleto to the king, to whom he
made grievous complaynt of the insolency of Vaschus Nunnez, insomuche that by
his procurement the king gave sentence against him. Ancisus complayneth of
Vaschus.
Thus much have I thought good (most holy father) whereof to advertise your
holiness, Mark to who^ this feigned myraculous story was written.
as concerning the religion of these nations, not only as I have been enstructed
of Ancisus (with whom I was daily conuersaunt in the Court, and used him
familiarlye) but also as I was enfourmed of diverse other men of great
authority, to the intent that your excellency may understand how docible
this kind of men are, and with what facility they may be allured to embrace
our religion: but this can not be done suddenly, yet we have great cause to hope
that in short time they will be al drawn by little and little, to the Euangelical
law of Christ, to the great increase of his flock. But let us now return
to the messengers or procuratours as concerning the affairs of Dariena.

The seventh book of the second Decade, of the supposed continent.
FRom Dariena to Hispaniola, is eight days saylyng, and sometimes less with a
prosperous wind: yet Quicedus and Colmenaris the procuratours of Dariena, by
reason of tempests and contrary winds, could scarcely sail it in a hundred
days. When they had tarried a few days in Hispaniola, and had declared the
cause of the coming to the Admiral and the other governors, they took
shipping in two merchant ships, being ready furnyshed, which were also
accustomed to sail to and fro between Spain and the Island of Hispaniola.
They departed from Dariena (as we said before) the fourth day of the Calends
of November, in the year of Christ.1512. and came not to the court before the
Calendes of May in the year following, being the year of Christ.1513. At their
coming to the court, Johannes Fonseca (to whom at the beginning the charge of
these affairs was committed, whom also for his faithful service toward the
king, The procuratours of Dariena are honorably received at the court.
your holiness created general Commissarie in the wars against the Moors)
received them honorably, as men coming from the new world, from naked
nations, and lands unknown to other men. By the preferment therefore of the
Bishop of Burges, Quicedus and Colmenaris were brought before the king, and
declared their legacy in his presence. Such news and presents as they
brought, were dilectable to the king and his noble men, for the newness and
strangeness thereof. They also soiourned with me oftentimes. Their
countenaunces do declare the intemperatnesse of the air and region of Dariena,
for they are yelowe, like unto them that have the yelowe gaundies, and also
swollen: but they ascribe the cause hereof, to the hunger which they sustained
in times past. I have been advertised of the affairs of this new world, not
only by these procuratours of Dariena, and Ancisus, and Zamudius, but also by
conference with Baccia the lawyer, who ran over a great part of those coasts:
likewise by relation of Vincentius Annez* the patron of the shyps, and
Alphonsus Nignus, both being men of great experience, and well travailed in
those parties, beside many other, of whom we have made mention in other places,
for there came never any from thence to the court, but took great pleasure to
certify me of al things, either by word of mouth or by writing. Of many
things therefore which I learned of them, I have geathered such as to my
judgment seem most worthy to satisfy them that take delight in histories. But
let us now declare what followed after the coming of the procuratours of
Dariena. Therefore, before their arryual, there was a rumor spread in the court,
that the chief governors and Lieuetenantes Nicuesa and Fogeda, also Johannes
de la Cossa (a man of such reputation, The great master of the kings ships.
that by the kings letters patentes he was named the great master of the
kings ships) were al peryshed by mischaunce: and that those few which yet
remained alive in Dariena, were at contention and discord among them selves,
so that they neither endeavored their diligence to allure those simple nations
to our faith, nor yet had regard to search the natures of those regions. In
consyderation whereof, the king was determined to send a new captain
thither, which should restore and set al things in good order, and put them
out of authority which had usurped the Empire of those provinces without the
kings special commandment. To this office, was one Petrus Arias assigned,
Petrus Arias is elected governor of Dariena.
a man of great prowess, and a citizen of Sego^ia, but when the procuratours
of Dariena had publyshed in the court how great a matter it was, and of what
moment, many labored earnestly to the king, to take the office out of his
hands: but the Bishop of Burges, being the kings chief chaplayne, and one of
the Commissioners appointed by him in these matters, being advertised hereof,
came immediately to the king, and spoke to him in this effect: May it please
your highness to understand (most catholic prince) that whereas Petrus
Arias, The oration of the Bishop of Burges, in the defense of Petrus Arias.
a man of valiant courage and great service, has offered him self to adventure
his life in your majesty's affairs, under uncertain hope of gain, and most
certain peryls, yet that notwithstanding, some other have ambiciously maliced
his felicity and preferment, laboring for the office whereto he is elected. It
may please your grace herein, so to show him your favor, and permit him to
enjoy his said office, as your majesty do know him to be a worthy and meet
man for the same, having in time past had great experience of his prowess and
valyantnesse, as well in behauyng him self, as orderyng his soldiers, as your
highness may the better consider, if it shall please you to call to
remembrance his doings in the wars of Aphryca, The wars of Aphryca.
where he showed him self both a wise Captain, and a valiant soldier. As
concerning his manners and vsages otherwise, they are not unknown to your
majesty, under whose wyng he has of a child ben brought up in the Court,
and ever found faithful toward your highness. Wherefore, to declare my
opinion, under your graces favor (whom it has pleased to appoint me a
Commissioner in these affairs) I think it were ungodly that he should be put
from his office at the suite of any other, especially being thereto moved by
ambition and covetousness, who perchance would prove them selves to be the
same men in the office, if they should obtain it, as they now show them selves
in the ambitious desyryng of the same. When the Bishop had said these words,
the king confirmed the election of Petrus Arias, in more ample manner then
before, wyllyng the bishop to appoint him a thousand and two hundred soldiers
at his charges, making him a warrant to the officers of his Exchequer, to
deliver him money in pressed for the same purpose. Petrus Arias therefore being
thus put in office, and aucthorised by the kings letters patentes under his
broad seal, chose a great number of his soldiers in the court, and so
departed from Valladoleto, about the Calends of October, in the year.1513. and
sailed first to Civil, being a very rich city, and well replenished with
people, where by the kings magistrates, he was furnyshed with men and
vyttualles, and other necessaries parteynyng to so great a matter: for the king
has in this city erected a house, seruyng only for the affairs of the Ocean,
A house in Civil appointed to the affairs of India.
to the which al they that go or come from the new lands and Islands,
resort to give accomptes, as well what they carry thither, as what they bring
from thence, that the king may be truly answered of his custom of the fyft
part, both of gold and other things, as we have said before. This house they
call the house of the Contractes of Indi. Petrus Arias found in Civil above
two thousand young men, Perulariae.
which made great suite to go with him, likewise no small number of covetous
old men, of the which, many offered them selves to go with him of their own
charges without the kings stipende. But lest the ships should be pestered with
to great a multitude, or lest vittuals should fail them, the liberty of free
passage was restraynt. It was also decreed that no stranger might pass without
the kings license. Wherefore I do not a little maruayle at Aloisius Cadamustus
a Uenetian, and writer of the Portugales voyages, that he was not ashamed to
write thus of the Spanyardes nauigations: we went, we saw, we did: whereas he
never went, nor any Uenetian saw, but he stole certain annotations out the
three first books of my first Decade, written to Cardinal Ascanius and
Arcimboldus, supposyng that I would never have publyshed the same. It might
also happen that he came by the copy thereof at the hand of some ambassador of
Uenice, for I have granted the copy to many of them, and was not dangerous
to forbid them to communicate the same to other. How so ever it be, this
honest man Aloisius Cadamustus feared not to challenge unto him the fruit of
another man's labor. Of the inventions of the Portugales (which surely are
woonderful) whether he have written that which he has seen (as he says) or
likewise bereaved other men of the just commendations of their trauayles, The
Portugales inventions.
I will not judge, but am content to let him live after his manner. Among the
company of these soldiers, there were none embarked but such as were lice^ced
by the king, except a few Italians, Genues, who by frendshyp and suite were
admitted for the Admiralles sake young Colonus, son and heir to
Christophorus Colonus, The navigations of Petrus Arias.
the first fynder of those lands. Petrus Arias therefore took shipping in the
river Betis (now called Guadalqueuir) running by the city of Civil, about the
beginning of the year of Christ.1514. But he loosed anchor in an evil hour,
for such a tempest followed shortly after his departure, A shipwreck.
that it rent in pieces two of his ships, and so tossed the other, that they
were enforced to heave ouerboorde part of their vyttualles to lyghten them. All
such as escaped, sailed back again to the coasts of Spain, where, being
newly furnyshed and refreshed by the kings officers, they went forward on their
voyage. The master Pylote of the governors ship, was Johannes Vesputius a
Florentine, the neuiew of Americus Vesputius, who left him as it were by
descent of inheritance, Americus Vesputius.
thexperience of the Maryners faculty, and knowledge of the sea, card, and
compass. But we were advertised of late by certain which came from
Hispaniola, that they had passed the Ocean with more prosperous wind: for this
merchant ship coming from Hispaniola, found them landing at certain
Islands near therabout. But in the mean time, while my importunate callers on,
Galeaceus Butrigarius, and Johannes Cursius, men studious by all means to
gratify your holiness, ceased not to put me in remembrance that they had one
in a redines to depart into Italy, and tarried only to carry with him unto your
holiness these my fair Nereides, although rudely decked, lest I should bestow
much time in vain, I have let pass many things, and will rehearse only such as
seem in my judgment most worthy memory, although somewhat disordered, as
occasion has served. So it is therefore, that this Petrus Arias has a wife
named Helisabetha Boadilla, A notable example of a valiant woman.
being niese by the brothers side to the marquis of Boadilla, which rendered
the city of Segouia to Fernando and Helisabeth princes of Spain, at such
time as the Portugales invaded the kingdom of Castile, by reason whereof, they
were encouraged first to resyst, and then with open war to assail and
expulse the Portugales, for the great treasure which king Henry brother to
queen Helisabeth had geathered together there. This marquess, while she
lived, did ever show a manly and stout mind, both in peace and war, so
that by her counsel, many noble things were brought to good effect in
Castile: unto this noble woman the wife of Petrus Arias was niese by her
brothers side. She, following the magnanimity of her aunt, perceiuyng her
husband now furnyshyng him self to depart to the unknown coasts of the new
world, and those large tractes of land and sea, spoke these words unto him:
My most dear and well-beloved husband, The wife of Petrus Arias.
we ought not now to forgeat that from our young years we have been joined
together with the yoke of holy matrimony, to the intent that we should so live
together, and not asunder, during the time of our natural life: wherefore for
my part, to declare my affection herein, you shall understand, that whither
soever your fatal destenie shall drive you, either by the furious waves of the
great Ocean, or by the manyfolde and horrible dangers of the land, I will
surely bear you company: there can no peril chance to me so terrible, nor
any kind of death so cruel, that shall not be much easyer for me to abide,
then to live so far separate from you. It were much better for me to dye,
and either to be cast into the sea, to be devoured of the fyshes, or on the
land to the Canibales, then with continual mournyng and bewaylyng, to live in
death, and dye living, while I consume in lookyng rather for my husbands
letters, then for him self. This is my full determination, not rashly, nor
presently excogitate, nor conceived by the light fantasy of woman's brain,
but with long deliberation and good aduisement. Now therefore choose to
whether of these two you will assent, either to thruste your swoorde in my
throat, or to grant me my request. As for the children which god has given us
as pledges of our inseparable love (for they had four sons, and as many
daughters) shall not stay me a moment: let us leave unto them such goods and
possessions as have been left us by our parents and friends, whereby they may
live among the woorshypfull of their order: for other things I take no care.
When this noble matrone of manly virtue had finished these words, her
husband seeing the constant mind of his wife, and her in a redynesse to do
according to her words, had no heart to deny her loving petition, but
embracing her in his arms, commended her intent, and consented to her request.
She followed him therefore, as did Ipsicratea her Mithridates, with her hear
hangyng loose about her shoulders: for she loved her husband, as did
Halicarnassea of Caria hers, being dead, and as did Artemisia her Mausolus. We
have also had aduertisment since their departure, that she (being brought up as
it were among soft feathers) has with no less stout courage sustained the
roringes and rages of the Ocean, then did either her husband, or any of the
Maryners brought up even among the sourges of the sea. But to have said thus
much hereof, this shall suffice: let us now speak of other things no less
worthy memory. Therefore, whereas in the first Decade we have made mention of
Vincentius Annez Pinzonus, ye shall understand* that he accompanied
Christophorus Colonus the Admiral in his first voyage, and afterward made an
other voyage of his own charges with only one ship. Again, the first year
after the departing of the Captains Nicuesa and Fogeda, he ran over those
coasts from Hispaniola, and searched all the South side of Cuba, from the East
to the West, and sailed round about that Island, which to that day, for the
great length thereof, was thought to have been part of the continent or firm
land, although some other say that they did the like. Vincentius Annez
therefore, knowing now by experience that Cuba was an Island, sailed on
further, and found other lands Westwarde from Cuba, but such as the Admiral
had first touched. Wherefore, being in manner encompassed with this new land,
turning his course toward the left hand, and rasing the coasts of that land
by the East, ouerpassing also the mouths of the gulfes of Beragua, Vraba, and
Cuchibachoa, he arrived at the region which in the first Decade we called
Paria and Os Draconis, and entered into the great gulf of fresh water, which
Colonus discovered, being replenyshed with great abundance of fyshe, and famous
by reason of the multitude of Islands lying in the same, being distant
Eastwarde from Curiana about an hundred and thirty miles, in the which tracte,
are the regions of Cumana and Manacapana, which also in the sixth book of the
first Decade we said to be regions of the large province of Paria, Plenty of
pearls.
where many affirm to be the greatest plenty of the best pearls, and not in
Curiana. The kings of these regions (whom they call Chiacones, as they of
Hispaniola call them Cacici) being certified of the coming of our men, sent
certain spies to enquire what new nation was arrived in their coasts, what
they brought, and what they would have, and in the mean time furnyshed a
number of their Canoas (which they call Chichos) with men armed after their
manner: for they were not a little astonyshed to behold our ships with the
sails spread, whereas they use no sails, nor can use but small ones if they
would, by reason of the narownesse of their Canoas. Swarmyng therefore about
the ship with their Canoas (which we may well call Monoxyla, because they are
made of one whole tree) they feared not to shoot at our men, being yet within
their ships, and keepyng them selves under the hatches, as safely as if they
had been defended with stone walls. But when our men had shot of certain
pieces of ordinance against them, they were so discomfited with the noise and
slaughter thereof, The use of gunnes.
that they drove them selves to flight. Being thus disparcled, our men chased
them with the ship boat, took many, and slew many. When the kings heard the
noise of the gunnes, and were certified of the loss of their men, they sent
ambassadors to Vincentius Agnes to entreat of peace, fearyng the spoil of
their goods, and destruction of their people, if our men should come alande in
their wrath and fury. They desired peace therefore, as could be coniectured
by their signs and poyntynges: for our men understood not one word of their
language. And for the better proof that they desired peace, Great abundance of
gold and frankencense*
they presented our men with three thousand of those weyghtes of gold that the
Spanyardes call Castellanum Aureum, Olibanum.
which they commonly call Pesum. Also a great barrel of wood full of most
excellent masculine Frankencense, weighing about two thousand and six hundred
pounds weight, after eight ounces to the pound: whereby they knew that that
land brought forth great plenty of Frankencense, Sabea is a country in
^rabia, which brings forth Frankencense.
for there is no intercourse of marchaundies between the inhabitauntes of
Paria and the Sabeans, being so far distant, whereas also they of Paria know
nothing without their own coasts. With the gold and Frankencense which they
presented to our men, they gave them also a great multitude of their peacockes,
both cocks and hens, dead and alive, as well to satisfy their present
necessity, as also to carry with them into Spain for increase, likewise
certain carpettes, couerlettes, table clothes, and hangyngs, made of
Gossampine silk, finely wrought after a strange device, with pleasant and
variable colors, having golden belles, and such other spangles and pendauntes,
as the Italians call Sonaglios, and the Spanyardes Cascaueles, hangyng at the
purfles thereof. They gave them furthermore speaking popyngayes of sundry
colors, as many as they would ask: for in Paria there is no less plenty of
popyngayes, then with us of doves or sparows. Thinhabitants of these regions,
both men and women, are apparelled with vestures made of gossampine cotton, the
men to the knees, and the women to the calfe of the leg. The fashion of their
apparel is simple and plain, much like unto the Turks: but the men's is
double, and quilted, like that which the Turks use in the wars. The princes
of Paria are rulers but for one year: but their authority is no less among
the people both in peace and war, Rulers for one year.
then is thauctoritie of other kings in those regions. Their villages are
builded in compass, The great gulf of Paria.
along by the banks of all that great gulf. Five of their princes came to our
men with their presents, whose names I thought worthy to be put in this
history, in remembrance of so notable a thing, Chiaconus Chiauaccha (that is,
the prince of Chiauaccha, for they call princes or kings Chiaconus) Chiaconus
Pintiguanus, Chiaconus Chamailaba, Chiaconus Polomus* and Chiaconus Potto. The
gulf being first found of the Admiral Colonus, they call Baia Natiuitatis,
because he entered into the same in the day of ye nativity of Christ, but at
that time he only passed by it without any further searchyng, and Baia in the
Spanyshe tongue, signifies a gulf. When Vincentius had thus made a league with
these princes, following his appointed course, he found many regions toward ye
East, desolate by reason of diverse floods and ouerflowyngs of waters: also many
standing pooles in diverse places, and those of exceeding largeness. He ceased
not to follow this tracte, until he came to the point or cape of that most long
land. This point seems as though it would invade the mount Atlas in Aphrica:
for it prospecteth toward that part of Aphrike, which the Portugales call Caput
bonae Sperantiae. The poynte^ or capes of the mount Atlas, are rough and
savage, near unto the sea. The cape of Bona Speranza, geathereth thyrtie and
four degrees of the South pole, called the pole Antartike, but that point only
seven degrees. I suppose this land to be that, which I find in old writers
of Cosmographie to be called the great Island Atlantike, The great Island
Atlantike.
without any further declaryng either of the situation, or of the nature
thereof.

The eight book of the second Decade, of the supposed continent.
WHen John the king of Portugale lived, which was predecessor to him that
now reigns, there arose a great contention between the Castilians and the
Portugales, Contention between the Castilians and Portugales for the new
lands.
as concerning the dominion of these new found lands. The Portugales,
because they were the first that durst attempt to search the Ocean sea since
the memory of man, affirmed that all the nauigations of the Ocean, ought to
parteyne to them only. The Castilians argued on the contrary part, that
whatsoever God by the ministration of nature has created on the earth, was at
the beginning common among men, and that it is therefore lawful to every man to
possess such lands as are void of Christian inhabitours. While the matter was
thus vncertaynelye debated, both parties agreed that the controversy should
be desyded by the bishop of Rome, and plighted faith to stand to his
arbitrament. The kingdom of Castile was at that time governed by that great
queen Helisabeth with her husband: for the Realm of Castile was her dowry.
She also and the king of Portugale, were cosyn germans of two systers, by
reason whereof, the dissension was more easyly pacified. By the assent therefore
of both parties, Alexander the bishop of Rome, The bishop of Rome divides the
land.
the.vi. of that name, by thaucthoritie of his leaden bull, drew a right line
from the North to the South, an hundred leagues Westwarde, without the paralels
of those Islands which are called Caput Viride, or Cabouerde, within the
compass of this line (although some deny it) falls the point of this land
whereof we have spoken, which they call Caput Sancti Augustini, otherwise
called Promontorium Sancti Augustini, that is, saint Augustines cape or point:
and therefore it is not lawful for the Castilians to fasten foot in the
beginning of that land. Vincentius Annez therefore departed from thence, being
advertised of the inhabitants, that on the other side of the high mountains
toward the South, lying before his eyes, The golden regio^ of Ciamba.
there was a region called Ciamba, which brought forth great plenty of gold.
Of certain captives which he took in the gulf of Paria (which certaynely
parteyneth to the dominion of Castile) he brought some with him to Hispaniola,
and left them with the young Admiral to learn our language: but he him self
repaired to the court, to make earnest suite to the king, that by his favor he
might be governor of the Island of Sancti Iohannis (otherwise called Burichena,
being distant from Hispaniola only.xxv. leagues) because he was the first
finder of gold in that Island. The Island of S. Iohannis.
Before Vincentius made suite for this office, one Don Christopher, a
Portugale, the son of the county of Camigna, was governor of the Island,
whom the Canibales of the other Islands slew, with all the Christian men that
were in the same, except the Bishop and his familiers, which fled and shyfted
for them selves, forsakyng the church and all the ornaments thereof: for your
holiness has consecrated five bishops in these Islands, Five bishops of the
Island made by the bishop of Rome.
at the request of the most catholic king. In Sancto Dominico the chief
city of Hispaniola, Garsia de Padilla, a reguler Friar of the order of saint
Frauncis, is bishop. In the town of Conception, doctor Petrus Xuares of Deza,
and in the Island of saint John or Burichena, Alphonsus Mansus a licenciate,
being both obseruantes of the institution of saint Peter. The fourth is Friar
Barnarde of Mesa, a man of noble parentage, borne in Toledo, a preacher, and
bishop of the Island of Cuba. The fifth is Johannes Cabedus, a friar preacher,
whom your holiness anointed minister of Christ, to teach the Christian
faith among the inhabitants of Dariena. The Canibales shall shortly repent
them, and the blood of our men shall be revenged, and that the sooner, because
that shortly after they had committed this abominable slaughter of our men,
they came again from their own Island of Sancta crux (otherwise called Ay Ay)
to the Island of Sancti Iohannis, The Canibales of the Island of Sancta Crux.
and slew a king which was a freende to our men, and ate him, and al his
family, utterly subuertyng his village, upon this occasion, that violating the
law of hostage, he had slain seven Canibales which were left with him by
composition to make certain Canoas, because the Island of Sancti Iohannis
bears greater trees, and apter for that purpose, then does the Island of
Sancti crux, the chief habitatio^ of the Canibales. These Canibales yet
remaynyng in the Island, certain of our men saylyng from Hispaniola, chanced
upon them. The thing being understood by the interpretours, our men quarelling
with them, and calling them to account for that mischeuous deed, they
immediately directed their bows and venomous arrows against them, and with
cruel countenances threatened them to be quiet, lest it should repent them of
their coming thither. Our men fearyng their venomous arrows (for they were
not prepared to fight) gave them signs of peace. Being demanded why they
destroyed the vyllage, and where the king was with his family, they answered,
that they rased the vyllage, and cut the king with his family in pieces, and
ate them in the revenge of their seven woorkmen: and that they had made
faggottes of their bones, to carry them to the wives and children of their
slain woorkemen, in witness that the bodies of their husbands and parents
lay not unrevenged, and therewith showed the faggottes of bones to our men, who
being astonyshed at their fierceness and cruelty, were enforced to dissemble
the matter, and hold their peace, quarellyng no further with them at that
time. These and such other things do daily chance, the which I do let
pass, lest I should offend the ears of your holiness with such blooddy
narrations. Thus have we sufficiently digressed from the regions of Beragua and
Vraba, being the cheifest fundations of our purpose. We will now therefore
entreat somewhat of the largeness and deapth of the ryuers of Vraba: The
ryuers of Vraba.
also declare both what they and the lands which they run through do bring
forth: likewise of the greatness of the land from the East to the West, and
of the breadth thereof from the South to the North, and what their opinion and
hope is of things yet unknown in the same. We will therefore begin at the new
names, wherewith the Spanyardes have named these provinces, since they were
under the dominions of the Christians.

The nienth book of the second Decade, of the supposed continent.
BEragua therefore they called Castella Aure^* that is, golden Castile, and
Vraba they named Andalusia noua, that is, new Andalusia. And like as of many
Islands which they subdued, they chose Hispaniola for the chief place of
their habitation: so in the large tracte of Paria, they appointed their colonie
or biding place in the two regions of Vraba and Beragua* that al such as
attempt any voyages in those coasts, may resort to them, as to safe ports to
be refreshed when they are weerie or driven to necessity. Al our seeds and
plants do now marvelously increase in Vraba, likewise blades, settes,
slippes, graffes, sugar canes, and such other as are brought from other places
to those regions, The fruitfulness of Vraba.
as also beasts and fowls, as we have said before: O marvelous
fruitefulnesse. Twenty days after the seed is sown, they geather ripe
cucumbers, and such like, but Colwoortes, Beetes, Lettuse, Borage, are ripe
within the space often days. Gourdes, Melones, and Pompions, within the space
of.xxviii. days. The fruitefulnes of Dariena
Dariena has many native trees and fruits, of diverse kinds, with sundry
tastes, and wholesome for the use of men, of the which I have thought it good to
describe certain of the best. They nouryshe a tree which they call Guaiana,
that bears a fruit much resemblyng the kind of Citrones which are commonly
called Limones, of taste somewhat sharp, myxt with sweetenes. They have also
abundance of nuts of pinetrees, and great plenty of Date trees, which bear
fruits bigger then the Dates that are known to us, but they are not apt to be
eaten for their to much sowrenesse. Wild and barren Date trees grow of them
selves in sundry places, the branches whereof they use for beesomes, and eat
also the buddes of the same. Guarauana, being higher and bygger then the orange
tree, brings forth a great fruit as bygge as pome Citrons. There is another
tree much like to a chestnut tree, whose fruit is like to the bigger sort of
fygs, being wholesome and of pleasant taste. Mameis, is another tree that
brings forth fruit as bygge as an orange, in taste nothing inferior to the
best kinds of Melones. Guananala, bears a fruit less then any of the
other, but of sweet savor like spice, and of dilectable taste. Houos is
another tree, whose fruit both in shape and taste is much like to prunes, but
somewhat bygger: they are surely persuaded that this is the Myrobalane tree.
These grow so abundantly in Hispaniola, that the hogs are fed with the
fruit thereof, as with mast among us. The hogs like this kind of feedyng so
well, that when these fruits wax ripe, the swineheards can by no means keep
them out of the woods of these trees, by reason whereof, a great multitude of
them are become wild. They also affirm, that in Hispaniola swines flesh is of
much better taste and more wholesome then mutton: Swynes flesh of better taste
and more wholesome then mutton,
for it is not to be doubted, but that diverse kinds of meats do engender
sundry tastes and qualities in such as are nourished therewith. The most
puissant prince Ferdinandus, declared that he had eaten of another fruit
brought from those lands, being full of scales, with keys, much like a
pineapple in form and color, but in tenderness equal to melow pepons, and in
taste exceedyng al garden fruits: for it is no tree, but an herb, much like
unto an archichoke, or Acantho: The king him self gave the cheifest
commendation to this. I have eaten none of these fruits: for of a great number
which they brought from thence, only one remained uncorrupted, Fruits
putrified on the sea.
the other being putrified by reason of the long voyage. Al such as have eaten
of them newly geathered in their native soil, do marvelously commend their
sweetness and pleasant taste. They dygge also out of the ground certain
roots growyng of them selves, which they call Betatas, Betatas.
much like unto the navy roots of Millane, or the great puffes or mushromes
of the earth. Howsoever they be dressed, either fried or sodde, they give place
to no such kind of meat in pleasant tenderness. The skin is somewhat tougher
then either the nauies or mushromes, and of earthy color, but the inner meat
thereof is very white: These are nourished in gardens, as we said of Iucca in
the first Decade. They are also eaten raw, and have the taste of raw
chestnuts, but are somewhat sweeter. We have spoken sufficiently of trees,
herbs, and fruits, we will now therefore entreat of things sencitiue. The
lands and desolate pastures of these regions, are inhabited and devoured of
wild and terrible beasts, Lions and Tigers.
as Lions, Tigers, and such other monsters as we now know, and have been
described of old auctours in time past. But there is specially one beast
engendered here, A strange beast.
in which nature has endeavored to show her cunnyng: This beast is as bygge as
an Ox, armed with a long snoute like an Elephant, and yet no Elephant, of the
color of an ox, and yet no ox, with the hoof of a horse, and yet no horse,
with ears also much like unto an Elephant, but not so open, nor so much
hangyng down, yet much wyder then the ears of any other beast. Of the beast
which bears her whelps about with her in her second belly as in a purse
(being known to none of the old writers) I have spoken in the first Decade,
which I doubt not to have come to the hands of your holiness. Let us now
therefore declare what rests of the flooddes and ryuers of Vraba. The ryuers
of Vraba.
The river of Dariena falls into the gulf of Vraba, with a narow chanel,
scarcely able to bear the Canoas or Lighters of that province, and runs by
the village where they chose their dwelling place, but the river in the corner
of the gulf which we said that Vaschus passed by, they found to be.xxiiii.
furlonges in breadth (which they call a league) and of exceedyng deapth, A
league is xxiiii. furlonges.
as of two hundred cubits, falling into the gulf by diverse mouths. They say
that this river falls into the gulf of Vraba, like as the river Ister
(otherwise called Danubius, and Danowe) falls into the sea Pontike, Danubius.
and Nilus into the sea of Egypt, wherefore they named it Grandis, that is,
great: which also they affirm to nouryshe many and great Crocodiles, as the
old writers testify of Nilus, A Crocodile is much like a Neute, but of
exceedyng kygnesse.
and especially as I have learned by experience, having sailed up and down the
river of Nilus, when I was sent Ambassador to the Souldane of Alcay^, at the
commandment of the most catholic king. What I may therefore geather out of
the wrytynges of so many learned aucthours as concerning the river of Nilus, I
know not: for they say that nature has given two ryuers of that name to water
the land, whether they will them to spryng out of the mountains of the moon
or the sun, or out of the tops of the rough mountains of Ethiopia, affyrmyng
one of the same to fall into the gulf of Egypt toward the North, and the other
into the south Ocean sea. What shall we say in this place? Of that Nilus in
Egypt there is no doubt. The Portugales nauigations.
The Portugales also which sail by the coasts of the Ethiopians called
Nigritae, and by the kingdom of Melinda, passing under ye Equinoctial line,
among their marvelous inventions have found another toward the South, and
earnestly affirm the same to be also derived from the mountains of the moon,
and that it is another chanel of Nilus, because it brings forth Crocodiles,
whereas it has not ben read before time, that any other river nourished
Crocodiles saving only Nilus. This river the Portugales call Senega. It runs
through the region of the Nigritas, being very fruiteful toward the North
shore, but on the South side sandy and rough. Crocodiles are also engendered
herein. What shall we then say of this third? yea I may well say the fourth: for
I suppose them also to be Crocodiles, which Colonus with his company found,
armed with scales as hard as shelles, in the river called Delagartos, whereof we
have made mention before. Shall we say that these ryuers of Dariena also and
Vraba, have their original from the mountains of the moon, whereas they spryng
out of the next mountains, and can by no means have the same original with
Nilus in Egypt, or that in Nigrita, or else that in the kingdom of Melinda,
from whence so ever they are deryued, whereas these other (as we have said)
spring out of the next mountains, which divide another South sea, with no
great distance from the North Ocean. Wherefore, it appears by experience of
such as have travailed the world in our time, that other waters beside the
river of Nilus in Egypt, may likewise bring forth Crocodiles. In the Maryshes
also and fennes of the regions of Dariena, are found great plenty of
Phesantes and Peacockes (but not of variable colors) with many other kinds
of birds and fowls unlike unto ours, as well apt to be eaten, as also to delight
the ears of men with pleasant noise. But our Spanyardes, because they are
ignorant in fowlyng, take but few. Also innumerable popingayes of sundry
kinds are found chattering in the groves of those fennie places. Of these
there are some equal to Capons in bygnesse, and some as little as sparowes. But
of the diversity of popyngayes, we have spoken sufficiently in the first
Decade: for in the raze of this large land, Colonus him self brought and sent
to the court a great number of every kind, the which it was lawful for all
the people to behold, and are yet daily brought in like manner. There
remains yet one thing most worthy to be put in history, A philosophical
discourse as concerning thoriginal of springes and ryuers.
the which, I had rather to have chanced into the hands of Cicero or Liuie,
then into mine: for the thing is so marvelous in my estimation, that I find
my wit more entangled in the description hereof, then is said of the hen
when she sees her young chycken inwrapped in towe or flax. The breadth of the
land at Vraba, from the North Ocean to the South sea.
The breadth of that land from the North Ocean to the south sea, is only six
days journey, by relation of the inhabitauntes. The multitude therefore and
greatness of the rivers on the one side, and on the other side the narownesse
of the land, bring me into such doubt how it can come to pass, that in so
little a space of three days journey, measuryng from the high tops of those
mountains, I do not understand how so many and so great ryuers may have
recourse unto this North sea: for it is to be thought, that as many do flow
toward thinhabitants of the south. These rivers of Vraba are but small, in
comparison of many other in those coasts: for the Spanyardes say, that in the
time of Colonus, they found and passed by an other river after this, whose
gulf falling into ye sea, they affirm to be little less then a hundred miles
in the first coasts of Paria, as we have said elsewhere: for they say, that
it falls from the tops of high mountains with so swyft and furious a
course, that by the violence and greatness thereof, it dryueth back the sea,
although it be rough and enforced with a contrary wynd. They al affirm
likewise, that in all the large tracte thereof, they felt no sour or salt water,
but that all the water was freeshe, sweet, and apt to be drunk.
Thinhabitauntes call this river Maragnonum, and the regions adjacent to the
same, Mariatambal, Camamorus, and Paricora: beside those rivers which I have
named before, as Darien* Grandis, Dabaiba, Beragua, Sancti Mathei, Boius gatti,
Delagartos, and Gaira, they which of late have searched those coasts, have
found many other. Deliberatyng therefore with me self, from whence these
mountains, being so narowe and near unto the sea on both sides, have such
great holowe caves or dens of such capacity, and from whence they are
filled, to cast forth such abundance of water: hereof also askyng them the
opinions of the inhabitauntes, they affirm them to be of diverse judgments
herein, alleging first the greatness of the mountains to be the cause, which
they say to be very high, which thing also Colonus the first fynder thereof
affirms to be true, addyng thereunto that the paradise of pleasure is in the
tops of those mountains which appear from the gulf of Paria and Os
Draconis, as he is fully persuaded. They agree therefore that there are great
caves within these mountains, but it rests to consider from whence they are
filled. If therefore all the rivers of fresh waters, by the opinion of many, do
so flow out of the sea, The sea.
as driven and compelled through the passages or pores of the earth, by the
ponderous weight of the sea it self, as we see them break forth of the
sprynges, and direct their course to the sea again, then the thing is less
to be marueyled at here, then in other places: for we have not read that in any
other place, two such seas have environed any land with so narowe lymyttes:
The land enclosed with two seas.
for it has on the right side the great Ocean, where the sun goes down on
the left hand, and another on the other side where the sun ryseth, nothing
inferior to the first in greatness, for they suppose it to be myxte and
joined as al one with the sea of East India. This land therefore being burdened
with so great a weight on the one side, and on the other, (if this opinion be
of any value) is enforced to swalowe up such devoured waters, and again to
cast forth the same in open springes and streams. But if we shall deny that
the earth draws humors of the sea, and agree that all fountaynes or sprynges
are engendered of the conversion or turnyng of air into water, Conversion of
air into water in the caves of mountains.
distilling within the holow places of the mountains (as the most part think)
we will give place rather to thaucthoritie of them which stycke to those
reasons, then that our sense is satisfied of the full truth thereof. Yet do I
not repugne, that in some caves of mountains, water is turned into air: for I
me self have seen, how in the caves of many mountains in Spain, in
manner showers of rain do fall continuallye, and that the water geathered by
this means, does send forth certain rivers by the sides of the mountains,
wherewith all such trees as are planted on the steep or foot of the
mountains, as vines, olive trees, and such other, are watered, and this
especially in one place: as the right honorable Lodouike the Cardinal of
Aragonie, most obsequious to your holiness, and two other bishops of Italy,
whereof the one is Siluius Pandonus, and the other an Archbishop (whose name
and title I do not remember) can bear me witness: for when we were together
at Granata, lately delivered from the dominion of the Moors, and walked for
our pastyme to certain pleasant hills (by the which there ran a fair
river)* while Cardinal Lodouike occupied him self in shootyng at birds which
were in the bushes near unto the river, I and the other two bishops determined
to clime the mountains, to search the original and spryng of the river: for
we were not far from the tops thereof. Following therefore the course of the
river, we found a great cave, in which was a continual fall of water, as it had been a shower of rain, the water whereof, falling into a trenche made with man's
hand, increases to a river, and runs down by the sides of the mountains.
The like is also seen in this famous town of Valladoleto (where we now
soiourne) in a certain green close, not past a furlong distant from the
walls of the town. I grant therefore, that in certain places, by conversion
of the ayrie deawe into water, within the caves of such mountains, many
springes and rivers are engendered: but I suppose that nature was not
sollicitate to bring forth such great floods by this so small industry. Two
reasons therefore do sound best to my judgment: whereof the one is, The often
fall of rain and continual spryng time.

The Equinoctial.


the often fall of rain: the other, the continual autumn or spryng time which
is in those regions, being so near unto the Equinoctial, that the common
people can perceive no difference between the length of the day and the night
throughout all the year, where as these two seasons are more apt to engender
abundance of rain, then either extreme winter, or fervent summer. An other
reason in effect much like unto the first, is this: If the sea be full of pores,
and that by the pores thereof, being opened by the south wyndes, The pores of
the sea, and the south wind.
we shall consent that vapors are lyfted up, whereof the watery clouds are
engendered, this land must needs be moysted with more showers then any other,
if it be as narowe as they say, and environed with two main seas collaterally
beatyng on the same: howsoever it be, I can not but give credit to the report
of such worthy men as have recourse to those regions, and can no less then
declare the same, albeit it may seem incredible to some ignorant persons, not
knowing the power of nature, to whom, Pliny was persuaded, that nothing was
impossible. We have therefore thought it good to make this discourse by the way
of argument, lest on the one side, men of good learning and judgment, and on
the other side, such as are studious to find occasions of quarellyng in other
men's wrytynges, should judge us to be so indiscreet, lightly to give credit
to every tale, not being consonant to reason: but of the force and great
violence of those fresh waters, which repulsyng the sea, make so great a
gulf (as we have said) I think the cause thereof to be the great multitude
of floods and rivers, which being geathered together, make so great a poole,
and not one river, as they suppose. And forasmuch as the mountains are
exceeding high and steep, I think the violence of the fall of the waters to
be of such force, that this conflict between the waters, is caused by
thimpulsion of the poole, that the salt water can not enter into the gulf. But
here perhaps some will marueyle at me, why I should marueyle so much hereat,
speaking unto me scornefully, after this manner: Why does he so marueyle at the
great rivers of those regions? Has not Italy his Eridanus, The fludde
Eridanus.
named the king of ryuers of the old writers? Have not other regions also the
like? as we read of Tanais, Ganges, and Danubius, which are said so to
overcome the sea, that fresh water may be drawn forty miles within the
same. These men I would satisfy with this answer. The famous river of Padus
in Italy (which they now call Po, and was of the Greeks called Eridanus)
has the great mountains called Alps, dividing France, Germany, and
Pannonie, from Italy, lying at the back thereof, as it were bulwarks agger,
full of moisture, and with a long tracte receiuyng Ticinam, with innumerable
other great ryuers, falls into the sea Adriatike. The like is also to be
understood of the other. But these ryuers (as our men were enfourmed by the
kings) fall into the Ocean sea with larger and fuller channels near hand,
and some there are which affirm this land to be very large in other places,
although it be but narowe here. There comes also to my remembrance another
cause, the which although it be of no great force, yet do I entende to write
it. Perhaps therefore the length of the land reachyng far from the East to
the West, if it be narowe, may be a help hereunto: for as we read, The river
Alpheus.
that the river Alpheus passes through the holowe places under the sea, from
the city of Elis in Peloponeso, and breaks forth at the fountain or spryng
Arethusa in the Island of Sicillia, so is it possible that these mountains may
have such long caves parteynyng unto them, Long caves in the mountains.
that they may be the receptacles of the water passing through the lands being
far distant, and that the same waters coming by so long a tracte, may in the
way be greatly increased, by the conversion of air into water, as we have
said. Thus much have I spoken freely, permitting both to them which do friendly
interpret other men's dooyngs, and also to the malicious scorners, to take the
thing even as them lysteth, for hitherto I can make no further declaration
hereof, but when the truth shall be better known, I will do my diligence to
commit the same to writing. Now therefore, forasmuch as we have spoken thus
much of the breadth of this land, we entende to describe the length and
form of the same.

The tenth book of the second Decade, of the supposed continent.
THat land reaches forth into the sea, even as does Italy, The length and
form of the Island.
although not like the leg of a man, as it does. But now I compare a Pigmean
or a dwarf, to a Giant: for that part thereof which the Spanyardes have over
run, from the said East point which reaches toward the sea Atlantike, (the
end not being yet found toward the West) is more then eight times longer
then Italy. And by what reason I am moved to say eight times, your holiness
shall understand. From the time therefore that I first determined to obey
their requests, who wylled me first in your name to write these things in the
Latin tongue, I did my endeavor that al things might come forth with due
trial and experience: whereupon I repaired to the Bishop of Burges, being the
chief refuge of this navigations. As we were therefore secretly together in
one chamber, we had many instruments parteining to these affairs, as globes,
Cards of the sea.
and many of those maps which are commonly called the shipmans cards, or
cards of the sea. Of the which, one was drawn by the Portugales, The card of
Americus Vesputius.
whereunto Americus Vesputius is said to have put to his hand, being a man most
expert in this faculty, and a Florentine borne, who also under the stipende of
the Portugales, had sailed toward the South pole many degrees beyond the
Equinoctial. In this card we found the first front of this land to be
brother then the kings of Vraba had persuaded our men of their mountains. To
another, Colonus the Admiral, while he yet lived, and searched those places,
The card of Colouns.
had given the beginning with his own hands: whereunto Bartholomeus Colonus
his brother and Lieuetenaunt had added his judgment, for he also had sailed
about those coasts. Of the Spanyardes likewise, as many as thought them selves
to have any knowledge what parteyned to measure the land and the sea, drew
certain cards in parchment as concerning these nauigations. Of all other, The
card of Johannes de la Cossa.
they most esteem them which Johannes de la Cossa the companion of Fogeda
(whom we said to be slain of the people of Caramairi in the haven of
Carthago) and another expert pylote called Andreas Moralis, had set forth. The
card of Andreas moralis.
And this as well for the great experience which they both had (to whom these
tractes were as well known as the chambers of their own houses) as also that
they were thought to be cunninger in that part of Cosmographie, which teaches
the description and measuring of the sea. Conferring therefore al these cards
together, in every of the which was drawn a live, expressing not the miles,
but leagues, after the manner of the Spanyardes, we took our compasses, and
began to measure the sea coasts after this order. The manner of measuring the
cards.
From that point or front which we said to be included within the live
parteynyng to the Portugales jurisdiction, being drawn by the paralelles of
the Islands of Cabouerde, but a hundred leagues further toward the West
(which they have now also searched on every side) we found three hundred
leagues to the entrance of the river Maragnonum: and from thence to Os
Draconis, seven hundred leagues, but somewhat less by the description of some,
for they do not agree in all points exquisitely. The Spaniards will that a
league conteyne four miles by sea, A league.
and but three by land. From Os Draconis, to the cape or point of Cuchibacoa,
which being passed, there is a gulf on the left hand, we measured three
hundred leagues in one Card, and much thereabout in another. From this point
of Cuchibacoa, to the region of Caramairi, in which is the haven Carthago
(which some call Carthagena) we found about a hundred and seventy leagues.
From Caramairi to the Island Fortis, fyftie leagues. From thence to the gulfes
of Vraba, among the which is the vyllage called Sancta Maria Antiqua, where
the Spaniards have appointed their habitation, only.xxxiii. leagues. From the
river of Vraba in the province of Dariena, to ye river of Beragua, where
Nicuesa had intended to have fastened his foot, if God had not otherwise
decreed, we measured a hundred and thirty leagues. From Beragua, to that
river, which we said of Colonus to be called Sancti Matthei, in the which also
Nicuesa loosing his Carauel, wandered in great calamities, we found in our
Cards only a hundred and forty leagues: Yet many other which of late time
have come from these parts, have described many mo leagues in this tract from
the river of Sancti Matthei, in which also they place diverse ryuers, as
Aburema, with the Island called Scutum Cateba, lying before it, whose kings name
is Facies combusta. Likewise another river called Zobraba, after that, Vrida,
and then Duraba, in the which gold is found. Furthermore, many goodly havens,
as Cerabaro and Hiebra, so called of the inhabitauntes. And thus if your
holiness will confer these numbers together, you shall find in this
account, a thousand, five hundred, twenty and five leagues, which amount to
five thousand and seven hundred miles, from the point of Sancti Matthei,
which they call Sinum perditorum, that is, The gulf of ye lost men. But we may
not leave here: for after this, one Astur Ouetensis, otherwise named Johannes
Dias de Solis, The navigations of Johannes Dias.
borne in Nebrissa (which brings forth many learned men) sailing from this
river toward the West, ouerranne many coasts and leagues, but the midst of
that shore bends toward the North, and is not therefore directly placed in
order with the other, yet may we geather by a diameter or right line, about
three hundred leagues. Hereby may you geather what is the length of this land,
but of the breadth, perhaps we shall hereafter have further knowledge. Let us
now speak somewhat of the variety of the degrees of the elevation of the
pole stars. This land therefore, The elevation of the pole.
although it reach forth from the East into the West, yet is it crooked, and
has the point bendyng so toward the South, that it loses the sight of the
North pole, and is extended beyond the Equinoctial line seven degrees toward
the South pole: but the point hereof, parteyneth to the jurisdiction of the
Portugales, as we have said. The jurisdiction of the Portugales,
Leaving this point, and saylyng toward Paria, the North star is seen
again, and is so much the more lifted up, in how much the region enclineth
more toward the West. The Spanyardes therefore have diverse degrees of
eleuations, until they come to Dariena, being their chief station and
dwelling place in those lands: for they have forsaken Beragua, where they
found the North pole eleuate.viii. degrees, but from hence, the land does so
much bend toward the North, that it is there in manner equal with the degrees
of the strayghtes of Hercules pyllers, Hercules pyllers.
especially if we measure certain lands found by them toward the North side
of Hispaniola, among the which there is an Island about three.C. and.xxv.
leagues from Hispaniola, as they say which have searched the same, named
Boiuca, or Agnaneo, The Island Boiuca or Agnaneo. The renouation of age. A
water of marvelous virtue.
in the which is a continual spring of running water, of such marvelous
virtue, that ye water thereof being drunk, perhaps with some diet, makes old
men young again. And here must I make protestation to your honesse, not to
think this to be said lightly or rashly, for they have so spread this rumor
for a truth throughout all the court, that not only all the people, but also
many of them whom wisdom or fortune has divided from the common sort, think
it to be true: but if you shall ask my opinion herein, I will answer, that I
will not attribute so great power to nature, but that God has no less
reserved this prerogative to him selft, then to search the hearts of men, or
to give substance to privation, (that is) being, to no being, except we shall
believe the fable of Colchis of Eson renouate, to be as true as the wrytynges
of Sibylla Erythrea. Albeit perhaps the scooles of Physicians and natural
philosophers, will not much stycke to affirm, that by the use of certain
secret medicines and diet, the accidents of age (as they call them) may be
long hydden and deferred, The accidents of age may be hydden.
which they will to be understood by the renouation of age. And to have said
thus much of the length and breadth of these regions, and of the rough and
hugious mountains, with their waterye caves, also of the diverse degrees of
that land, I think it sufficient. But I thought it not good to let pass what
chanced to these miserable men among their general calamities. I remember
that when I was a child, me thought my bowelles grated, and that my spirits
were marvelously troubled for very pity, when I read in the poet Uirgyl,
how Achemenides was left of Ulysses upon the sea banks among ye giantes
called Cyclopes, where for the space of many days from the departing of
Ulysses, until the coming of Eneas, he eat none other meat, but only berries
and hawes. Extreme hunger.
But our unfortunate Spaniards, which followed Nicuesa to inhabit Beragua,
would have esteemed hawes and berries for great delicates. What should I hear
speak of the head of an ass bought for a great price, This was at the siege
of Jerusalem.
and of such other extremities as men have suffered in towns besieged? After
that Nicuesa had determined to leave Beragua for the barrenness of the soil,
he attempted to search Portum Bellum, and then the coasts of the point called
Marmor, if he might there find a place more fortunate to inhabit. In this
mean time, so grievous famine oppressed his soldiers, that they neither
absteined from eating of mangie dogs, Many dogs eaten.
which they had with them, as well for their defense as for huntyng (for in the
war against the naked people, dogs stood them in great stead) nor yet
sometime from the slain inhabitauntes: for they found not there any fruitful
trees, or plenty of fowls, as in Dariena, but a barren ground, and not meet
to be inhabited. Here certain of the soldiers made a bargayne with one of
their fellows for the price of a lean dog, A mangie dog ^^are sold.
who also was almost dead for hunger: they gave the owner of the dog many of
those pieces of gold which they call Pesos, or golden Castellans. Thus agreeing
of the price, they flayed the dog to be eaten, and cast his mangie skin,
with the bones of the head hangyng thereto, among the bushes. The day following,
a certain footeman of their company, chanced to find the skin being now
full of maggottes and stynkyng. He brought it home with him, sodde it, and eat
it. Many resorted to him with their dysshes for the brothe of the sodde skin,
profering him for every dysshefull a piece of gold. Broth of a mangie dogs
skin.
An other found two toades, and sodde them, Toades eaten.
which a sick man bought of him for two fine shurtes, curiously wrought of
lynnen intermyxed with gold. Certain other wanderyng about to seek for
vittuals, found in a pathway in the myddest of a feelde, a dead man, of the
inhabitants, which had been slain of his own company, and was now rotten and
stynkyng. They drew him a side, dismembered him secretly, roasted him, A dead
man eaten.
and ate him, therewith asswagyng their hunger, as if they had been fed with
pheasauntes. One also, which departing from his companions in the night
season, went a fyshyng among the reeds of the marysshes, lived only with slyme
or mudde for the space of certain days, until at the length creepyng, and
almost dead, he found the way to his fellows. And thus these miserable men of
Beragua, vexed with these and such other affictions, were brought from the
number of seven hundredth, threescore and ten soldiers, scarsely to forty,
being now also added to the company of them in Dariena. Few were slain of
thinhabitauntes, but the resydue consumed by famine, breathed out their weary
souls, openyng a way to the new lands for such as shall come after them,
appeasyng the fury of the barbarous nations, with the price of their blood.
Consyderyng therefore, after these storms, Note.
with what ease other men shall ouerrunne and inhabit these lands, in respect
to the calamities that these men have suffered, they shall seem to go to
bryde feasts, where all things are ready prepared against their coming. But
where Petrus Arias arrived with the kings navy and new supply of men, to
this hour I know no certantie. Petrus Arias who^ the Spanyard^s call
Ped^arias.
What shall chance heareafter, I will make diligent inquisition, if I shall
understand this to be acceptable to your holiness. Thus I bid you farewell: from
the court of the most Catholyke king, the day before the nones of December,
in the year of Christ.1514.

The first book of the third Decade, to the Bishop of Rome Leo the tenth.
I Was determined (most holy father) to have closed up the gates to this new
world, supposyng that I had wandered far yenough in the coasts thereof,
while in the mean time new letters were brought me from thence, which caused
me again to take my pen in hand: for I received letters not only from
certain of mine acquayntance there, but also from Vaschus Nunnez, Vaschus
Nunnez, governor of Dariena.
whom we said by the confidence of his own power with his confederates, to
have usurped the governance of Dariena, after the rejecting of Nicuesa and
Ancisus, Lieutenauntes. By his letter, written after his warlyke manner, we
understand that he has passed over the mountains, diuidyng the Ocean, The
new south Ocean.
known to us, from the other main sea on the south side of this land,
hitherto unknown. His epistle is greater then that called Capreensis de
Seiano. But we have geathered out of that and other, only such things as we
thought most worthy to be noted. Vaschus so behaved him self in these
affairs, that he did not only pacify the kings displeasure conceived against
him, but also made him so favorable and gracious good lord toward him, that
he rewarded him and his companions with many honorable gifts and privileges
for their attempts. Wherefore, I desire your holiness to incline your
attentyue ears, and to consider with a joyful mind what they have brought to
pass in these great enterpryses: for this valiant nation (the Spanyardes I
mean) have not only with great pains and innumerable dangers subdued,
Commendation of the Spanyardes.
to the Christian empire, infinite hundredes and legions, but also myrtades of
men. Vaschus Nunnez therefore, A valiant mind can not be idle.
whether it were that he was impacient of idleness, (for a valiant mind can not
rest in one place, or be unoccupied) or lest any other should prevent him in
so great a matter (suspectyng the new governor Petrus Arias) or being moved
by both these causes, and especially for that the king had taken displeasure
with him for such things as he had done before, took the adventure upon
him, with a few men to bring that to pass which the son of king Comogrus
thought could hardly have been done with the aid of a thousand men, whereof
Petrus Arias was appointed captain for the same purpose. Assembling therefore
certain of the old soldiers of Dariena, and many of those which came
lately from Hispaniola, allured by the fame of greater plenty of gold,
Vaschus his voyage toward the golden mountains*
he geathered an army of a hundred fourscore and ten men. Thus being
furnyshed, and redye to take his voyage by sea, while the wind served him, he
departed from Dariena with one Brigandine, and ten of their boats which they
call Canoas, as we have said. First therefore arriving in the dominion of
Careta king of Coiba, and friend to the Christians, and leauyng his ship and
boats there, Careta king of Coiba.
he made his devout prayers to almighty God, and therewith went forward on
his journey by land toward the mountains. Here he first entered into the
region of king Poncha, King Poncha.
who fled at his coming, as he had done before. But Vaschus sent messengers
to him by the conduct of certain of Careta his men, promysing him frendshyp
and defense against his enemies, with many other benefits. Poncha thus entised
with fair speech and frendlye profers, both of our men, and of the Caretans,
came to our men gladly and wyllyngly, making a league of frendshyp with them.
Vaschus enterteyned him very friendly, and persuaded him never thereafter to
stand in fear. Thus they joined hands, embrased, and gave great gifts the
one to the other, to knytte up the knotte of continual amity. Poncha gave
Vaschus a hundred and ten pounds weight of gold, of that pound which the
Spaniardes call Pesum. He had no greater plenty of gold at this time, by
reason he was spoiled the year before, as we have said. Vaschus to recompense
one benefit with another, gave him certain of our things, as counterfayte
rings, Crystal stones, copper chains, and bracelets, hawks belles, lookyng
glasses, and such other fine stuff. These things they set much by, and
greatly esteem: for such things as are strange, Strange things are counted
precious.
are every where counted precious. He gave also to Poncha certain axes to fell
trees, which he accepted as a pryncely gift, because they lack Iron, and al
other metals except gold: by reason whereof, Lack of Iron.
they are enforced with great labor to cut their trees to build their
houses, and specially to make their boats holowe, withwithout instruments of
Iron, with certain sharp stones, which they find in the ryuers. A stone in
the steed of Iron.
Thus Vaschus, leauyng all things in safety behind him, marched forward
with his army toward the mountains, by the conduct of certain guides and
laborers which Poncha had given him, as well to lead him the way, as also to
carry his baggages, and open the strayghtes through the desolate places and
craggie rocks full of the dens of wild beasts: for there is seldom any
intercourse of buying and sellyng between these naked people, because they
stand in need of few things, and have not the use of money: but if at any
time they exercise any barteryng, they do it but near hand, exchanging gold
for household stuff, with their confines, which somewhat esteem ye same for
ornament when it is wrought. Other superfluities they utterly contemn,
Superfluities hinder liberty.
as hynderaunces of their sweet liberty, forasmuch as they are given only to
play and idleness. And for this cause ye high ways which lie between their
regions, are not much worn with many iourneyes, yet have their scoutes
certain privy marks, whereby they know the way the one to invade the others
dominions, and spoil and infest them selves on both sides with mutual
incursions privily in the night season. By the help therefore of their guides
and laborers, with our Carpenters, he passed over the horrible mountains,
Carpenters.
and many great ryuers lying in the way, over the which he made brydges,
Brydges.
either with pyles or trunks of trees. And here do I let pass many things
which they suffered for lack of necessaries, being also in manner overcome
with extreme labor, lest I should be tedious in rehearsing things of small
value. But I have thought it good not to omyt such doings as he had with the
kings by the way. Therefore or ever he came to the tops of the high
mountains, he entered into a region called Quarequa, The region of Quarequa.
and met with the king thereof called by the same name, with a great band of
men armed after their manner, as with bows and arrows, long and broad two
handed swoordes made of wood, long staves hardened at the ends with fire,
darts also and slings. He came proudely and cruellye against our men, and
sent messengers to them to bydde them stand and proceed no further,
demaundyng whyther they went, and what they had to do there? Herewith he came
forth and showed him self, being apparelled with all his nobility, but the
other were al naked. Then approaching toward our men, he threatened the^, with a
Lions countenance, to depart from thence, except they would be slain every
mothers son. When our men denied that they would go back, he assailed them
fiercely, but the battle was soon finished: king Quarequa is driven to
flight. Hargabusies.
for as soon as they heard the noise of the hargabusies, they believed that
our men carried thunder and lyghtnyng about with them. Many also being slain
and sore wounded with quarrels of crossebowes, they turned their backs and
fled. Crossebowes
Our men following them in the chase, hewed them in pieces, as the Butchers do
flesh in the shambles, from one an arm, from another a leg, from him a
buttocke, from another a shoulder, and from some the neck from the body at
one stroke. Thus, six hundred of them, with their king, were slain like
brute beasts. vi.C. Barbarians are slain
Vaschus found the house of this king infected with most abominable and
unnatural lechery: for he found the kings brother, and many other young men
in women's apparel, smoothe and effeminately decked, which by the report of
such as dwelt about him, he abused with preposterous venus. Of these about the
number of forty, he commanded to be given for a pray to his dogs: for (as
we have said) the Spanyardes use the help of dogs in their wars against
the naked people, The use of dogs in the war against the naked Barbarians.
whom they invade as fiercely and rauenyngly, as if they were wild bores or
Hearts: insomuche that our Spanyardes have found their dogs no less
faithful to them in all dangers and enterprises, then did the Colophonians or
Castabalences, which instituted whole armies of dogs, so made to serve in
the wars, that being accustomed to place them in the forefronte of the
battayles, they never shronke or gave back. Natural hatred of unnatural sin.
When the people had heard of the severe punishment which our men had
executed upon that fylthy kind of men, they resorted to them as it had been to
Hercules for refuge, by violence bryngyng with them all such as they knew to
be infected with that pestilence, spyttyng in their faces, and crying out to
our men to take revenge of them, and rydde them out of the world from among
men, as contagious beasts. This stynkyng abomination had not yet entered among
the people, but was exercised only by the noble men and gentlemen. But the
people lyftyng up their hands and eyes toward heaven, I would al men were of
this opinion.
gave tokens that God was grievously offended with such vile deeds, affyrmyng
this to be the cause of their so many thunderynges, lyghtnyng, and tempests,
wherewith they are so often troubled, and of the ouerflowyng of waters which
drown their sets and fruits, whereof famyne and diverse diseases ensue, as
they symply and faithfully believe, although they know none other GOD then the
sun, whom only they honor, thinkyng that it does both give and take away, as
it is pleased or offended: Yet are they very docible, The harvest is great, and
the woorkemen but few.
and easy to be allured to our customs and religion, if they had any teacher.
In their language there is nothing unpleasant to the ear, or hard to be
pronounced, but that all their words may be written with latin letters, as
we said of the inhabitauntes of Hispaniola. Warlyke people.
It is a warlyke nation, and has been ever hitherto molestous to their
borderers: but the region is not fortunate with fruiteful ground, or plenty
of gold. Yet is it full of great barren mountains, The higher, the colder.
being somewhat cold by reason of their height, and therefore the noble men
and gentlemen are apparelled, but the common people live content only with the
benefits of nature. There is a region not past two days journey distant from
Quarequa, in which they found only black Moors, A region of black Moors
and those exceedyng fierce and cruel. They suppose that in time past certain
black Moors sailed thither out of Ethiopia to rob, and that by shypwracke
or some other chance, they were driven to those mountains. The inhabitaunts
of Quarequa live in continual war and debate with these black men. Here
Vaschus leaving in Quarequa many of his soldiers (which by reason they were
not yet accustomed to such trauayles and hunger, Diseases of change of air and
diet.
fell into diverse diseases) took with him certain guides of the Quarequatans,
to conduct him to the tops of the mountains. From the palace of king
Poncha, to the prospect of the other south sea, The south sea.
is only six days journey, the which nevertheless, by reason of many
hindrances and chances, and especially for lack of vittuals, he could
accomplish in no less then.xxv. days. But at the length, the seventh day of
the Calendes of October, he beheld with woonderyng eyes the tops of the high
mountains, showed unto him by the guides of Quarequa, from the which he might
see the other sea so long looked for, and never seen before of any man coming
out of our world. Approaching therefore to the tops of the mountains, he
commanded his army to stay, and went him self alone to the top, as it were
to take the first possession thereof. Where, falling prostrate upon the
ground, Prayer.
and raising him self again upon his knees, as the manner of the Christians is
to pray, lyftyng up his eyes and hands toward heaven, and directyng his face
toward the new found south sea, he powered forth his humble and devout
prayers before almighty God, as a spiritual sacrifyce with thanks gyuing,
that it pleased his divine majesty, to reserve unto that day the victory and
praise of so great a thing unto him, being a man but of small wit and knowledge,
of little experience, and base parentage. God rayseth the poor from the dounghyl
When he had thus made his prayers after his warlike manner, he beckned with his
hand to his companions, to come to him, showing them the great main sea
heretofore unknown to thinhabitants of Europe, Aphrike, and Asia. Here again
he fell to his prayers as before, desyring almyghtie God (and the blessed
virgin) to favor his beginnings, and to give him good success to subdue
those lands, to the glory of his holy name, and increase of his true religion.
All his companions did likewise, and praised God with loud voices for joy.
Then Vascus, with no less manlye courage then Hanniball of Carthage showed his
soldiers Italye, and the promontories of the Alps, Hanniball of Carthage.
exhorted his men to lift up their hearts, and to behold the land even now
under their feet, and the sea before their eyes, which should be unto them
a full and just reward of their great labors and trauayles now ouerpassed.
When he had said these words, he commanded them to raise certain heaps of
stones, in the stead of alters, for a token of possession. They descendyng from
the tops of the mountains, least such as might come after him should argue
him of lying or falsehood, he wrote the king of Castles name here and there, on
barks of the trees, both on the right hand and on the left, and raised heaps
of stones all the way that he went, until he came to the region of the next
king toward the south, whose name was Chiapes. This king came forth against
him with a great multitude of men, threatnyng and forbyddyng him not only to
pass through his dominions, King Chiapes.
but also to go no further. Hereupon Vaschus set his battle in array, A
battle.
and exhorted his men (being now but few) fiersly to assail their enemies,
and to esteem them no better then dogs meat, as they should be shortly.
Placing therefore the hargabusiers and masties in the forefroont, they saluted
king Chiapes and his men with such alarome, Chiapes is driven to flight.
that when they hard the noise of the gunnes, saw the flames of fire, and smelt
the savor of brimstone (for the wind blewe toward them) they drove them
selves to flight, with such fear lest thunderboultes and lyghtnynges followed
them, that many fell down to the ground, whom our men pursuing, first keepyng
their order, and after breakyng their array, slew but few, and took many
captyue: For they determined to use no extremity, but to pacyfie those regions
as quietly as they might. Enteryng therefore into the palace of king Chiapes,
Vaschus commanded many of the captyues to be loosed, Vaschus sends for king
Chiapes.
wyllyng them to search out their king, and to exhort him to come thither: and
that in so doing, he would be his friend, and profer him peace, beside many
other benefits: But if he refused to come, it should turn to the destruction
of him and his, and utter subuertion of his country. And that they might the
more assuredly do this message to Chiapes, he sent with them certain of the
guides which came with him from Quarequa. Chiapes submits him self to
Vaschus.
Thus Chiapes, being persuaded as well by the Quarequans, who could conjecture
to what end the matter would come, by thexperience which they had seen in
them selves and their king, as also by the reasons of his own men, to whom
Vaschus had made such friendly promises in his behalf, came forth of the
caves in the which he lurk^d, and submitted him self to Vaschus, who accepted
him friendly. They joined hands, embraced the one the other, made a perpetual
league of friendship, and gave great rewards on both sides. Chiapes gave
Vaschus four hundred pounds weight of wrought gold, of those pounds which
they call Pesos, and Vaschus recompensed him again with certain of our
things. Thus being made friends, they remained together a few days, until
Vaschus soldiers were come, which he left behind him in Quarequa. Then
calling unto him the guydes and laborers which came with him from thence, he
rewarded them liberally, and dismissed them with thanks. Shortly after, by the
conduct of Chiapes him self, and certain of his men departing from the tops
of the mountains, he came in the space of four days to the banks of the
new sea: where assemblyng al his men together, with the kings scribes and
notaries, they addicted all that main sea with all the lands adjacent
thereunto, to the dominion and Empire of Castile. Here he left part of his
soldiers with Chiapes, that he might the easelier search those coasts. And
taking with him niene of their lyghters made of one whole tree (which they
call Culchas, as thinhabitantes of Hispaniola call them Canoas) and also a band
of fourscore men, with certain of Chiapes men, he passed over a great river,
and came to the regio^ of a certain king, whose name was Coquera. He attempted
to resyst our men as did the other, and with like success: for he was overcome
and put to flight. But Vaschus, who intended to win him with gentelnes, sent
certain Chiapeans to him, to declare the great power of our men, how
invincible they were, how merciful to such as submit them selves, also cruel
and severe to such as obstinatly withstand them: Promisyng him furthermore,
that by the friendship of our men, he might be well assured by thexample of
other, not only to live in peace and quietness him self, but also to be
revenged of the injuries of his enemies: Wyllyng him in conclusion so to weigh
the matter, that if he refused this gentleness proffered unto him by so great a
victourer, he should or it were long learn by feelyng, to repent him to late
of that peril which he might have avoided by hearing. Coquera with these
words and examples, shaken with great fear, came gladly with the messengers,
bryngyng with him.650. Pesos of wrought gold, which he gave unto our men.
Vaschus rewarded him likewise, as we said before of Poncha. Coquera being thus
pacified, they returned to the palace of Chiapes, where, visityng their
companions, and restyng there a while, Vaschus determined to search the next
great gulf, the which, from the furthest reachyng thereof into the land of
their countries, A gulf of threescore miles. Saint Michaels gulf.
from the enteraunce of the main sea, they say to be threescore miles. This
they named saint Michaels gulf, which they say to be full of inhabited
Islands and hugious rocks. Entryng therefore into the niene boats of Culchas,
wherewith he passed over the river before, The manly courage and godly zeal of
Vaschus
having also with him the same company of fourscore whole men, he went
forward on his purpose, although he were greatly dissuaded by Chiapes, who
earnestly desired him not to attempt that voyage at that time, affirming ye
gulf to be so tempestious and stormy three months in the year, that the
sea was there by no means nauigable, and that he had seen many Culchas
devoured of whirlepooles, even before his eyes. But invincible Vaschus,
impacient of idleness, and void of all fear in Gods cause, answered, that
God and his holy saints would prosper his enterpryses in this case, forasmuch
as the matter touched God, and the defense of the Christian religion, for the
mayntenance whereof, it should be necessary to have abundance of riches and
treasure, as the sinews of war against the enemies of the faith. Riches are
the synewes of war

The faythfulnes of king Chiapes.


Thus vsyng also the office both of an orator and preacher, and having
persuaded his companions, he lanched from the land. But Chyapes, lest Vaschus
should any thing doubt of his faythfulnesse toward him, proffered him self to
go with him whyther soever he went, and would by no means assent that
Vaschus should depart from his palace, but that he would bring him on the
way, and take part of his fortune. Therefore, as soon as they were now entered
into the maine sea, such sourges and conflyctes of water arose against them,
that they were at their wits ends, A tempest on the sea.
whither to turn them, or where to rest. Thus being tossed and amassed with
fear, the one looked on the other with pale and vnchearefull countenances, but
especially Chiapes and his company, who had before time with their eyes seen
the experience of those ieopardies, were greatly discomforted (yet as God
would) they escaped all, and landed at the next Island, where, making fast
their boats, they rested there that night. The increasing of the South sea.
Here the water so increased, that it almost ouerflowed the Island. They say
also, that the South sea does so in manner boil and swel, that when it is at
the highest, it does cover many great rocks, which at the fall thereof, are
seen far above the water. But on the contrary part, all such as inhabit
the North sea, affirm with one voice, that it scarcelye ryseth at any time a
cubite above the banks, The North Ocean.
as they also confess which inhabit the Island of Hispaniola, and other
Islands situate in the same. The Island therefore being now dry by the fall
of the water, they resorted to their boats, which they found al overwhelmed,
and full of sand, and some sore bruised with great ryftes, and almost lost by
reason their cables were broken: such as were bruised, they tied fast with
their gyrdles, with slyppes of the barks of trees, and with tough and long
stalks of certain herbs of the sea, Hard shyft in necessity.
stoppyng the ryftes or chynkes with grass, according to the present
necessity. Thus were they enforced to return back again, like unto men that
came from shypwracke, being almost consumed with hunger, because their
vyttualles were utterly destroyed by tempest. The inhabitauntes declared that
there is heard all the year horrible roaring of the sea among those Islands,
as often as it ryseth or falls, but this most especially in those three
months in the which it is most boystous, as Chiapes told Vaschus before,
meaning (as they could conjecture by his words) October, November, and
December: for he signified the present moon, and the two moons following,
countyng the months by the moons, whereas it was now October. Here
therefore refreshing him self and his soldiers a while, and passing by one
unprofitable king, he came to another, whose name was Tumaccus, after the name
of the region, The region Tumacca.
being situate on that side of the gulf. This Tumaccus came forth against our
men, as did the other, and with like fortune: for he was overcome, driven to
flight, and many of his men slain. King Tumaccus is driven to flight.
He him self was also sore wounded, but yet escaped. Vaschus sent certain
messengers of the Chiapians to him, to return, and not to be afraid: but he
could be nothing moved, neither by promises, nor threatninges: yet when the
messengers were instant, and ceased not to threaten death to him and his
family, with the utter desolation of his kingdom, if he persisted in that
obstinacy, at the length he sent his son with them, whom Vaschus honorably
enterteynyng, apparellyng him gorgiously, and geuyng him many gifts, sent him
to his father, wyllyng him to persuade him of the puissaunce, munificence,
liberality, humanity, and clemency of our men. Tumaccus being moved by this
gentleness declared toward his son, came with him the third day, bryngyng
nothing with him at that time. But after that he knew that our men desired
gold and pearls, he sent for six hundred and fourteen Pesos of gold, and
two hundred and forty of the byggest and fairest pearls, Gold and pearls.
beside a great number of the smallest sort. Our men marueyled at the byggenes
and fayrenes of these pearls, although they were not perfectly white, because
they take them not out of the sea muscles, except they first roast them, that
they may the easelyer open them self, Muscles of the sea.
and also that the fysshe may have the better taste, which they esteem for a
delicate and princely dysshe, and set more thereby, then by the pearls them
selves. Of these things I was enfourmed of one Arbolantius, being one of
Vaschus companions, whom he sent to the king with many pearls, and certain of
those sea muscles. But when Tumaccus saw that our men so greatly regarded the
beauty of the pearls, he commanded certain of his men to prepare them
selves to go a fysshyng for pearls: Fyshyng for pearls.
Who departing, came again within four days, bringyng with them twelve
pound weight of orient pearls, after eight ounces to the pound. Thus
rejoicing on both parties, they embrased, and made a league of continual
frendshyp. Tumaccus thought him self happy that he had presented our men with
such thankful gifts, and was admitted to their frendshyp: and our men
thinkyng them selves happy and blessed that they had found such tokens of
great riches, The thyrst of gold.
swalowed down their spyttle for thyrst. At all these dooinges, king Chiapes
was present, as a wytnes and companion. He also rejoiced not a little, as well
that by his conductyng he saw that our men should be satisfied of their
desire, as also that by this means he had declared to the next king his
borderer and enemy, what friends he had of our men, Ambition among naked men.
by whose aid he might live in quietness, and be revenged of his adversary, if
need should so require. For (as we have said) these naked kings infest them
selves with grievous wars, only for ambition and desire to rule. Vaschus
bosteth in his epistle, that he learned certain marvelous secrets of Tumaccus
him self, as concerning the great riches of this land, whereof (as he says)
he would utter nothing at this present, forasmuch as Tumaccus told it him in
his ear. But he was enfourmed of both the kings, that there is an Island in
that gulf, greater then any of the other, having in it but only one king, and
him of so great power, that at such times of the year as the sea is calm, A
king of great power.
he inuadeth their dominions with a great navy of Culchas, spoylyng and
cariyng away for a pray all that he meets. This Island is distant from these
coasts, only twenty miles: So that the promontories or points thereof,
reachyng into the sea, may be seen from the hills of this continent. In the
sea near about this Island, sea muscles are engendered, of such quantity, that
many of them are as broad as bucklers. In these are pearls found (being the
hearts of those shell fysshes) oftentimes as bygge as beans, Byg pearls.
somtymes bygger then Olyues, Cleopatra, queen of Egypt, resolved a pearl in
vinegar and drunk it. Price five thousand pound of our money.
and such as sumptuous Cleopatra might have desired. Although this Island be
so near to the shore of this firm land, yet is the beginning thereof in the
main sea, without the mouth of the gulf. Vaschus being joyful and merry with
this rych communication, fantasyng now in manner nothing but princes treasures,
began to speak fierce and cruel words against the tyrant of that Island,
meaning hereby to win the minds of the other kings, and bind them to him
with a nearer bond of frendeshyp. Yet therefore raylyng further on him with
spytefull and approbrious words, he swore great oaths, that he would
forthwith invade the Island, spoylyng, destroying, burning, drownyng, and
hangyng, sparyng neither swoorde nor fire, until he had revenged their
injuries: and therewith commanded his Culchas to be in a redynes. But the two
kings, Chiapes and Tumaccus* exhorted him friendly to defer this enterprise,
until a more quiet season, because that sea was nor nauigable without great
danger, being now the beginning of November: Wherein the kings seemed to say
true. For as Vaschus him self writes, great roaring of the sea was heard among
the Islands of the gulf, by reason of the ragyng and conflict of the water.
Great ryuers also, descendyng from the tops of the mountains the same time
of the year, and ouerflowyng their banks, dryuyng down with their violence
great rocks and trees, make a marvelous noise. Likewise the fury of the
South and Northeast wyndes, associate with thunder and lyghtnyng at the same
season, did greatly molest them. While the wether was fair, they were vexed in
the night with cold, and in the day time the heat of the Son troubled them,
whereof it is no marueyle, forasmuch as they were near unto the Equinoctial
line, although they make no mention of the elevation of the pole, for in such
regions, in the night the Moon and other cold planettes, but in the day the
Son and other hot planettes, do cheefely exercise their influence,
although the antiquity were of an other opinion, supposyng the Equinoctial
circle to be vnhatable and desolate, by reason of the heat of the Son,
having his course perpendiculerly or directly over the same, except a few of
the contrary opinion, whose assertions the Portugales have at these days by
experience proved to be true: for they sail yearly to thinhabitantes of the
south pole, being in manner Ant^podes to the people called Hyperborei under the
North pole, and exercise marchaundize with them. And here have I named
Antipodes, forasmuch as I am not ignorant that there has been men of singular
wit and great learning, which have denied that there is Antipodes, that is,
such as walk feet to feet. But it is most certain, that it is not given to
any one man to know all things, for even they also were men, whose property
is to err, and be deceived in many things. Nevertheless, the Portugales of
our time, have sailed to the five and fyftie degree of the south pole: The
stars about the south pole.
where, compassyng about the point thereof, they might see throughout all the
heaven about the same, certain shynnyng white clouds here and there among the
stars, like unto them which are seen in the tract of heaven called Lactea
via, that is, the milk white way. They say, there is no notable star near
about that pole, like unto this of ours, which the common people think to be
the pole of it self (called of the Italians Tramontana, A similitude declaryng
Antipodes.
and of the Spanyardes Nortes) but that the same falls beneath the Ocean.
When the Son descends from the myddest of the exiltree of the world from
us, it ryseth to them, as a pair of balances, whose weight enclinyng from the
equal payse in the myddest toward either of the sides, causes the one end
to rise as much as the other falls. When therefore it is Autumn with us, it
is spring time with them, and summer with us, when it is winter with them. But
it suffiseth to have said thus much of strange matters. Let us now therefore
return to the history, and to our men.

The second book of the third Decade.
VAschus by thaduice of king Chiapes and Tumaccus, determined to defer his
voyage to the said Island, until the next spryng or summer, at which time,
Chiapes offered him self to accompany our men, and aid them therein all that he
might. In this mean time, Vaschus had knowledge that these kings had nets
and fysshyng places in certain stations of that sea near unto the shore where
they were accustomed to fyshe for sea muscles, in the which pearls are
engendered, The manner of of fyshyng for pearls.
and that for this purpose they had certain diverse or fysshers, exercised from
their youth in swimmyng under the water. But they do this only at certain
times when the sea is calm, that they may the eassier come to ye place where
these shel fishes are wont to lie: for the bygger that they are, so much lie
they the deeper and nearer to ye bottom: but the lesser, as it were daughters
to the other, are nearer the brimme of the water: likewise the least of al, as it
were their nieses, are yet nearer to the superficial part thereof. To them of
the byggest fort which lie lowest, the fys^hers descend the depth of three
men's heyght, and sometime four, but to the daughters or nieses, as their
succession, they descend only to the mydde thygh. Sometimes also, after that
the sea has been disquieted with vehement tempests, they find a great
multitude of these fishes on the sands, being driven to the shore by the
violence of the water. The pearls of these, which are found on the sand, are
but little, the fyshe it self, is more pleasant in eating, then are our
oysters, as our men report: But perhaps hunger, the sweet sause of all meats,
caused our men so to think. Whether pearls be the hearts of sea muscles (as
Aristotle supposed) or the birth or spawne of their intrals (as Pliny thought)
or whether they cleave continually to the rocks, or wander by companies in the
sea by the guyding of the eldest, whether every fysshe bring forth one pearl
or more, at one birth, or at diverse: also whether they be fyled from the rocks
whereunto they cleave, or may be easily pulled away, or otherwise fall of by
them selves when they are come to their full grouth: Likewise whether pearls
be hard within the shel, or soft, our men have as yet no certain experience,
but I trust or it be long to know the truth hereof: for our men are even now
in hand with the matter. Also, as soon as I shall be advertised of the aryuall
of Petrus Arias the captain of our men, Petrus Arias.
I will desire him by my letters to make diligent search for these things, and
certify me thereof in all points. I know that he will not be slack or omit
any thing herein, for he is my very freende, and one that takes great
pleasure in considering the works of nature. And surely it seems unto me
indecent, that we should with silence ouerslyp so great a thing, which as well
in the old time, as in our days, has and yet does, draw both men and women
to the immoderate desire of superfluous pleasure. Wanton and superfluous
pleasures.
Spain therefore shall be able hereafter with pearls to satisfy the greedy
appetyte of such as in wanton pleasures are like unto Cleopatra and Asopus: So
that from henceforth we shall neither envy nor reverence the nice
fruitefulnesse of Stoidum, or Taprobana, or the red sea. But let us now return
to our purpose. Vaschus therefore determined with the fyshers of Chiapes, to
prove what might be done in his fish pooles or stations of sea muscles.
Chiapes to show him self obedient to Vaschus his request, although the sea
were boysteous, commanded thyrtie of his fyshers to prepare them selves, and
to resort to the fishyng places. Vaschus sent only six of his men with them,
to behold them from the sea banks, but not to commit them selves to the
danger of the sea. The fishyng place was distant from the palace of Chiapes
about ten miles. The fyshyng place of king Chiapes.
They durst not adventure to dyue to the bottom, by reason of the fury of the
sea: Yet of the muscles which lie highest, and of such as were driven to the
shore by the violence of the water, they brought six great fardelles in the
space of a few days. The pearls of these were but little, about the bygnesse
of small fytches: yet very fair and beautiful, by reason that they were
taken newely out of the fyshe, being yet raw. And that they should not be
reproved of lying, as concerning the bygnesse of these sea muscles, they sent
many of them into Spain to the king, with the pearls, the fyshe being taken
out: We think verily that there may in no place bygger be found. These shel
fyshes therefore being thus found here in so many places in that sea, and gold
in manner in every house, Gold in manner in every house. The rych treasury of
nature.
do argue the rich treasury of nature to be hid in those coasts,
forasmuch as great riches have been found, as it were in the little finger of a
giauntes hand. What then may we think of the whole hand of the giaunt (for
hitherto they have only benne in hand with the confines of Vraba) when they
shall have throughlye searched all the coasts and secrets of the inner parts
of all that large land? But Vaschus contented with these signs, and joyful
of his good success in these enterpryses, determined by another way to return
to his fellows in Dariena, where also they have gold mines, The gold mines of
Dariena.
about ten miles from the vyllage. He gave therefore king Chiapes leave to
depart, and to follow him no further, counsaylyng him to continue faithful unto
the christian king his lord and master. Thus embracing the one the other, and
joining hands, Chiapes departed with tears, declaring the good mind which he
bore to our men. Vaschus leaving his sick men with Chiapes, went forward on
his journey with the residue, having also with him for guides three of Chiapes
Maryners. He conueyghed his army over a great river, into the dominion of a
certain king called Teaocha, who being advertised of the coming of our men,
King Teaocha enterteyneth Vaschus friendly.
of whose famous acts he had heard much before, was very glad thereof, and
enterteyned them honorably, so that for a token of his friendly affection
toward them, he gave Vaschus twenty pounds weight of wrought gold, after
eight ounces to the pound: Twenty pound weight of wrought gold.
also two hundred bygge pearls, but not fair, by reason they were taken out
of the muscles after they had been sodden. After they had joined hands, Vaschus
recompensed him with certain of our things: likewise rewarding his guides the
servants of Chiapes, he dismissed them with commendations to their lord. King
Teaocha, at the departure of our men from his palace, did not only appoint
them guides to conduct them in the way, but also gave them certain slaves, in
the steed of beasts to carry their vittuals, because they should pass through
many desartes, barren and rough mountains and terrible woods full of Tigers and
Lions. Desartes full of wild beasts.
He sent also one of his sons with these slaves, lading them with salted and
dried fish, and bread of those regions, made of the roots of Maizium and
Iucca. Dried fyshe.
He also commanded his son not to depart from our men, until he were
licensed by Vaschus. By their conductyng therefore, Vaschus came to the dominion
of an other king, whose name was Pacra, a cruel tyrant, fearful to the other
kings his borderers, King Pacra a tyrant.
and of greater power then any of them. This tyrant, whether it were that his
guilty conscience, for his mischeuous acts, put him in fear that our men
would revenge the same, or that he thought him self inferior to resist them,
fled at their coming. Vaschus writes, that in these regions in the month of
November, Great heat in the month of November.
he was sore afflicted with great heat and intolerable thirst, by reason that
side of the mountains has little water: Insomuche that they were in danger
to have perished, but that certain of thinhabitantes showed them of a spring,
which was in ye secret place of a wood, whither Vaschus with all speed sent
two quick and strong young men of his companions, with their gourdes, and such
water vessels as Teaocha his men brought with them. Of thinhabitantes, there
durst none depart from their company, because the wyld beasts do sone invade
naked men: For in those mountains, and especially in the woods near unto the
spring, they say that they are sometimes taken out of their houses in the night,
except they take good heed that the doors be well sparde. Hurt by wild
beasts.
It shall not be from my purpose here to declare a particular chance, before I
enter any further in this matter. They say therefore, that the last year the
region of Dariena was no less infested and troubled with a fierce Tiger, A
Tiger. Calidonia is a forest in Scotland. Nemea is a wood in Greece.
then was Calidonia in time past with a wild Boore, and Nemea with a horrible
Lion. For they affirm that for the space of six whole months, there passed
not one night without some hurt done: so that it killed nyghtly either a
Bullock, a Mare, a Dog, or a Hog, and sometimes even in the high ways of
the vyllage: For our men have now great heardes of cattayle in those regions.
They say also, that when this Tiger had whelps, no man might safelye go
forth of his doors, Tigers whelps.
because she spared not men, if she met first with them. But at the
length, necessity enforced them to invent a policy how they might be
revenged of such bloodshed. Searchyng therefore dilygently her footesteppes,
Thus the Egiptians take Crocodiles
and following the pathe whereby she was accustomed in the night season to
wander out of her den to seek her pray, they made a great trenche or pyt in
her walk, coueryng the same with hurdels, whereupon they cast part of the
earth, and dispearsed the resydue. The dog Tiger chanced first into this
pitfall, The dog tiger taken.
and fell upon the points of sharp stakes, and such other engines as were of
purpose fyxed in the bottom of the trench. Being thus wounded, he rored so
terrybly, that it grated the bowels of such as hard him, The roryng of the
tiger.
and the wooddes and mountains near about rebounded the noise of the horrible
cry. When they perceived that he was laid fast, they resorted to the trenche,
and slew him with stones, darts, and pykes. With his teethe and claws he
brake the darts into a thousand chyppes. Being yet dead, he was fearful to
all such as beheld him: what then think you he would have done being alive
and loose? One Johannes Ledisma of Civil, a near friend to Vascus, and one of
the companions of his trauayles, Tigers flesh eaten.
told me that he him self did eat of the flesh of that Tiger, and that it
was nothing inferior to beef in goodness. Being demanded how they knew it
to be a Tiger, forasmuch as none of them had ever seen a Tiger: they answered
that they knew it by the spots, fiercenes, agilitie, and such other marks
and tokens whereby ancient writers have described the Tiger. For some of them
had before time seen other spotted wild beasts, as Libardes and Panthers.
The dog Tiger being thus killed, The bi^the tiger.
they following the trase of his steps toward the mountains, came to the
den where the bytche remained with her two young suckyng whelps. But she was
not in the den at their coming. Tigers whelps.
They first carried away the whelps with them. But afterward, fearyng lest
they should dye because they were young, entendyng when they were bygger to
send them into Spain, they put cheynes of iron about their necks, and carried
them again to their den: whither returnyng within a few days after, they
found the den empty, and they cheynes not removed from their place. They
suppose that the damme in her furye tore them in pieces, A strange thing.
and carried them away, lest any should have the fruition of them. For they
plainly affirm, that it was not possible that they should be loosed from the
chains alive. The skin of the dead Tiger stuffed with dry herbs and
straws, they sent to Hispaniola, to the Admiral, and other of the chief
rulers, from whom the new lands receive their laws and succor. It shall at
this time suffice to have written thus much of the Tigers, as I have learned
by report of them which both su^teyned damage by their rauenyng, and also
handled the skin of that which was slain. King Pacra.
Let us now therefore return to king Pacra, from whom we have digressed. When
Vaschus had entered into the houses forsaken of Pacra, he sent messengers to
reconcile him, as he had done the other kings. At the first he refused to
come: but after threatenings he came, with three other kings in his company.
Vaschus writes, that he never saw a more monstrous and defourmed creature,
and that nature has only given him humane shape, and otherwise to be worse
then a brute beast, with manners according to the liniamentes of his body. He
abused, with most abominable lechery, the daughters of four kings his
borderers, from whom he had taken them by violence. Natural hatred of vice.
Of the fylthy behavior of Pacra, of his cruelty, and iniures done by him,
many of the other kings made grievous complayntes to Vaschus, as unto a high
Judge, and just revenger, most humbly beseechyng him to see such things
punyshed, forasmuch as they took him for a man sent of God for that purpose.
Herevppon Vaschus, as well to win their good wylles, as also to show an example
of terror to such as used like fasshions, commanded that this monstrous
beast, with the other three kings which were subject to him, Four Kings
devoured of dogs.
and of like conditions, should be given for a pray to his fyghtyng dogs,
and their torn carkases to be burned. Of these dogs which they use in the
wars, The use of dogs in war against naked men.
they tell marvelous things: for they say, that they run upon
thinhabitauntes, armed after their manner, with no less fiercenes, then if
they were Hearts or wild Bores, if the Spaniardes do but only point toward
them with their fyngers: Insomuche that oftentimes they have had no need to
drive their enemies to flight with swoordes or arrows, but have done the same
only with dogs, placed in the forefront of their battle, and lettyng them
slyppe with their watch word and privy token: whereupon the barbarians
strycken with fear, by reason of the cruel countenances of their masties,
with their desperate boldness, and unaccustomed howlyng and barkyng, have
disparckled at the first onsette, and brake their array. Yet it chances
otherwise when they have any conflycte against the Canibales, and the people of
Caramairi: The Canibales are expert archers.
for these are fiercer and more warlyke men, also so expert archers, that they
can most certaynely direct their venomous arrows against the dogs, with
such seleritie as if they were thunderboltes, by reason whereof, they
sometimes kill many of them. Thinhabitauntes of these mountains do not keep
war with bows and arrows, but use only Macanis, that is, certain long and
broad swoordes made of wood, also slings, long pykes, Swoordes of wood.
and darts, hardened at the ends with fire. While king Pacra yet lived, no
man could know of him, neither by fair means nor by foul, where he had the
gold which was found in his house: for our men found in his jewel house
fifty pounds weight of gold. Being therefore demanded where he had it,
Fifty pound weight of gold.
he answered, that they which geathered the same in those mountains in his
fathers days, were all dead, and that sense he was a child, he never esteemed
gold more then stones: More then this they could not geat of him. By this
severe punishment executed upon Pacra, Vaschus concyled unto him the minds of
all the other kings of that province, and by this means it came to pass,
that when he sent for the sick men which he left behind him with king
Chiapes, another king which was in the mydde way, King Bononiama, friend to the
christians.
(whose name was Bononiama) enterteyned them gentelly, and gave them twenty
pound weight of pure wrought gold, beside great plenty of vittualles. And
not this only, Wrought gold.
but also accompanied them him self, until he had brought them safely from
his palace, into the dominion of Pacra, where taking each of them by the right
hands, he delivered them to Vaschus him self, as a faithful pledge committed
to his charge, and therewith spoke to Vaschus in this effect: Most myghtie
and valiant victourer, behold, I here deliver unto you, your companions in
such plight as I received them: wishyng that I had been as well able to give
them health, The oration of king Bononiama.
as they were hartyly welcome to such poor entertaynement as I was able to
show them. For the favor and gentelnesse which I have found both in you
and them, The spark of the law of nature, is the law written in the hearts
of men.
he shall reward you which sends thunderyng and lyghtnyng to the
destruction of myscheuous men, and of his clemencye gives unto good men
plenty of Iucca and Maizium in due season. As he spoke these words, he
lyfted up his hands and eyes toward the Son, whom they honor as God. Then
he spoke further to Vaschus, saying, In that you have destroyed and slain our
violent and proud enemies, you have brought peace and quietness to us and our
familyes, and bound us for ever to love and obey you. You have so overcome and
tamed wild monsters, that we think you to be sent from heaven, for the
punyshement of evil men, and defense of innocents, that under the protection
of your myghtie swoorde, we may hereafter lead our lives without fear, and
with more quietness give thanks to the geuer of all good things, for his
mercy showed unto us in this behalf. When the interpretoure had told Vaschus
that the king Bononiana had said these words, and such like, Vaschus
rendered him like thanks for his humanity declared toward our men, and
rewarded him as he had done other in whom he found like gentilnesse. Vaschus
writes, that he learned many things of this king as concerning the great
richesse of these regions, but that he would at this present speak nothing
thereof, and rehearses the same, as things like to have good success. What
this implicate Hiperbole, or advancement means, I do not well understand,
but he plainly seems hereby to promise many great things. And suerly it is
to be thought, Great plenty of gold.
that according to his hope, great riches may be looked for. For they came in
manner into none of thinhabitaunts houses, but that they found in them either
bresteplates or curettes of gold, or else golden ouches, jewels, or garlandes
to wear about their heads, necks, or arms. I conjecture therefore thus by a
similitude of our houses: A symilitude for the proof of plentye of gold.
If among us any man of great power were moved with the desire to have great
plenty of Iron, and would enter into Italy with a main force, as did the
Goths in time past, what abundance of Iron should he have in their houses,
whereas he should find in one place a fryingpan, in another a caldron, here a
trivet, and there a spit^e, and these in manner in every poor man's house, with
such other innumerable? whereby any man may conjecture, that iron is
plentifully engendered in such regions where they have so great use thereof.
Our men also perceived, that the inhabitauntes of these regions do no more
esteem gold then we do iron, nor yet so much, after they saw to what use
iron served us. Thus much have I thought good to write to your holiness, of
such things as I have geathered out of the letters of Vaschus Nunnez, and
learned by word of mouth of such as were his companions in these affairs.
As we receive them, so we give them unto you. Time, which reuealeth al
secrets, shall hereafter minister larger argument of writing. They could at
this time do no great thing in searchyng the gold mines, forasmuch as of a
hundred, fourscore, and ten men, which Vaschus brought with him from
Dariena, there remained only threescore and ten, or at the most fourscore,
whose aid he now used in these dangerous adventures, leaving ever the crased
men behind him in the kings houses all the way that he went, but they most
especially fell into sundry diseases, which came lately from Hispaniola,
Change of diet is dangerous.
for they were not able to abide such calamities, as to live only contented
with the bread of those regions, and wild herbs, without salt, drynkyng none
other then river water, and that oftentimes either lackyng, or unwholesome, where
as before their stomachs had been used to good meats. But the old soldiers
of Dariena, were hardened to abide all sorrows, and exceedyng tolerable of
labor, heat, hunger, Old soldiers.
and watchyng, insomuche that merrily they make their boast, that they have
observed a longer and sharper Lent then ever your holiness enjoined: for they
say, that for the space of four whole years, A long lent.
they ate none other then herbs and fruits, except now and then perhaps
fyshe, and very seldom flesh: yea, and that sometime for lack of all these,
they have not abhorred from mangie dogs and fylthy toades, as we have said
before. The old soldiers of Dariena, I call those which first followed the
captains Nicuesa and Fogeda, to inhabit the land, of the which now few
were living. But let us now omyt these things, and return to Vaschus, the
vyctourer of the mountains.

The third book of the third Decade.
WHen Vaschus had remained thyrtie days in the palace of king Pacra, concilyng
unto him the minds of the inhabitauntes, and prouidyng things necessary for
his companions. As he departed from thence, by the conduct of certain of king
Teaocha his men, and came to the bank of the river Comogrus, Comogrus.
whereof the region and king thereof, are named by the same name, he found the
sides of these mountains so rude and barren, that there was nothing apt to be
eaten but wild roots, and certain unpleasant fruits of trees. Two kings
being near of blood, inhabited this unfortunate region, which Vaschus
ouerpassed with all speed, Two poor kings.
for fear of hunger. One of these poor kings was named Cotochus, and the
other Ciuriza. He took them both with him, to guide him the way, and dismissed
Teaocha his men with vittuals and rewards. Thus for the space of three days,
Desartes.
he wandered through many desert woods, craggy mountains, and muddie marshes,
full of such quamyres, that men are oftentimes swalowed up in them, if they
look not ye more warely to their feet: also through places not frequented with
resort of men, and such as nature had not yet opened to their use, forasmuch
as the inhabitauntes have seldom intercourse between them, but only by sundry
incursions, the one to spoil and destroy the other: being otherwise contented
to live only after the law of nature, without al worldly toil for
superfluous pleasures. Thus entryng at the length into the territory of
another king, whose name was Becheb^ea, they found all things void and in
scilence: for the king and his subjects were al fled to the woods. When
Vaschus sent messengers to fetch him, he did not only at the first submit him
self, but also promise his aid, with all that he might make: Protestyng
furthermore, that he fled not for fear that our men would do them injury,
but that he hyd him self for very shame and grief of mind, for that he was
not able to receive them honorablye, according unto their dignity, because his
store of vitayles was consumed. Yet in a token of obedience and frendeshyppe,
he sent our men many vessels of gold, desyring them to accept them as the
gift of a friend, Vessels of gold.
whose good will wanted not in greater things, if his ability were greater.
By which words, the poor man seemed to insinuate that he had been robbed,
and otherwise cruelly handled of his borderers, by reason whereof, our men were
enforced to depart from thence more hungerly then they came. As they went
forward therefore, they espied certain naked men coming down from a hill
toward them. Vaschus commanded his army to stay, and sent his interpretours
to them, to know what they would have. Then one of them, to whom the other
seemed to give reverence, spoke in this effect. Our lord and king Chiorisus,
greeteth you well, wyllyng us to declare that he hard of your puissaunce and
virtue, king Chiorisus sends Vaschus xxx. dyshes of pure gold.
whereby you have subdued evil men, and revenged the wrongs done to
innocents: For the which your noble factes and justice, as he does honor
your fame, so would he think him self most happy, if he might receive you
into his palace. But, forasmuch as his fortune has been so evil (as he
imputes it) that being out of your way, you have ouerpassed him, he has sent
you this gold, in token of his good will and frendshyppe toward you. And with
these words he delivered to Vaschus thirty dishes of pure gold, addyng
hereunto, that when so ever it should please him to take the pains to come to
their king, he should receive greater gifts. He declared further, that a king
which was their borderer and mortal enemy, was very rich in gold, and that
in subduyng of him, they should both obtain great richesse, and also deliver
them from daily vexations: which thing might easily be done by their help,
because they knew the country. Vaschus put them in good comfort, and gave
them for reward certain Iron axes, Axes of Iron more esteemed then any gold.
which they more esteemed then great heaps of gold. For they have they have
little need of gold, having not the use of pestiferous money: but he that may
geat but one axe or hatchet, thinks him self richer then ever was Crassus.
For even these naked men, do perceive that an axe is necessary for a
thousand uses, and confess that gold is desired only for certain vain and
effeminate pleasures, as a thing which the life of man may lack without any
inconvenience: for our gluttony and superfluous sumptuousness has not yet
corrupted them. By reason whereof, they take it for no shame to lack cobordes
of plate, whereas the pride and wantonness of our time, does in manner impute
it to us for ignominy, to be without that, whereof by nature we have no need.
But their contentation with the benefits of nature, does plainly declare,
that men may lead a free and happy life without tables, table clothes,
carpets, napkyns, and towels, with such other innumerable, whereof they have no
use, except perhaps the kings furnysh their tables with a few golden vessels.
But the common people drive away hunger with a piece of their bread in the one
hand, and a piece of broyled fyshe, or some kind of fruit in the other hand:
for they eat flesh but seldom. When their fyngers are imbrued with any
ounctuous meats, they wype them either on the soles of their feet, or on
their thyghes, ye and sometimes on the skyns of their privy members, in the
steed of a napkyn: and for this cause do they oftentimes wash them selves in
the rivers. Our men therefore went forward laden with gold, Plenty of gold and
scarceness of meat.
but sore afflicted with hunger. Thus they came at the length to the dominion
of king Pocchorrosa, who fled at their coming. Here for the space of thyrtie
days, they filled their emptye bellies with bread of the roots of Maizium. In
the mean time, Vaschus sent for Pocchorrosa, who being allured with promises
and fair words, came and submmitted him self, bryngyng with him for a
present fyfteene pounds weight of wrought gold, and a few slaves: Vaschus
rewarded him as he had done other before. When he was minded to depart, he was
advertised, that he should pass through the dominion of a certain king,
whose name was Tumanama. This is he whom the son of king Comogrus declared to
be of so great power, and fearful to all his borderers, and with whom many of
Comogrus familiars had been captyue, but our men now perceived that they
measured his power by their own: For their kings are but gnattes (compared to
Elephantes) in respect to the power and policy of our men. Our men were also
enfourmed by such as dwelt near about Tumanama, that his region was not beyond
the mountains as they supposed, nor yet so rich in gold as young Comogrus
had declared: Yet consulted they of his subduing, which they thought they
might the easeliar bring to pass, because Pocchorrosa was his mortal enemy,
who most gladly promised them his advice and aid herein. Vaschus therefore,
leauyng his sick men in the vyllage of Pocchorrosa, took with him threescore
of his most valyant soldiers, and declared unto them, how king Tumanama had
often times spoken proud and threatnyng words against them: A good policy.
Likewise that it now stood them in hand of necessity to pass through his
dominion, and that he thought it best to set upon him unawares. The soldiers
consented to his advice, and exhorted him to give the adventure, promising that
they would follow him, whyther soever he went. They determined therefore to go
two days journey in one day, that Tumanama, not knowing of their sudden
coming, might have no leisure to assemble an army: and the thing came to pass
even as they had devised. For in the first watch of the night, our men, with
the Pocchorrosians, invaded the village and palace of Tumanama, where they
took him prisoner, suspectyng nothing less. He had with him two young men,
which he abused unnaturally, also fourscore women, which he had taken
violently from diverse kings: likewise, a great number of his gentlemen and
subjects were taken straglyng in other vyllages near about his palace. For
their houses are not adherent together as ours be, because they are oftentimes
troubled with vehement whirlewyndes, by reason of the sudden chaunges and
motions of the air, caused by the influence of the planettes, The cause of
vehement winds near the Equinocciall.
in the equality of the day and night, being there in manner both of one length
throughout all the year, forasmuch as they are near unto the Equinoctial
line, as we have said before. Their houses are made of trees, covered, and
after their manner thatched with the stalks of certain rough herbs. To the
palace of Tumanama, was only one house adherent, and that even as bygge as the
palace it self. Either of these houses were in length a hundred and twentye
paces, and in breadth fifty paces, as our men measured them. In these two
houses the king was accustomed to muster his men, as often as he prepared an
army. When Tumanama therefore was thus taken captive, with all his
Sardanapanicall family, the Pocchorrosians bragged and threatened him, being
now bound, that he should shortly be hanged: the other kings also his
borderers, rejoiced at his mysfortune. Whereby our men parceyued that Tumanama
was no less troublesome to his neighbors, then was Pacra to the kings of the
south side of the mountains. Vaschus also the better to please them,
threatened him greeuouslye, but in deed intended no evil toward him. Vaschus
his Words to King Tumanama.
He spoke therefore sharply unto him with these words: Thou shall now suffer
punishment thou cruel tyrant, for thy pride and abominations. Thou shall
know of what power the Christans are, whom thou have so contemned, and
threatened to draw by the hear of their heads to the next river, and there to
drown them, as thou have oftentimes made thy vaunt among thy naked slaves: But
thou thy self shall first feel that, which thou have prepared for others.
And heerewith commanded him to be taken up: Nevertheless geuyng a pryuie
token of pardon to them which laid hands on him. Thus unhappy Tumanama,
fearyng and beleeuyng that Vaschus had meant in ernest as he commanded, fell
prostrate at his feet, and with tears desired pardon: Protesting that he
never spoke any such words, but that perhaps his noble men in their
drunkenness had so abused their tongues, which he could not rule: For their
wynes, although they be not made of grapes, yet are they of force to make men
drunken. He declared furthermore, that the other kings his borderers had of
malice surmised such lies of him, envying his fortune, because he was of
greater power then they, most humbly desyryng Vaschus, Oderuut quem metuunt.
that as he took him to be a just victourer, so to give no credit unto their
unjust and malicious complayntes: Addyng heereunto, that if it would please
him to pardon him, not having offended, he would bring him great plenty of
gold. Thus laying his right hand on his breast, he swore by the Son, that
he ever loved and feared the Christians sense he first heard of their fame and
victoryes: especyally when he hard say, that they had Michanas, that is,
swords sharper then theyrs, and such as cut in pieces all things that come
in their ways. Then directyng his eyes toward Vaschus, who had his sword in
his hand, he spoke thus, Who (except he were out of his wit) dare lift up his
hand against this sword of yours, wherewith you are able with one struck to
cleave a man from the head to the navel? Let no man therefore persuade you (O
most mighty victourer) that ever such words proceeded out of my mouth. As
Tumanama with tremblyng spoke these words, therewith swalowyng down the knot
of death, Vaschus seemed by his tears to be moved to compassion, and speaking
to him with cheerful countenance, commanded him to be loosed. This done, he
sent immediately to his palace for thyrtye pounds weight of pure gold,
artificyally wrought into sundry ouches, Xxx. pound weight of wrought gold.
which his wives and concubines used to wear. Also the third day following,
his noble men and gentlemen, Threescore pounds weight of gold.
sent threescore pounds weight of gold for their fine and ransom. Tumanama
being demanded where they had that gold: he answered, that it was not
geathered in his dominions, but that it was brought his ancestors from the
river Comogrus toward the south, But the Pocchorrosians and other his enemies
said that he lied, affirmyng that his kingdom was rich in gold. Tumanama on
the contrary part, instantly protested that he never knew any gold mine in
all his dominions: yet denied not but that there has sometimes been found
certain small graynes of gold, to the geathering whereof, he never had any
regard, because they could not get it without great and long labor. They
abhorrce labor.
While these things were doing, the sick men which Vaschus had left in the
vyllage of Pocchorrosa, came to him the.viii. day of the Calendes of January,
in the year of Christ.M.D.XIII. bryngyng with them certain laborers from the
kings of the south, with sundry instruments to dygge the ground, and
geather gold. Thus passing over the day of the nativity of Christ without
bodylye labor, upon Saint Stephens day he brought certain miners to the side
of a hill, not far distant from the palace of Tumanama, where (as he says)
he perceived by the color of the earth, that it was like to bring forth
gold. When they had dygged a pyt, The color of the golden earth, and a
trial of the same.
not past a hand breadth and a half, and syfted the earth thereof, they found
certain small graynes of gold, no bygger then lintell seeds, amountyng to
the weight of twelve graynes, as they proved with their balances of assaie,
before a notarie and witness, that the better credit might be given thereto.
Whereby they argued, that the rychenesse of that land was agreeable to the
report of the borderers, although Vaschus could by no means cause Tumanama to
confess the same. They suppose that he nothing esteemed so small a portion:
but other say, that he denied his country to be fruiteful of gold, least by
reason thereof, the desire of gold might intyse our men to inhabyte his
kingdom, as in deed the seely king was a prophet in so thynkyng. For they
chose that and the region of Pocchorrosa to inhabit, and determined to build
towns in them both, if it should so please the king of Castile: as well that
they might be baytyng places and vittailyng houses for such as should journey
toward the south, as also that both the regions were fruiteful, and of good
ground to bear fruits and trees. Intendyng now therefore to depart from
thence, he tried the earth by chance in an other place, where the color of
the ground, with certain shynyng stones, seemed to be a token of gold, where
causyng a small pyt to be dygged, little beneath the upper crust of the earth,
he found so much gold, as weighed the piece of gold which the Spaniardes
call Castellanum aureum, Tokens of great plentle of gold.
and is commonly called Pesus, but not in one grain. Reioycyng at these
tokens, in hope of great riches, he bad Tumanama to be of good comfort,
promysyng him that he would be his freende and defender, so that he troubled
not any of the kings, which were friends to the Christians: He also persuaded
him to geather plenty of gold. Some say that he led away all Tumanama his
women, and spoiled him, least he should rebel. Yet he delivered his son to
Vaschus, to be brought up with our men, to learn their language and religion,
that he might heareafter the better use his help, as well in all things that
he should have to do with our men, as also more politikely rule, and obtain
the love of his own subjects. Vischus at this time fell into a vehement
fever, by reason of excess of labor, immoderate watchyng, and hunger,
insomuche that departing from thence, he was feign to be borne upon men's backs
in sheets of gossampyne cotton: likewise also many of his soldiers, which
were so weak, that they could another go nor stand. Feebleness of hunger and
watching.
To this purpose they used the help of thinhabitantes, who showed them selves
in all things wyllyng and obedient. Also some of them which were somewhat
feeble, and not able to travail, although not grievously sick, were led by
the arms, until they came to the dominion of king Comogrus, a great friend to
the Christians, of whom we have largely made mention before. At Vaschus coming
thither, he found that the old king was dead, and his son (whom we so
praised for his wisdom) to reign in his stead, and that he was baptized by
the name of Charles. The palace of this Comogrus, is situate at the foot of a
stiepe hill well cultured, having toward the south a plain of twelve leagues
in breadth, and very fruitful. This plain they call Zauana. Beyond this, are
the great and high mountains, which divide the two seas, whereof we have
spoken before. Out of the stiepe hills, spryngeth the river Comogrus, which
runs through the said plain to the high mountains, receauyng into his
chanel by their valleys, The river Comogrus.
all other ryuers, and so falls into the south sea: It is distant from
Dariena, about threescore and ten leagues toward the west. As our men
therefore came to these parties, king Comogrus (otherwise called Charles by his
christian name) met them joyfully, and entertained them honorably, geuyng them
their fill of pleasant meats and drynkes: He gave also to Vaschus twenty
pound weight of wrought gold. Vaschus recompensed him with things which he
esteemed much more, as axes, and sundry kinds of carpenters tools: also a
soldiers cloak, and a fair shurt, wrought with needle work. By these
gifts, Comogrus thought him self to be half a God among his borderers.
Vaschus at his departing from hence, earnestly charged Comogrus, and the other
kings, to remain faithful and obedient to the christan king of Castile, if
they desired to live in peace and quietness, and that they should heareafter
more diligently apply them selves to the geatheryng of gold, to be sent to the
great chrystian Tiba (that is) king: Declaryng further, that by this means,
they should both get them and their posterity a patron and defender against
their enimyes, and also obtain great abundaunce of our things. These affairs
thus happily atchiued, he went forward on his voyage to the palaice of king
Poncha, where he found four young men, which were come from Dariena, to
certify him that there were certain ships come from Hispaniola laden with
vyttayles, and other necessaries. Vaschus returns to Dariena.
Wherefore taking with him twenty of his most lusty soldiers, he made have to
Dariena, with long journeys: leauyng the residue behynd him, to follow at their
leisure. He writes, that he came to Dariena the.xiiii. Ca. of Fe. An. 1514.
The date of his letter is: The good fortune of Vaschus.
From Darena, the.iiii. day of March. He writes in the same letter, that he
had many sore conflictes, and that he was yet neither wounded, or lost any of
his men in the battle: and therefore in all his large letter, there is not
one leaf without thanks geuyng to almighty God for his delyuery, and
preservation from so many imminent peryls. He attempted no enterprise, or took
in hand any voyage, without thinuocation of God and his holy saints. Thus was
Vaschus Balboa of a vyolent Goliath, turned into Heliseus, and from Anteus to
Hercules, the conqueror of monsters. Being therefore thus turned from a rash
royster, to a polytike and descrete capttayne, he was judged worthy to be
advanced to great honor: By reason whereof, he was both received into the
kings favor, O flatteryng fortune, look his death in the book of the Island
lately found
and thereupon created the general or Lieuetenaunt of the kings army in those
Regions. Thus much have I geathered both by the letters of certain my
faithful friends being in Dariena, and also by word of mouth of such as
came lately from thence. If your holiness desire to know what I think herein,
suerly, by such things as I have seen, I believe these things to be true,
even so thorder and agreeyng of Vaschus and his companions warrelyke letters,
seem to confirm the same. The Spanyarde therefore shall not need hereafter,
with vndermynyng the earth with intolerable labor, to break the bones of our
mother, The earth is our general mother.
and enter many miles into her bowels, and with innumerable dangers cut in
sunder whole mountains, to make away to the court of infernal Pluto, to bring
from thence wicked gold, the seed of innumerable mescheeues, without the
which, The cout of infernal Pluto.
notwithstanding we may now scarcelye lead a happy life, since iniquity has
so prevailed, and made us slaves to that, whereof we are lords by nature: The
Spaniarde (I say) shall not need with such trauayles and difficulty, to dygge
far into the earth for gold, but shall find it plentifully, in manner in the
upper crust of the earth, or in the sands of ryuers dried up by the heat of
summer, only wasshyng the earth softly from the same, and shall with like
facility geather plenty of pearls. Certainly the reverent antiquity (by all
the Cosmographers assent) obtained not so great a benefyte of nature, nor yet
aspired to the knowledge hereof, because there came never man before out of our
known world, to these unknown nations, at the least with a power of men by
force of arms, in manner of conquest: whereas otherwise nothing can be gotton
here, forasmuch as these nations are for the most part severe defenders of
their patrimonies, and cruel to strangers, in no condition admitting them
otherwise then by conquest, especially the fierce Canibales or Caribes. For
these wily hunters of men, give them selves to none other kind of exercise,
Manhuntees.
but only to manhuntyng, and tyllage, after their manner. At the coming
therefore of our men into their regions, they look as surely to have them fall
into their snares, as if they were hearts or wild bores: and with no less
confydence, The fyersness^ of the Canibales.
lick their lips secretly, in hope of their pray. If they get the upper
hand, they eat them greedyly: if they mystrust them selves to be the weaker
part, they trust to their feet, and flee swifter then the wind. Again, if
the matter be tried on the water, as well the women as the men can dyue and
swymme, as though they had been ever brought up and fed in the water. It is no
marueyle therefore, if the large tract of these regions have been hitherto
unknown. But now since it has pleased God to discover the same in our time,
it shall become us to show our natural love to mankind, and duty to God,
Our duty to god, and natural love to mankind.
to endeavor our selves to bring them to civility and true religion, to
thincrease of Christ's flock, to the confusion of Infidels and the Devil
their father, who delyteth in our destruction, as he has done done from the
beginning. By the good success of th^se first fruits, our hope is that the
Christian religion shall str^^^h forth her arms very far, which thing
should the sooner come to pass, if all men to their power, especially
Christian princes (to whom it cheefely parteyneth) would put their hands to
the plough of the lords vineyarde: The office of Christian princes.

The harvest is great.


The harvest surely is great, but the woorkemen are but few. As we have said
at the beginning, your holiness shall hereafter nouryshe many myriades of
broodes of chyckens under your wings. But let us now return to speak of
Beragua, being the West side of Vraba, and first found by Colonus the Admiral,
then unfortunately governed by Diego Nicuesa, and now left in manner desolate,
with the other large regions of those provinces, brought from their wild and
beastly rudeness, to civility and true religion.

The fourth book of the third Decade.
I Was determined (most holy father) to have proceeded no further herein, but
ye one fyery spark, yet remaynyng in my mind, would not suffer me to cease.
Whereas I have therefore declared how Beragua was first found by Colonus, me
think I should commit a heinous crime, if I should defraud the man of the due
commendations of his trauayles, of his cares and troubles, and finally of the
dangers and peryls which he sustained in that navigations. Therefore in the
year of Christ 1502. in the.6. day of the Ides of May, The fourth navigations
of Colonus the Admiral.
he hoysed up his sails, and departed from the Islands of Gades, with four
ships, of fyftie or threescore tun a piece, with a hundred, threescore, and
ten men, and came with prosperous wind to the Islands of Canariae, within five
days following. From thence, arryuyng the.16. day at the Island of Dominica,
being the chief habitation of the Canibales, he sa^led from Dominica to
Hispaniola in five other days. Thus within the space of.26. days, with
prosperous wind, and by the swyfte fall of the Ocean from the East to the
West, he sailed from Spain to Hispaniola, which course is counted of the
mariners, to be no less then a thousand and two hundred leagues. He tarried but
a while in Hispaniola, whether it were wyllyngly, From Spain to Hispaniola a
thousand and two hundred leagues.
or that he were so admonished of the Uice Roy. Directyng therefore his voyage
from thence toward the west, leauyng the Islands of Cuba and Iamaica on his
right hand toward the north, he writes that he chanced upon an Island more
southwarde then Iamaica, which thinhabitantes call Guanassa, so floryshyng and
fruitful, that it might seem an earthlye Paradyse. Coastyng along by the
shores of this Island, he met two of the Canoas, or boats of those provinces,
which were drawn with two naked slaves against the stream. In these boats
was carried a ruler of the Island, with his wife and children, all naked. The
slaves seeing our men a land, made signs to them with proud countenance in
their masters name, to stand out of the way, and threatened them, if they
would not give place. Simple people
Their symplenes is such, that they neither feared the multitude, or power of
our men, or the greatness and straungenes of our ships. They thought that our
men would have honored their master with like reverence as they did. Our men
had entelligence at the length, that this ruler was a great merchant, A great
merchant.
which came to the mart from other coasts of the Island: for they exercise
bying and sellyng by exchange with their confines. He had also with him good
store of such ware as they stand in need of, or take pleasure in: as laton
belles, rasers, knyues, and hatchettes made of a certain sharp yellowe bright
stone, with handles of a strong kind of wood: also many other necessary
instruments, with kytchen stuff, and vessels for all necessary uses:
likewise sheets of gossampine cotton, wrought of sundry colors. Our men took
him prisoner, with all his family, but Colonus commanded him to be loosed
shortly after, and the greatest part of his goods to be restored, to win
his frendshyppe. Being here instructed of a land lying further toward the
south, he took his voyage thither. Therefore little more then ten miles
distant from hence, he found a large land, which thinhabitants called
Quiriquetana, but he named it Ciamba. When he went a land, and commanded his
chaplain to say mass on the sea banks, a great confluence of the naked
inhabitants flocked thither, symply and without fear, bringyng with them
plenty of meat and fresh water, Gentle people.
marueylyng at our men, as they had been some strange miracle. When they had
presentted their gifts, they went somewhat backward, and made low curtesy
after their manner, bowyng their heads and bodies reverently. He recompensed
their gentilnes, rewardyng them with other of our things, as counters,
braslettes, and garlands of glass, and counterfeit stones, lookyng glasses,
needelles, and pynnes, with such other trashe, which seemed unto them
precious merchandise. In this great tracte, there are two regions, whereof the
one is called Tuia, and the other Maia. He writes, The regions of Tuia and
Maia.
that all that land is very fair and wholesome, by reason of the excellent
temperatnesse of the air: And that it is inferior to no land in fruitful
ground, being partly full of mountains, and partly large playnes: also
replenyshed with many goodly trees, wholesome herbs, continuyng green, and
floryshyng all the whole year. It bears also very many holly trees, Seven
kinds of date trees.
and pyneaple trees. Also.vii. kinds of date trees, whereof some are
fruitful, and some baren. It brings forth likewise of it self Pelgoras,
Wild vines.
and wild vines, laden with grapes, even in the wooddes among other trees. He
says furthermore, that there is such abundaunce of other pleasunt and
profitable fruits, that they pass not of vines. Of one of those kinds of
date trees, they make certain long and broad swoordes, and darts. These
regions bear also gossampyne trees here and there commonly in the woods.
Mirobalanes.
Likewise Mirobalanes of sundry kinds, as those which the physicians call
Emblicos, and Chebulos: Maizium also, Iucca, Ages, and Battatas, like unto
those which we have said before to be found in other regions in these coasts.
The same noorysheth also Lions, Tigers, Hearts, Roes, Goats, and diverse other
beasts. Birds and fowls.
Likewise sundry kinds of birds and fowls: among the which they keep only
them to frank and feed, which are in color, bygnes, and taste, much like
unto our Pehennes. People of goodly stature.
He says that thinhabitantes are of high and goodly stature, well lymmed and
protioned, both men and women, coueryng their privy parts with fine breeches
of gossampyne cotton, wrought with diverse colors. And that they may seem the
more comely and beautiful (as they take it) they paynt their bodies read and
black, with the juice of certain apples, They point their bodies.
which they plant in their gardens for the same purpose. Some of them paynt
their whole bodies, some but part, and other some draw the portitures of
herbs, flowers, and knottes, every one as seems best to his own fantasy.
Their language differs utterly, from theyrs of the Islands near about them.
From these regions, the waters of the sea ran with as full a course toward the
West, The swyft course of the sea from the East to the West.
as if it had been the fail of a swift river. Nevertheless he determined to
search the East parts of this land, reuoluyng in his mind that the regions
of Paria and Os draconis with other coasts found before toward the East,
should be near there about, as in deed they were. Departing therefore from
the large region of Quiriquetana, the.xiii. day of the calendes of September,
when he had sailed thyrtie leagues, he found a river, within the mouth whereof
he drew fresh water in the sea: Fresh water in the sea.
where also the shore was so clean without rocks, that he found ground
every where, where he might aptly cast anchor. He writes, that the swift course
of the Ocean was so vehement and contrary, that in the space of forty days,
he could scarcely sail threescore and ten leagues, and that with much
dyfficultie, with many fetches and compassynges, fyndyng him self to be some
times repulsed and driven far back by the violent course of the sea, when he
would have taken land toward the evening, least perhaps wanderyng in
unknown coasts in the darcknesse of the night, he might be in danger of
shypwracke. He writes, that in the space of eight leagues, he found three
great and fair ryuers, Fair ryuers. Great reeds.
upon the banckes whereof there grew reeds bygger then a man's thygh. In
these rivers was also great plenty of fyshe, and great Tortoyses: Great
Tortoyses.
Likewise in many places, multitudes of Crocodyles lying in the sand, and
yanyng to take the heat of the son: beside, diverse other kinds of beasts,
whereunto he gave no names. He says also, that the soil of that land is
very diverse and variable, being somewhere stonye and full of rough and craggie
promontories, or points reachyng into the sea, and in other places as
fruitful as may be. They have also diverse kings and rulers. In some places
they call a king Cacicus: in other places they call him Quebi, and somewhere
Tiba. Such as have behaved them selves valyantlye in the wars against their
enemies, and have their faces full of scarres, they call Cupras, and honor
them as the antiquity did the gods which they called Heroes, supposed to be
the souls of such men, as in their life time excelled in virtue and noble
acts. The common people they call Chiui, and a man, they call Homem. When they
say in their language, take man, they say Hoppa home. After this, he came to an
other river apt to bear great ships, before the mouth whereof, lie four
small Islands, full of floryshyng and fruitful trees: Quatuor tempora.
these Islands he named Quatuor tempora. From hence, sailing toward the East
for the space of.xiii. leagues, still against the violent course of the water,
he found twelve other small Islands, in the which, because he found a new kind
of fruits, much like unto our Lemonds, he called them Limonar^s. Wanderyng yet
further the same way for the space of.xii. leagues, he found a great haven
entryng into the land, after the manner of a gulf, the space of three leagues,
and in manner as broad, into ye which fell a great river. Here was Nicuesa lost
afterward, when he sought Beragua, by reason whereof, they called it Rio de los
perdidos, that is, the river of the lost men. Thus Colonus the Admiral, yet
further continuyng his course against the furye of the sea, found many high
mountains, and horrible valleys, with diverse ryuers and havens, from all the
which (as he says) proceeded sweet savors, greatly recreatyng and comfortyng
nature: Insomuche that in all this long tract, there was not one of his men
diseased, until he came to a region which thinhabitantes call Quicuris, The
region of Quicuri.
in the which is the haven called Cariai, named Mirobalanus by the Admiral,
because the Mirobalane trees are native in the regions thereabout. In this
haven of Cariai, The haven of Cariai or Mirobalanus
there came about two hundred of thinhabitantes to the sea side, with every of
them three or four darts in their hands, yet of condition gentle yenough,
and not refusyng strangers. Their coming was for none other purpose, then to
know what this new nation meant, or what they brought with them. When our men
had given them signs of peace, they came swimming to the ships, and desired
to barter with them by exchange. The Admiral, to allure them to frendshyppe,
give them many of our things: But they refused them, suspecting some disceyt
thereby, because he would not receive theirs. They wrought all by signs:
Civil and humane people
for one understood not a word of the others language. Such gifts as were
sent them, they left on the shore, and would take no part thereof. They are of
such civility and humanity, that they esteem it more honorable to give,
then to take. They sent our men two young women, being virgins, of commendable
favor, and goodly stature, sygnifying unto them, that they might take them
away with them, if it were their pleasure. These women, after the manner of
their country, were covered from their ancles somewhat above their priuye
parts, with a certain cloth made of gossampine cotton, but the men are all
naked. The women use to cut their hear: but the men let it grow on the hinder
part of their heads, and cut it on the fore part. Their long hear, they bind
up with fyllettes, and wind it in sundry rowles, as our maids are accustomed
to do. The virgins which were sent to the Admiral, he decked in fair
apparel, and gave them many gifts, and sent them home again. But likewise
all these rewards and apparel they left upon the shore, because our men had
refused their gifts. Yet took he two men away with him (and those very
wyllyngly) that by learning the Spanyshe tongue, he might afterward use them
for interpretours. He considered that the tractes of these coasts were not
greatly troubled with vehement motions, or ouerflowynges of the sea, forasmuch
as trees grow in the sea not far from the shore, even as they do upon the
banks of ryuers: the which thing also other do affirm, which have latelyer
searched those coasts, declaryng that the sea ryseth and falls but little
therabout. He says furthermore, that in the prospect of this land, there are
trees engendered even in the sea, which after that they are grown to any
height, Trees growing in the sea after a strange sort.
bend down the tops of their branches into the ground: which embrasyng
them, causes other branches to spring out of the same, and take root in the
earth, bryngyng forth trees in their kind successively, as did the first root
from whence they had their oryginall, as do also the settes of vines, when
only both the ends thereof are put into the ground. Pliny.
Pliny in the twelfth book of his natural history makes mention of such
trees, describyng them to be on the land, but not in the sea. The Admiral
writes also, that the like beasts are engendered in the coasts of Cariai, as
in other provinces of these regions, and such as we have spoken of before: A
strange kind of Monkeys.
Yet that there is one found here in nature much differyng from the other.
This beast is of the bygnesse of a great Monkey, but with a tail much longer
and bygger, it lives in the wooddes, and remoueth from tree to tree in this
manner: Hangyng by the tail upon the branch of a tree, and geatheryng
strength by swaying her body twyse or thryse to and fro, she casts her self
from branche to branche, and so from tree to tree, as though she flewe. An
archer of ours hurt one of them, who, perceiuyng her self to be wounded, A
Monkey fyghteth with a man.
leapt down from the tree, and fiercely set on him which gave her the wound,
in so much that he was feign to defend him self with his swoorde. And thus by
chance, cuttyng of one of her arms, he took her, and with much a do brought
her to the ships, where within a while she waxed tame. While she was thus
kept and bound with cheynes, certain other of our hunters had chased a wild
Bore out of the maryshes near unto the sea side: for hunger and desire of
flesh, caused them to take double pleasure in huntyng. In this mean time
other which remained in the ships, going a land to recreate them selves,
took this Monkie with them, who, as soon as she had espied the Bore, set up
her brystels, and made toward him. The Bore likewise shook his bristels, A
conflyct between a Monkey and a wyld Bore.
and whet his teeth. The Monkie furiously invaded the Bore, wrappyng her tail
about his body, and with her arm, reserved of her victourer, held him so fast
about the throat, that he was suffocate. These people of Cariai, The bodies of
kings dried and reserved.
use to dry the dead bodies of their princes upon hurdels, and so reserve
them inuolued in the leaves of trees. As he went forward, about twenty
leagues from Cariai, he found a gulf of such largenes, that it
contained.xii. leagues in compass, in the mouth of this gulf was four little
Islands, so near together, that they made a safe haven to enter into the
gulf: This gulf is the haven which we said before to be called Cerabaro of
thinhabitantes. But they have now learned, that only the land of the one side
thereof, lying on the right hand at the enteryng of the gulf, is called by
that name, but that on the left side, is called Aburema. He says that all this
gulf is full of fruitful Islands, well replenished with goodly trees, and the
ground of the sea to be very clean without rocks, and commodious to cast
anchor: likewise the sea of the gulf to have great abundance of fyshe, and the
land on both the sides to be inferyor to none in fruitfulnes. At his first
arryuyng, he espied two of thinhabitantes, having cheynes about their necks,
made of ouches (which they call Guauines) of base gold, artificially wrought
in the fourmes of Eagles, and Lions, with diverse other beasts, and fowls. Of
the two Cariaians which he brought with him from Cariai, he was enfourmed that
the regions of Cerabaro and Aburema were rych in gold, and that the people of
Cariai, have al their gold from thence for exchange of other of their things.
They told him also, that in the same regions there are five villages, not
far from the sea side, whose inhabitants apply them selves only to the
geathering of gold. The names of these villages are these, Chirara, Puren,
Chitaza, Iureche, A^amea. All the men of the province of Cerabaro, go naked,
and are painted with diverse colors. They take great pleasure in wearing
garlandes of flowers, Crowns of beasts claws.
and crowns made of the claws of Lions and Tigers. The women cover only their
privy parts with a fyllet of gossampine cotton. Departing from hence, and
coasting still by the same shore for the space of xviii. leagues, he came to
another river, where he espied about three hundred naked men in a company. When
they saw the ships draw near the land, they cried out aloude, with cruel
countenaunces, shaking their wooden swoordes, and hurlyng darts, taking also
water in their mouths, and spouting the same against our men: whereby they
seemed to insinuate, that they would receive no condition of peace, Spytefull
people.
or have ought to do with them. Here he commanded certain pieces of
ordinance to be shot of cowarde them, yet so to ouershoote them, that none
might be hurt thereby: For he ever determined to deal quietly and peaceably
with these new nations. At the noise therefore of the gunnes, and sight of the
fire, they fell down to the ground, and desired peace. Guns make peace.
Thus enteryng into further frendshyp, they exchaunged their cheynes and ouches
of gold, for glasses, and hawks belles, and such other marchandies. They use
drums or tymbrels made of the shelles of certain sea fyshes, wherewith they
encorage them selves in the wars. In this tract are these seven ryuers,
Acateba, Quareba, Zobroba, Seven golden ryuers
Aiaguitin, Vrida, Duribha, Beragua, in all the which, gold is found. They
defend them selves against rain and heat with certain great leaves of trees,
in the stead of clokes. Departing from hence, he searched the coasts of
Ebetere, and Embigar, into the which fall the goodly ryuers of Zohoran and
Cubigar: Note where the plenty of gold ends
And here ceasseth the plenty and fruitfulnes of gold, in the tract of fifty
leagues, or there about. From hence, only three leagues distant, is the rock
which in the unfortunate discourse of Nicuesa we said was called of our men
Pignonem, but of thinhabitantes the Region is called Vibba. In this tract also,
about fire leagues from thence, is the haven which Colonus called Portus
Bellus (whereof we have spoken before) in the region which thinhabitants call
Xaguaguara. This region is very populous, but they go all naked. The king is
painted with black colors, but all the people with read. The king and seven
of his noble men, had every of them a little plate of gold hangyng at their
nosethrylles, down unto their lyppes: and this they take for a comely
ornament. The men enclose their privy members in a shell, and the women cover
theyrs with a fyllet of gossampine cotton, tied about their loins. In their
gardens they noryshe a fruit much like the nut of a pine tree, the which (as
we have said in an other place) grows on a shrubbe, much like unto an
hartichoke, but the fruit is much softer, and meat for a king: also certain
trees which bear gourdes, whereof we have spoken before: this tree they call
Hibuero. In these coasts they met sometimes with Crocodiles lying on the
sands, Crocodiles of sweet savor.
the which when they fled, or took the water, they left a very sweet sauoure
behind them, sweeter then musk or Castoreum. When I was sent ambassadoure for
the catholyke king of Castile, to the Soltane of Babylon, or Alcayre in Egypt,
Alcayr or Babylon in Egypt.
thinhabitantes near unto the river of Nilus told me the like of their female
Crocodiles, affyrmyng furthermore, that the fat or shewet of them, is equal in
sweetness with the pleasant gummes of Arabie. But the Admiral was now at the
length enforced of necessity to depart from hence, as well for that he was no
longer able to abide the contrary and violent course of the water, as also
that his ships were daily more and more putrified, and eaten through with
certain worms, Ships eaten with worms.
which are engendered of the warmenesse of the water in all those tractes, near
unto the Equinoctial line. The Uenetians call these worms Bissas. The same
are also engendered in two havens of the city of Alexandria in Egypt,
Alexandria in Egypt.
and destroy the ships if they lie long at anchor. They are a cubit in length,
and somewhat more, not passing the quantity of a finger in bigness. The
Spanysh mariner calls this pestilence Broma. Colonus therefore, whom before
the great monsters of the sea could not fear, now fearyng this Broma, being
also sore vexed with the contrary fall of the sea, directed his course with the
Ocean toward the west, and came first to the river Hiebra, distant only two
leagues from the river of Beragua, because that was commodious to harborowe
great shyps. This region is named after the river, and is called Beragua the
less, because both the rivers are in the dominion of the king which
inhabiteth the region of Beragua. But what chanced unto him in this voyage on
the right hand and on the left, let us now declare. While therefore Colonus the
Admiral remained yet in the river Hiebra, he sent Bartholomeus Colonus his
brother, and Liefetenaunt of Hispaniola, with the ship boats, and threescore
and eight men, to the river of Beragua, where the king of the region, being
naked, How the king of Beragua entertained the Lieuetenant.
and painted after the manner of the country, came toward them, with a great
multitude of men waytyng on him, but all unarmed and without weapons, geuyng
also signs of peace. When he approached nearer, and entered communication with
our men, certain of his gentlemen, nearest about his person, remembering the
majesty of a king, and that it stood not with his honor to bargayne
standing, took a great stone out of the river, washyng and rubbing it very
decently, and so put it under him, Their reverence to their king.
with humble reverence. The king thus sittyng, seemed with signs and tokens,
to insinuate that it should be lawful for our men to search and view all the
rivers within his dominion. Wherefore, the syxt day of the Ides of February,
leaving his boats with certain of his company, he went by land a foot, from
the banks of Beragua, until he came to the river of Duraba, which he
affirms to be rycher in gold then either Hiehra or Beragua: For gold is
engendered in all ryuers of that land, insomuch that among the roots of trees
growing by the banks of the ryuers, and among the stones left of the water,
and also wheresoever they dygged a hole or pyt in the ground, not past the
deapth of a handefull and a half, they found the earth, being taken out
thereof, myxte with gold: whereupon he determined to fasten his foot there,
and to inhabit. Which thing the people of the country perceiving, and
smellyng what inconvenience and mischief might thereof ensue to their
country, if they should parmit strangers to plant their inhabitations there,
assembled a great army, and with horrible outcryes assailed our men (who had
now begun to build houses) so desperately, that they were scarcely able for to
abide the first brunt. These naked Barbarians at their first approach, used
only slings and darts: Slings and darts.
but when they came nearer to hand strokes, they fought with their wooden
swoordes, which they call Machanas, as we have said before. A man would not
think what great malice and wrath was kyndled in their hearts against our men,
and with what desperate minds they fought for the defense of their liberty,
which they more esteem then life or riches: Liberty more esteemed then
riches.
For they were now so void of al fear, and contemning death, that they
neither feared long bows or cross bows, nor yet (which is most to be
marueyled) were any thing discouraged at the terrible noise of the gunnes,
shot of from the ships. They retired once: but shortly after encreasyng
their number, they returned more fiercely then at the first. They would have been contented to have received our men friendly as strangers, but not as
inhabitours. The more instant that our men were to remain, so much the greater
multitude of borderers flocked together daily, disturbyng them both night and
day, sometimes on the one side, and sometimes on the other. The ships lying
at anchor near unto the shore, warded them on the back half: The Spanyardes
are driven to flight.
but at the length they were feign to forsake this land, and return back the
same way by the which they came. Thus with much difficulty and danger they
came to the Island of Iamaica, lying on the south side of Hispaniola and Cuba,
with their ships as full of holes as syues, and holes so eaten with worms,
as though they had been bored through with wymbles. The water entered so fast at
the ryftes and holes, that if they had not with the paynful labor of their
hands emptied the same as fast, they were like to have peryshed: where as yet
by this means they arrived at Iamaica, although in manner half dead. But
their calamity ceased not here: For as fast as their ships leaked, their
strength diminished, so that they were no longer able to keep them from
sinkyng. A miserable case.
By reason whereof, falling into the hands of the Barbarians, and enclosed
without hope of departure, they led their lives for the space of ten months
among the naked people, more miserably then ever did Achemenides among the
Giauntes, called Ciclopes, rather living, then being either contented or
satisfied with the strange meats of that Island, and that only at such times
as pleased the Barbarians to give them part of theyrs. The deadly enmity and
malice which these barbarous kings bear one against an other, made greatly
with our men: For at such times as they attempted war against their
borderers, they would sometimes give our men part of their bread, to aid
them. But how miserable and wretched a thing it is to live only with bread
gotten by beggyng, your holiness may easly conjecture: especially where al
other accustomed food is lackyng, as wine, oil, flesh, butter, cheese, and
milk, wherewith the stomachs of our people of Europe have ever been norished,
even from their cradels. Necessity has no law.
Therefore as necessity is subject to no law: so does it enforce men to attempt
desperate adventures, and those ye sooner, which by a certain nobility of
nature, do no further esteem life then it is joined with some felicity. How
far life is to be esteemed
Bartholomeus Colonus therefore, intendyng rather to prove what God would do
with him and his companyons in these extremities, then any longer to abide the
same, commanded Diegus Mendez his steward, with two guides of that Island,
whom he had hired with promises of great rewards at their return, to enter
into one of their Canoas, and take their voyage to Hispaniola. Being thus
tossed on the sea to and fro from rock to rock, by reason of the shortness
and narownesse of the Canoa, they arrived at the length at the last corner of
Hispaniola, being distant from Iamaica forty leagues. Here his guydes
departing from him, returned again to Colonus, for the rewards which he had
promised them: but Diegus Mendez went on forward a foot, until he came to the
city called Sanctus Dominicus, Sanctus Dominicus.
being the chief and head city of the Island. The officers and rulers of
Hispaniola, being enfourmed of the matter, appointed him two ships, wherewith
he returned to his master and companions. As he found them, so came they to
Hispaniola, very feeble, and in manner naked. What chanced of them afterward,
I know not as yet. Let us now therefore leave these particulers, and speak
somewhat more of generals. In all those tracts, which we said here before to
have been found by Colonus the Admiral, both he him self writes, and all his
companions of that voyage confess, Lands found by Colonus.
that the trees, herbs, and fruits, are floryshyng and green all the whole
year, and the air so temperate and wholesome, that of al his company there
never fell one man sick, Themperat regions and wholesome air.
nor yet were vexed either with extreme cold or heat, for the space of fyftie
leagues, from the great haven of Cerabaro, to the ryuers of Hiebra and Beragua.
Thinhabitantes of Cerabaro, and the nations which are betwyxt that and the
said ryuers, apply not them selves to the geatheryng of gold, but only at
certain times of the year, and are very expert and cunnyng herein, as are our
myners of silver and Iron. Expert miners
They know by long experience in what places gold is most abundantly
engendered: as by the color of the water of the ryuers, and such as fall from
the mountains, and also by the color of the earth and stones. They believe a
certain godly nature to be in gold, A godly nature in gold.
forasmuch as they never geather it, except they use certain religious
expiations or purging, as to absteyne from women, and all kinds of pleasures,
and delicate meats and drinks, during all the time that their golden harvest
lasts. They suppose that men do naturally live and die as other beasts do,
Golden harvest
and therefore honor none other thing as God: Yet do they pray to the Son,
and honor it when it ryseth. But let us now speak of the mountains, and
situation of these lands. High and great mountains.
From all the sea banks of these regions, exceedyng great and high mountains
are seen toward the South, yet reaching by a continual tract from the East
into the west, by reason whereof, I suppose that the two great seas (whereof I
have spoken largely before) are divided with these mountains, as it were with
bulwarks, least they should join and repugne, as Italy divides the sea
called Tirrhenum, Tirrhenum is now called Tuscane.
from the sea Adriatike, which is now commonly called the gulf of Uenice.
For which way so ever they sailed from the point called Promontorium, S.
Augustini (which parteyneth to the Portugales, and prospecteth against the sea
Atlantike) even unto Vraba and the haven Cerabaro, and to the furthest lands
found hitherto westward, they had ever great mountains in sight, both near
hand, and also far of, in all that long raze. These mountains were in some
place smooth, pleasant, and fruitful, full of goodly trees and herbs, and
somwhere high, rough, full of rocks, and barren, as chances in the famous
mountain of Taurus in Asia, and also in diverse coasts of our mountains of
Apennini, and such other of like bygnesse. The rydgies also of these mountains
are divided with goodly and fair valleys. That part of the mountains which
includes the limittes of Beragua, The mou^tayns of Beragua higher then the
clouds.
is thought to be higher then the clouds, insomuch that (as they say) the tops
of them can seldom be seen for the multitude of thick clouds which are
beneath the same. Colanus the Admiral, the first fynder of these regions,
affirms that the tops of the mountains of Beragua, are more then fifty
miles in heyght. Mountains of fifty miles heyght.
He says furthermore, that in the same region at the roots of the mountains
the way is open to the south sea, and compares it as it were between Uenice
and Genua, or Ianua, as the Genues will have it called, which fable that their
city was builded of Ianus. Ianus otherwase called Iaphet the son of Noe.
He affirms also, that this land reaches forth toward the south, and that
from hence it takes the beginning of breadth: like as from the Alps, out of
the narowe thygh of Italy, we see the large and main lands of France,
Germany, and Pannonie, to the Sarmatians and Scithians, even unto the
mountains and rocks of Riphea, and the frosen sea, and embrase therewith, as
with a continual bond, al Thracia, and Grecia, with all that is included
within the promontorie or point of Malea, and Hellespontus southwarde, and the
sea Euzinus, and the marysshes of Meotis in Scithia northwarde. The Admiral
supposes, that on the left hand, in saylyng toward the west, this land is
joined to India, beyond the river of Ganges, and that on the right hand
toward the North, By this conjecture, the way should open to Cathai by the
Hiperboreans.
it is extended to the frosen sea, beyond the Hyperboreans and the North pole:
So that both the seas (that is to mean that south sea which we said to be
found by Vaschus, and our Ocean) should join and meet in the corners of
that land, and that the waters of these seas do not only enclose and compass
the same without division, as Europe is enclosed with the seas of Hellespontus,
and Tanais with the frosen Ocean, and our sea of Tyrrhenum with the Spanyshe
seas: But in my opinion, the vehement course of the Ocean toward the west, does
signify the let that the said two seas should not so join together, Look
the navigations of Cabote. Deca. iii. lib. vi.
but rather that that land is adherent to the firm lands toward the North,
as we have said before. It shall suffice to have said thus much of the
length hereof: Let us now therefore speak somewhat of the breadth of the same.
We have made mention before how the south sea is divided by narowe limittes
from our Ocean, as it was proved by thexperience of Vaschus Nunnez and his
companions, which first made open the way thither. But as dyuersly the
mountains of our Alps in Europe are somwhere narowe, and in some place broad:
even so, by the like providence of nature, this land in some part thereof
reaches far in breadth, and is in other places coarcted with narowe limittes
from sea to sea, with valleys also in some places, whereby men may pass from
the one side to the other. Where we have described the regions of Vraba and
Beragua to be situate, these seas are divided by small distaunce: Yet ought we
to think the region, which the great river of Maragnonus runs through, The
great river Maragnonus.
to be very large, if we shall grant Maragnonum to be a river, and no sea, as
the fresh waters of the same ought to persuade us. For in such narowe caves
of the earth, there can be no swalowyng gulfes of such bygnesse as to receive
or nooryshe so great abundance of water. The like is also to be supposed of the
great river of Dabaiba, The great river Dabaiba, or sancti Johannes.
which we said to be from the corner of the gulf of Vraba, in some place of
forty fathomes depth, and somwhere fifty: also three miles in breadth, and
so to fall into the sea. We must needs grant, that the earth is broad there,
by the which the river passes from the high mountains of Dabaiba from the
East, and not from the west. They say that this river consists and takes his
increase of four other ryuers, falling from the mountains of Dabaiba. The
rivers have their increase from the sprynges of the mountains. The river of
Nilus in Egypt.
Our men call this river Flumen. S. Iohannis. They say also that from hence it
falls into the gulf of Vraba by seven mouths, as does the river of Nilus
into the sea of Egypt: Likewise that in the same region of Vraba, there are in
some places narowe streyghtes, not passing fyfteene leagues, and the same to be
savage, and without any passage, by reason of diverse maryshes and desolate
ways, which the Latins call Lamas, Maryshes and desolate ways
but the Spanyardes according to their variety call them Tremedales,
Trampales, Cenegales, Sumideros, and Zabondaderos. But before we pass any
further, it shall not be greatly from our purpose to declare from whence these
mountains of Dabaiba have their name, A superstitious opinion of the original
of the mountains of Dabaiba.
according unto thantiquities of thinhabitantes. They said that Dabaiba was a
woman, of great magnanimity and wisdom among their predecessors in old
time, whom in her life all thinhabitantes of those provinces did greatly
reverence, and being dead, gave her divine honor, and named the region after
her name, beleeuyng that she sends thunder and lyghtnyng, to destroy the
fruits of the earth if she be angered, and to send plenty if she be well
pleased. This superstition has been persuaded them by a crafty kind of men,
under pretense of religion, to the intent that they might enjoy such gifts and
offeringes as were brought to the place where she was honored. This is
sufficient for this purpose. They say furthermore, that the maryshes of the
narowe land, whereof we have spoken, bring forth great plenty of Crocodiles,
Dragons, Battes, and Gnats, Dragons and Crocodiles in the maryshes.
being very hurtful. Therefore whenever they take any journey toward the
south, they go out of the way toward the mountains, and eschew the regions
near unto those perylous fennes or maryshes. Some think that there is a
valley lying that way that the river runs, which our men call Rio de los
perdidos, that is, the river of the lost men (so named by the misfortune which
there befell to Nicuesa and his company) and not far distant from the haven
Cerabaro, which divides those mountains toward the south. The haven Cerabaro.
But let us now finishe this book with a few other things worthy to be
noted. They say therefore, that on the right hand and left hand from Dariena
there are twentye ryuers, Twenty golden ryuers.
in all the which great plentye of gold is found. Being demanded what was the
cause why they brought no greater abundance of gold from thence: they
answered, that they lacked miners, and that the men which they took with
them from Spain thither, were not accustomed to labor, but for the most part
brought up in the wars. This land seems also to promise many precious
stones: Precious stones.
For beside those which I said to be found near unto Cariai and Sancta
Martha, one Andreas Moralis, a pilot (who had trauayled those coasts with
Johannes de la Cossa while he yet lived) had a precious Diamonde, A precious
Diamond of exceeding bigness.
which he bought of a naked young man in the region of Cumana, in the province
of Paria. This stone was as long as two joints of a man's myddle finger, and as
byg as the first joint of the thumb, being also painted on every side,
consisting of eight squares, perfectly fourmed by nature. They say that with
this they made scarres in anuylles and hammers, and brake the teeth of fyles,
the stone remaining vnperyshed. The young man of Cumana, wore this stone about
his neck among other ouches, and sold it to Andreas Moralis for five of our
counterfect stones, made of glass, of diverse colors, wherewith the ignorant
young man was greatly delyted: They found also certain Topases on ye shore.
Topasis.
But the estimation of gold was so far entered into the heads of our men,
that they had no regard to stones. Also the most part of the Spanyardes, do
laugh them to scorn which use to wear many stones, specially such as are
common, judging it to be an effeminate thing, and more meet for women then
men. The noble men only, when they celebrate solemn marriages, or set forth
any triumphs, wear cheynes of gold, beset with precious stones, and use fair
apparel of silk, embrodered with gold, intermixed with pearls and precious
stones, and not at other times. They think it no less effeminate for men to
smell of the sweet savors of Arabie, and judge him to be infected with some
kind of fylthy lechery, in whom they smell the savor of musk or Castoreum.
But like as by one apple taken from a tree, we may perceive the tree to be
fruiteful, and by one fyshe taken in a river, we may know that fyshe is
engendered in the same: even so, by a little gold, and by one stone, we ought to
consider that this land brings forth great plenty of gold, and precious
stones. What they have found in the port of Sancta Martha, in the region of
Cariai, when the whole navy passed thereby under the governance of Petrus
Arias and his company, with certain other of the kings officers, I have
sufficiently declared in his place. To be short therefore, al things do so
floryshe, grow, increase, and prosper, that the last are ever better then the
first. And surely to declare my opinion herein, whatsoever has heretofore ben
discovered by the famous trauayles of Saturnus and Hercules, with such other
whom the antiquity for their heroical factes honored as gods, seems but
little and obscure, if it be compared to the Spanyardes victorious labors. Thus
I bydde your holiness farewell, desyryng you to certify me how you like
these first fruits of the Ocean, that being encouraged with your exhortations,
I may the gladlyer, and with less tediousness, write such things as shall
chance hereafter.

The fyfth book of the third Decade.
AL such living creatures, as under the cyrcle of the moon bring forth any
thing, are accustomed by thinstincte of nature, as soon as they are delivered
of their birth, either to close up the matrice, or at the least to be quiet for
a space: But our most fruitful Ocean and new world, engenders and brings
forth daily new byrthes, whereby men of great wit, and especially such as are
studious of new and marvelous things, may have somewhat at hand wherewith to
feed their minds. If your holiness do ask to what purpose is all this: ye
shall understand, that I had scarsly finished the history of such things as
chanced to Vaschus Nunnez and his company in their voyage to the south sea,
when suddenly there came new letters from Petrus Arias the new governor, whom
the king had appointed the year before with an army of men and a navy of shyps
to sail to these new lands. He signified by his letters, that he with his
navy and company arrived al safely. Furthermore, Johannes Cabedus (whom your
holiness at the request of the most catholic king had created Bishop of that
province of Dariena) and three other of the chief officers joined in
commission to be his assystantes, as Alfonsus de Ponte, Diegus Marquis, and
Johannes de Tauira, confyrmed the same letters, and subscribed them with their
names. The navigations therefore of Petrus Arias, The navigations of Petrus Arias.
was in this manner. The day before the Ides of Apryl, in the year of
Christ.1514. he hoysed up his sails, in the town of saint Lucar de
Barrameda, situate in the mouth of the river Baetis, which the Spanyardes now
call Guadalchebir. The seven Islands of Canaria are about four hundred miles
distant from the place where this river falls into the sea. Some think that
these are the Islands which the old writers did call the fortunate Islands:
The Island of Canarie.
but other think the contrary. The name of these Islands are these. The two
that appear first in sight, are named Lanzelota and Fortisuentura. On the
backhalfe of these, lies Magna Canaria or Grancanaria. Beyond that is Teuerif
and Gomera somewhat toward the north from that Palma and Ferrea lie behind,
as it were a bulwark to all the other. Petrus Arias therefore, arrived at Gomera
the eight day after his departure, with a navy of seventeen ships, and a
thousand and five hundred men, although there were only a thousand and two
hundred assigned him by the kings letters. It is said furthermore, that he
left behind him more then two thousand, very pensive and sighing that they
also might not be received, proferyng them selves to go at their own charges.
He tarried xvi. days in Gomera, to the intent to make provision of fuel and
fresh water, Provision of fresh water and fuel.
but cheefely to repair his ships, being sore broosed with tempests, and
especially the governors ship, which had lost the rudder: For these Islands
are a commodious restyng place for all such as intend to attempt any
nauigations in that maine sea. Departing from hence in the Nones of May, he
saw no more land until the third day of June, at the which he arrived at
Dominica an Island of the Canibales, being distant from Gomera about eight
hundred leagues. Here he remained four days, making new provision of fresh
water and fuel, during which time, he saw no man, nor yet any steps of
men, but found plenty of sea Crabbes and great Lisarts. From hence he sailed
by the Islands of Matinina (otherwise called Madanino) Guadalupea and Galanta
(otherwise called Galana) of al which we have spoken in the first Decade. He
passed also through the sea of herbs or weeds, continuing a long tract: Yet
neither he, The sea of herbs.
nor Colonus the Admiral (who first found these Islands, and sailed through
this sea of weeds) have declared any reason how these weeds should come. Some
think the sea to be very muddye there, and that these weeds are engendered in
the bottom thereof, and so being loosed, to ascend to the uppermost part of
the water, as we see oftentimes chance in certain standing pooles, and
sometimes also in great ryuers. Other suppose that they are not engendered
there, but to be beaten from certain rocks by the violence of the water in
tempests: And thus they leave the matter in doubt. Neither have they yet any
certain experience whether they stycke fast and give place to the ships, or
wander loose upon the water: But it is to be thought, that they are engendered
there, for otherwise they should be driven together on heaps, by the
impulsion of the ships, even as a beasome geathereth the sweepynges of a
house, and should also let the course of the ships. The fourth day after
that he departed from Dominica, These mountains are called Montes Niuales, or
Serra Neuata, Decade.ii. lib. 1. and.ii.
the high mountains covered with snow (whereof we have spoken in the second
Decade) appeared unto him. They say that there the seas run as swyftly
toward the west, as it were a river falling from the tops of high
mountains, although they failed not directly toward the west, but inclined
somewhat to the south. From these mountains falls the river of Gaira, famous
by the slaughter of our men, at such time as Rodericus Colmenares passed by
those coasts, as we have said before: Likewise many other fair ryuers have
their original from the same mountains. This province (in the which is also
the region of Caramairi) has in it two notable havens, of ye which our men
named the one Carthago or Carthagena, and the other Sancta Martha, the region
whereof thinhabitants call Saturma. The port of Sancta Martha, Mountains
covered with snow.
is nerer to the mountains covered with snow, called Montes Niuales, for it is
at the roots of the same mountains, but ye haven of Carthago is more
westward, about fyftie leagues. He writes marvelous things of the haven of
Sancta Martha, which they also confirm that came lately from thence: Of the
which young Vesputius is one, to whom Americus Vesputius his uncle (being a
florentine borne) left the exact knowledge of the mariners faculty, as it were
by inheritance after his death, for he was a very expert master in the
knowledge of his card, his compass, and the elevation of the pole star,
with all that parteyneth thereto. This young Vesputius was assigned by the king
to be one of the masters of the governors ship, because he was cunnyng in
judging the degrees of the elevation of the pole star by the quadrant: For
the charge of governing the rudder, was chiefly committed to one Johannes
Serranus a Spaniard, who had oftentimes ouerrunne those coasts. Vesputius is
my very familier friend, and a witty young man, in whose company I take great
pleasure, and therefore use him oftentimes for my ghest. He has also made many
voyages into these coasts, and diligently noted such things as he has
seen. Petrus Arias therefore writes, and he confirms the same, that
thinhabitantes of these regions took their original of the Caribbes or
Canibales, as appeared by the desperate fyersnesse and cruelty which they
oftentimes showed to our men when they passed by their coasts. The stoutnes of
the Barbarians.
Such stoutnesse and fortitude of mind is naturally engendered in these naked
Barbarians, that they feared not to assail our whole navy, and to forbid them
to come a land. They fight with venomous arowes, as we have said before.
Parceyuyng that our men contemned their threatenings, they ran furyously into
the sea, The Canibales fight in the water.
even up to the breasts, nothing fearyng either the bygnesse or multitude of
our ships, but ceased not contynuallie, being thus in the water, to cast
darts, and to shoot their venomous arrows as thycke as hayle: Insomuch that
our men had been in great danger, if they had not bin defended by the cages or
pauisses of the ships, and their targettes: Yet were two of them wounded,
which died shortly after. But this conflict continued so sharp, that at the
length our men were enforced to shoot of their greatest pieces of ordinance
with hayleshoote: The use of gunnes.
at the slaughter and terrible noise whereof, the Barbarians being sore
discomfited and shaken with fear, thynkyng the same to be thunder and
lyghtnyng, turned their backs, and fled amayne. They greatly fear thunder,
The generation of thunder and lyghtning.
because these regions are oftentimes vexed with thunder and lyghtnynges, by
reason of the high mountains, and nearenesse of the same to the region of the
air, wherein such fiery tempests are engendered, which the philosophers call
Meteora. And albeit that our men had now driven their enemies to flight, and
saw them disparcled and out of order, yet doubted they, and were of diverse
opinions, whether they should pursue them, or not. On the one party shame
prycked them forward, and on the other side, fear caused them to cast many
perils, especially consyderyng the venomous arrows which these Barbarians
can direct so certaynely. To depart from them with a dry foot (as says the
proverb) with so great a navy, and such an army, they reputed it as a thing
greatly soundyng to their reproach and dishonor. At the length therefore,
shame ouercommyng fear, they pursued them, and came to land with their ship
boats. The governor of the navy, and also Vesputius do write, that the haven
is no less then three leagues in compass, being also safe without rocks, and
the water thereof so clear, that a man may see pybble stones in the bottom
twenty cubits deep. They say likewise, that there falls two fair ryuers of
fresh water into the haven: but the same to be meeter to bear the Canoas of
these provinces, then any bygger vessels. It is a delectable thing to hear
what they tell of the plenty and variety, and also of the pleasant taste of
the fyshes, as well of these ryuers, as of the sea therabout: By reason whereof
they found here many fysher boats and nets woonderfully wrought of the
stalks of certain herbs or weeds, dried and tawed, Plenty of fysh.
and wreathed with cords of spunne gossampyne cotton. For the people of
Caramairi, Gaira, and Saturma, are very cunnyng in fisheyng, and use to sell
fyshe to their borderers, Cunning fyshers.
for exchange of such things as they lack. When our men had thus chased the
Barbarians from the sea coasts, and had now entered into their houses, they
assailed them with new skyrmishes, espetially when they saw them fall to
sacking and spoylyng, and their wives and children taken captyue. Their
householde stuff was made of great reeds, which grow on the sea banks, and
the stalks of certain herbs beaten, and afterward made hard. The floores
thereof were strewed with herbs of sundry colors, Tapistrie.
and the walls hanged with a kind of tapstry, artificially made of gossampine
cotton, and wrought with pictures of Lions, Tigers, and Eagles. The doors of
their houses and chambers were full of diverse kinds of shelles, hangyng loose
by small cords, that being shaken by the wind, they might make a certain
rattelyng, and also a whystelyng noise, by geatheryng the wind in their holowe
places: for herein they have great delyght, and impute this for a goodly
ornament. Diverse have showed me many wonderful things of these regions, This
is he whom Cardanus praises.
especially one Conzalus Fernandus Ouiedus, being one of the magistrates
appointed in that office, which the Spanyardes call Veedor, who has also
hitherto entered further into the land then any other. He affirms, that he
chanced upon the fragment of a Sapphire, bygger then the egg of a goose, and
that in certain hills where he trauayled with thirty men, Precious stones.

The Smaradge is the true H^merode. Another kind of Amber is found in Whales.


he found many of the precious stones called Smaragdes, Calcidones, and
Iaspers, beside great pieces of Amber of the mountains. He also, with diverse
other, do affirm that in the houses of some of the Canibales of these regions,
they found the like precious stones, set in gold, and enclosed in tapstry or
arras (if it may so be called) wherewith they hang their houses. The same land
brings forth also many wooddes of brasile trees, Gold and Brasile.

Marchasites are flowers of metals, by the colors whereof, the kinds of
metals are known.


and great plenty of gold, in so much that in manner in all places they found
on the sea banks, and on the shores, certain marchasites in token of gold.
Fernandus Ouiedus declares furthermore, that in a certain region called Zenu,
lying fourscore and ten miles from Dariena Eastwarde, they exercise a
strange kind of marchaundize: For in the houses of the inhabitants, they
found great chestes and baskets, made of the twigges and leaves of certain
trees apt for that purpose, being all full of Grassehoppers, Grylles, Crabbes,
or Crefyshes, Snayles also, and Locustes, which destroy the fields of corn,
These Locustes burn the corn with touching, and devour the residue. They are
in India of three foot length.
al well dried and salted. Being demanded why they reserved such a multitude
of these beasts: they answered, that they kept them to be sold to their
borderers, which dwell further within the land, and that for the exchange of
these precious birds, and salted fyshes, they received of them certain
strange things, wherein partly they take pleasure, and partly use them for
their necessary affairs. These people dwell not together, but scattered here
and there. Thinhabitantes of Caramairi, seem to dwell in an earthly Paradise,
their region is so fair and fruitful, without outrageous heat, or sharp
cold, with little difference of the length of day and night throughout all the
year. After that our men had thus driven the Barbarians to flight, they entered
into a valley, of two leagues in breadth, and three in length, extendyng to
certain fruitful mountains, full of grass, herbs, and trees, at the
roots whereof, lie two other valleis toward the right hand and the leaft,
through either of the which runs a fair river, whereof the river of Caira
is one, but unto the other they have yet given no name. In these valleys they
found many fair gardens, and pleasant feeldes, watered with trenches,
distributed in marvelous order, Gardens.
with no less art then our Insubrians and Hetrurians use to water their
feeldes. Insubres are now called Lumbardes, and Hetruci, Tuscans.
Their common meat, is Ages, Iucca, Maizium, Battata, with such other roots
and fruits of trees, and also such fyshe as they use in the Islands and other
regions of these provinces. They eat man's flesh but seldom, because they
meet not oftentimes with strangers, except they go forth of their one
dominions with a main army, of purpose to hunt for men, when their rauenyng
appetite pricketh them forward: For they abstain from them selves, and eat
none but such as they take in the wars, or otherwise by chance. But suerly
it is a miserable thing to hear how many myriades of men these fylthy and
unnatural deuourers of men's flesh have consumed, One myriade, is ten
thousand.
and left thousands of most fair and fruitful Islands and regions desolate
without men: by reason whereof, our men found so many Islands, which for
their fayrenes and fruitefulnesse might seem to be certain earthly Paradyses,
and yet were utterly void of men. Hereby your holiness may consider how
pernicious a kind of men this is. We have said before, that the Island named
Sancti Iohannis (which thinhabitants call Burichena) is next to Hispaniola. It
is said, that only the Canibales which dwell in the other Islands near about
this, as in the Island called Hayhay or Sansta Crucis, and in Guadalupea
(otherwise called Queraqueiera, or Carucuiera) have in our time violently taken
out of the said Island of Sancti Iohannis, more then five thousand men to be
eaten. But let it suffice thus much to have wandered by these monstrous
bloodsuckers. We will now therefore speak somewhat of the roots whereof they
make their bread, forasmuch as the same shall hereafter be food to Christian
men, in stead of bread made of wheat, and in the stead of radyshe, with such
other roots as they have been accustomed to eat in Europe. We have oftentimes
said before, that Iucca is a root, whereof the best and most delicate bread is
made, both in the firm land of these regions, and also in the Islands: but
how it is tylled or husbanded, how it grows, and of how diverse kinds it
is, I have not yet declared. Therefore, The manner of plantyng the root Iucca.
when they entende to plant this Iucca, they make a hole in the earth, knee
deep, and raise a heap of the earth taken out of the same, fashionyng it like
a square bed, of niene foot breadth on every side, setting twelve trunkes of
these roots (being about a foot and a half long a piece) in every of the said
beds, contaynyng three roots of a side, so laid a slope, that the ends of
them join in manner together in the center or midst of the bed within the
ground. Out of the joints of the roots, and spaces between the same, spryng
the tops and blades of new roots, which by little and little encreasyng,
grow to the bygnes and length of a man's arm in the brawne, and oftentimes as
bygge as the thygh: so that by the time of their full rypenes, Earth turned
into roots.
in manner all the earth of the heap is converted into roots. But they say
that these roots are not ripe in less then a year and a half, and that the
longer they are suffered to grow, even until two years complete, they are so
much the better, and more perfect to make bread thereof. When they are taken
forth of the earth, How bread is made of roots
they scrape them, and slyse them, with certain sharp stones, seruyng for the
same purpose: And thus laying them between two great stones, or puttyng them in
a sack made of the stalks of certain tough herbs and small reeds, they
press them (as do we cheese or crabbes, to draw out the juice thereof) and so
let them dry a day before they eat them. The juice or liquour they cast
away: for (as we have said) it is deadly poison in the Islands. Yet is the
juice of such as grow in the firm land wholesome, if it be sodde, as is the
whey of our milk. They say that there are many kinds of this Iucca, whereof
some are more pleasant and delicate then the other, and are therefore reserved
as it were to make five Manchet for the kings own table: But the Gentlemen
eat of the meaner sort, and the common people of the basest. The finest they
call Cazabbi, which they make round like cakes, in certain presses, before
they seethe it, or bake it. They say furthermore, that there are likewise
diverse kinds of the roots of Ages, and Battata. But they use these rather as
fruits, and dyshes of service, then to make bread thereof, as we use Rapes,
Radishes, Mushromes, Nauies, Persnippes, and such like. In this case, they
most especially esteem the best kind of Battatas, which in pleasant taste
and tenderness, far exceeds our Mushromes. It shall suffice to have said
thus much of roots: We will now therefore speak of another kind of their
bread. We declared before, that they have a kind of grain or Pulse, much
like unto Panicum, but with somewhat bygger graynes, Panicum is a grain
somewhat like mil: The Italians call it Melica.
which they beat into meal, upon certain great hollow stones, with the
labor of their hands, when they lack Iucca, and of this is made the more
vulgar or common bread. It is sown thryse a year, so that the fruitefulnesse
of the ground may bear it, by reason of the equality of the time, whereof we
have spoken sufficiently before. In these regions they found also the grain
of Maizium, and sundry kinds of fruits of trees, He means the equal length
of day and night which is continualy in regions under the Equinoctial line.
diligently planted, and well husbanded. The way between the regions of
Caramairi and Saturma, is fair, brood, and right forth. They found here
also sundry kinds of water pottes made of earth, of diverse colors, in the
which they both fetch and keep fresh water: Likewise sundry kinds of
iugges, godderdes, drynkyng cups, pottes, pannes, dyshes, and platters,
artificially made. When the governor had given commandment by proclamation,
that the inhabitauntes should either obey the Christian king, and embrace our
religion, or else to depart out of their country: they answered with venomous
arrows. In this skyrmyshe, our men took some of them: whereof, clothyng the
most part in fair apparel, they sent them again to their own company: But
leading the residue to the ships, to the intent to show them the power and
magnificence of the christians, that they might declare the same to their
companions, thereby to win their favor, they appareled them likewise, and
sent them after their fellows. They affirm, that in all the ryuers of these
coast, they saw great arguments and tokens of gold. They found here and
there in their houses good store of Hearts flesh, and Bores flesh, wherewith
they fed them selves delicately. They also have great plenty of sundry
kinds of birds, and fowls, whereof they bring up many in their houses, some
for necessary food, and other for dayntie dyshes, as we do Hens and
Partriches. Our men hereby conjecture, that the air of these regions is very
wholesome, Wholesome air.
forasmuch as slepyng all night under the fyrmament on the banks of the
ryuers, none of them were at any time offended with reumes or headache, by
reason of any noisome humor, or vapor proceedyng from the earth, air, or
water. Gossampine Cotton. Feathers.
Our men furthermore found there many great botomes of gossampyne cotton ready
spunne, and fardelies of diverse kinds of feathers, whereof they make them
selves crestes and plumes, after the manner of our men of arms: also certain
clokes, which they esteem as most comely ornaments. They found likewise an
innumerable multitude of bows and arrows. Bows and arrows.
Thinhabitants also of these regions, in some places use to burn the carkases
of their princes when they are dead, and to reserve their bones buried with
spyces in certain hills. In other places, Dead bodies reserved.
they only dry them, and imbawme them with spyces and sweet gummes, and so
reserve them in sepulchers in their own houses. Somewhere also, they dry them,
spyce them, adourne them with precious iewelles, and ouches, and so reverently
place them in certain tabernacles, made for the same purpose in their own
palaces. When our men had many of their tablets, braselettes, collers, and
such other ouches (which they call Guanines) they found them rather to be
made of laton then of gold: Gonzalus Oui^dus says, that they gylt
marvelously with the iuce of a certain herb.
whereby they suppose that they have used to exchange their ware with some
crafty strangers, which brought them those counterfeyt ouches, to defraude
them of their gold: For even our men perceived not the deceyte until they
came to the meltyng. Furthermore, certain of our buyl^ers wanderyng a little
way from the sea coasts, chanced to ^ynde certain pieces of white marble:
whereby they think, White marble.
that in time past some strangers have come to those lands, which have
dygged marble out of the mountains, and left those fragmentes on the plain.
There our men learned that the river Maragnonus descends from the mountains
covered with snow, called Montes Niuales, The great river Maragnonus. This
joins with the mighty river called Flumen Amazonum, found of late.
or Serra Neuata, and the same to be increased by many other ryuers, which
fall into it throughout all the low and waterly regions, by the which it
runs with so long a tract from the said mountains into the sea, and this to
be the cause of the greatness thereof. These things being thus brought to
pass, the governor commanded the trumpeter to blow a retraite: Wheruppon
they which were sent to land (being five hundred in number) making a great
shout for joy of their victory, set them selves in order of battle, and so
keepyng their array, returned to the ships laden with spoil of those
provinces, and shynyng in soldiers clokes of feathers, Clokes of feathers.
with fair plumes and crestes of variable colors. In this mean time, having
repaired their ships, and furnyshed the same with all necessaries, they
loosed anchor the.xvi day of the Calendes of July, directyng their course to the
haven of Carthagena, in the which voyage they destroyed and wasted certain
Islands of the Canibales, lying in the way, according as they were commanded
by the king. But the swift course of the water deceived both Johannes Sarranus
the chief Pilot of the governors ship, and all the other, The swift course
of the water.
although they made their bost that they perfectly knew the nature thereof: For
they affirm, that in one night they were carried forty leagues beyond their
estimation. Forty leagues in one night.


The syxte book of the third Decade.
Here must we somewhat digress from Cosmography, Sundry opinions why the sea
runs with so swyft course from the East into the West.
and make a philosophical discourse to search the secret causes of nature.
For whereas they all affirm with one consent, that ye sea runs there from
the east to the west, as swiftely as it were a river falling from high
mountains, I thought it not good to let such matter slyppe untouched. The
which while I consider, I am drawn into no small ambiguitie and doubt, whyther
those waters have their course, which flow with so continual a tract in
circuit from the East, as though they fled to the west, never to return,
and yet neither the west thereby any whit the more filled, nor the East
emptied. If we shall say that they fall to their center (as is the nature of
heavy things) and assign the Equinoctial line to be the center (as some
affirm) what center shall we appoint to be able to receive so great abundance
of water? The Equinoctial line.

Why al waters move toward the south or Equinoctial, read Cardanus ae subtilit
liber ii. de elementis. Strayghtes.


Or what circumference shall be found wet? They which have searched those
coasts, have yet found no like reason to be true. Many think that there
should be certain large straightes or entrances in the corner of that great
land, which we described to be eight times bygger then Italye, and the corner
thereof to be full of gulfes, whereby they suppose that some strayghtes should
pass through the same, lying on the west side of the Island of Cuba, and that
the said strayghtes should swalowe up those waters, and so convey the same
into the west, and from thence again into our East Ocean, or north seas, as
some think. As by the straight of Magelanus The north lands.
Other will, that the gulf of that great land be closed up, and the land to
reach far toward the north on the back side of Cuba, so that it embrace
the north lands, which the frosen sea encompasseth under the north pole, and
that all the land of those coasts, should join together as one firm
land: Whereby they conjecture, that those waters should be turned about by
the obiecte or resistaunce of that land, so bendyng toward the north, as we
see the waters turned about in the crooked banks of certain ryuers. But this
agrees not in all points. For they also which have searched the frosen sea,
The frosen sea.
and sailed from thence into the west, do likewise affirm, that those north
seas flow continually toward the west, although nothing so swiftely. These
north seas have been searched by one Sebastian Cabot, Sebastian Cabot.
a Uenetian borne, whom being yet but in manner an infant, his parents carried
with them into England, having occasion to resort thither for trade of
merchandise, as is the manner of the Uenetians, to leave no part of the world
unsearched to obtain richesse. He therefore furnished two ships in England at
his own charges: And first with three hundredth men, The voyage of Sebastian
Cabot from England to the frosen sea.
directed his course so far toward the north pole, that even in the month
of July he found monstrous heaps of Ise swymming on the sea, and in manner
continual day light: Yet saw he the land in that tract free from Ise, which
had been moulten by heat of the Son. Thus seeing such heaps of Ise before
him, he was enforced to turn his sails, and follow the west, so coastyng
still by the shore, that he was thereby brought so far into the south, by
reason of the land bendyng so much southwarde, that it was there almost
equal in latitude with the sea called Fretum Herculeum, having the north pole
eleuate in manner in the same degree. He sailed likewise in this tract so far
toward the west, that he had the Island of Cuba on his left hand, in manner in
the same degree of longitude. As he traueyled by the coasts of this great
land (which he named Baccallaos) he says, that he found the like course of
the waters toward the west, but the same to run more softly and gentelly,
then the swifte waters which the Spanyardes found in their nauigations
southwarde. Wherefore, it is not only more like to be true, but ought also of
necessity to be concluded, that between both the lands hitherto unknown,
there should be certain great open places, whereby the waters should thus
continually pass from the East into the west: which waters I suppose to be
driven about the globe of the earth by the vncessaunt mouyng and impulsion of
the heavens, and not to beswalowed up and cast out again by the breathyng of
Demogorgon, Demogorgon is the spirit of the earth.
as some have imagined, because they see the seas by increase and decrease, to
flow and reflow. Sebastian Cabot him self, named those lands Baccallaos,
because that in the seas therabout he found so great multitudes of certain
bygge fyshes, much like unto Tunnies (which thinhabitants call Baccallaos) that
they somtymes stayed his ships. He found also the people of those regions
covered with beasts skynnes: People covered with beasts skynnes.
yet not without the use of reason. He also says there is great plenty of
Bears in those regions, which use to eat fyshe: For plungeyng them selves
into the water where they perceive a multitude of these fyshes to lie, they
fasten their claws in their scales, and so draw them to land, and eat them:
So that (as he says) the Bears being thus satisfied with fyshe, are not
noisome to men. He declares further, that in many places of these regions, he
saw great plenty of laton among the inhabitauntes. Cabot is my very friend,
whom I use fam^lierlye, and delight to have him sometimes keep me company in my
own house: For being called out of England by the commandment of the
catholic king of Castile, after the death of Henry king of England, the
seventh of that name, he was made one of our counsel and assistaunce as
touching the affairs of the new Indies, lookyng daily for ships to be
furnished for him to discover this hyd secret of nature. This voyage is
appointed to be begun in March in the year next following, being the year
of Christ.1516. What shall succeed, your holiness shall be aduertysed by my
letters, if God grant me life. Some of the Spaniardes deny that Cabot was the
first fynder of the land of Bacallaos, and affirm that he went not so far
westewarde: But it shall suffice to have said thus much of the gulfes and
strayghtes, and of Sebastian Cabot. Let us now therefore return to the
Spaniardes. At this time, they let pass the haven of Carthago untouched, The
Islands of the Canybales.
with all the Islands of the Canibales there about, which they named Insulas
Sancti Bernardi, leauyng also behind their backs, all the region of Caramairi.
Here by reason of a sudden tempest, they were cast upon the Island Fortis,
The Island Fortis.
being about fyftie leagues distant from the enteraunce of the gulf of Vraba.
In this Island, they found in the houses of thinhabitantes, many baskettes made
of certain great sea reeds, Salt.
full of salt. For this Island has in it many goodly salt bays, by reason
whereof they have great plenty of salt, which they sell to other nations for
such things as they stand in need of. Not far from hence, a great Curlew,
as bygge as a Storke, A strange thing
came flying to the governors ship, and suffered her self to be easily taken,
which being carried about among all the ships of the navy, dyed shortly
after: They saw also a great multitude of the same kind of fowls on the
shore a far of. The governors ship, which we said to have lost the
rudder, being now sore broosed, and in manner unprofitable, they left behind,
to follow at leisure. The navy arrived at Dariena the twelfth day of the
Calendes of July, and the governors ship (being void of men) was driven
alande in the same coasts within four days after. The Spanyardes which now
inhabited Dariena, with their Captain and Lieuetenaunt Vaschus Nunnez Balboa
(of whom we have largelye made mention before) being certifyed of the arrival
of Petrus Arias and his company, went forth three miles to meet him, How
Vaschus received the new governor.
and received him honorably, and religiously with the psalm Te deum laudamus,
geuyng thanks to god by whose safe conduct they were brought so prosperously
thither to al their comfortes. They received them gladly into their houses
builded after the manner of those provinces. I may well call these regions,
Provinces, a Procul Victis (that is) such as are overcome far of, forasmuch
as our men do now inhabit the same, all the barbarous kings and Idolatours
being eiected. They entertained them with such cheer as they were able to make
them: as with the fruits of those regions, and new bread, both made of roots,
and the grain Maizium. Other delicates to make up the feast, were of their own
store, which they brought with them in their ships, as poudred flesh, salted
fyshe, and bread made of wheat: for they brought with them many barrelles of
wheat meal for the same purpose. Here may your holiness, not without just
cause of admiration, behold a kings nauye and great multitude of Christians,
inhabiting not only the regions situate under the cyrcle of heaven, called
Tropicus Cancri, but also in manner under the Equinoctial line, contrary to the
opinion of the old writers, a few excepted. Habitable regions under the
Equinoctial line.
But after that they are now met together, let us further declare what they
determined to do. Therefore, the day after that ye navy arrived, there
assembled a company of Spaniards thinhabitours of Dariena, to the number of
four hundred and fifty men. Petrus Arias the governor of the navy, and his
company, conferred with them both privily and openly of certain articles,
whereof it was the kings pleasure he should enquire: and most especially as
concerning such things whereof Vaschus the first fynder and Admiral of the
South sea, made mention in his large letter sent from Dariena to Spain. In
this inquisition they found althyngs to be true whereof Vaschus had certified
the king by his letters, and thereupon concluded, that in the dominions of
Comogra, Pocchorrosa and Tumanama at the assignement of Vaschus, certain
fortresses should be erected forthwith, to the intent there to plant their
colonie or habitation. Where the new governor planteth his habitation.
To the better accomplyshment hereof, they sent immediately one Johannes Aiora,
a noble young gentleman of Corduba, and under Lieuetenant, with four hundred
men, and four Carauels, and one other little ship. Thus departing, he sailed
first directly to the haven of Comogrus, distant from Dariena about twenty and
five leagues, as they write in their last letters. From hence, he is appointed
to send a hundred and fyftie of his four hundred, toward the South, by a new
and ryghter way found of late, by the which (as they say) it is not past
twenty and six leagues from the palace of king Comogrus to the entrance of
the gulf of Sancti Michaelis. The residue of the four hundred shall remain
there, to be an aid and succor to al such as shall journey to and fro. Those
hundred and fyftie which are assigned to go southward, take with them for
interpretours certain of our men, which had learned the soothern language of
the bondmen which were given to Vaschus when he ouerranne those regions, and
also certain of the bondemen them selves which had now learned the Spanyshe
tongue. They say that the haven of Pocchorrosa is only seven leagues distant
from the haven of Comogrus. In Pocchorrosa he is assigned to leave fyftie men,
A passinger ship.
with the lightest ship, which may be a passinger between them: that like as we
use post horses by land, so may they by this current ship, in short space
certify the Lieuetenaunt and thinhabitours of Dariena of such things as shall
chance. They entend also to build houses in the region of Tumanama. The
palace of king Tumanama, is distant from Pocchorrosa about twenty leagues. Of
these four hundred men, being of the old soldiers of Dariena, and men of
good experience, fyftie were appointed to be as it were Decurians, Decurians
are officers divided into tennes etc.
to guide and conduct the new men from place to place to do their affairs.
When they had thus set all things in order, they thought it good to aduertyse
the king hereof, and therewith to certyfye him, that in those provinces there is
a king named Dabaiba, whose dominion is very rich in gold: but the same to be
yet untouched by reason of his great power. The gold mines of Dabaiba.
His kingdom joins to the second great river, named Dabaiba after his name,
which falls into the sea out of the corner of the gulf of Vraba, as we have
largely declared before. The common report is, that all the land of his
dominions is rich in gold. The palace of king Dabaiba is fyftie leagues
distant from Dariena. The inhabitants say, that from the palace, the gold
mines reach to the borders on every side. Albeit our men have also gold mines
not to be contemned, even within three leagues of Dariena, in the which they
geather gold in many places at this present: Yet do they affirm greater
plentye to be in the mines of Dabaiba. In the books of our first fruits,
written to your holiness, we made mention of this Dabaiba, wherein our men
were deceived, An error.
and mystooke the matter: For where they found the fyshermen of king Dabaiba
in the marshes, they thought his region had been there also. They determined
therefore to send to king Dabaiba, three hundred choice young men, to be chosen
out of the whole army, as most apt to the wars, and well furnyshed with all
kinds of armor and artyllerie, to the intent to go unto him, and will him,
either friendly and peaceably to permit them to inhabit part of his kingdom,
with the fruition of the gold mines, or else to bid him battle, and drive him
out of his country. In their letters, they oftentimes repeat this for an
argument of great riches to come, that they in a manner dygged the ground in no
place, but found the earth myxt with sparks and small graynes of gold. They
have also advertised the king, that it shall be commodious to place inhabitours
in the haven of Sancta Martha, in the region of Saturma, The region of Saturma.
The Island of Dominica.
that it may be a place of refuge for them that sail from the Island of
Dominica, from the which (as they say) it is but four or five days saylyng
to that haven of the region of Saturma, and from the haven, but three days
saylyng to Dariena. But this is to be understood in going, and not in
returnyng. For the returnyng from thence is so laborious and difficulte,
Difficult saylyng against the course of the sea.
by reason of the contrary course of the water, that they seem as it were to
ascend high mountains, and strive against the power of Neptunus. This swyft
course of the sea toward the west, is not so violent to them which return to
Spain from the Islands of Hispaniola and Cuba, although they also do labor
against the fall of the Ocean: The cause whereof is, that the sea is here very
large, so that the waters have their full scope. But in the tract of Paria, the
waters are constrained together by the bendyng sides of that great land, and
by the multitude of Islands lying against it, as the like is seen in the
strayghtes or narrow seas of Scicile, where the violent course of the waters
cause the dangerous places of Scilla and Caribdis by reason of those narrow
seas which conteyne Ionium, The dangerous straightes of Scylla and Charibdis.
Libicum, and Tirrhenum. Colonus the first fynder of these regions, has left
in writing, that saylyng from the Island of Guanassa, and the provinces of
Iaia, Maia, and Cerabaro, being regions of the west marches of Beragua, he
found the course of the water so vehement and furious against the foreparte of
his ship, while he sailed from those coasts toward the East, that he could
at no time touch the ground with his soundyng plummet, but that the contrary
violence of the water would bear it up from the bottom: He affyrmeth also,
that he could never in one whole day, with a meetely good wind, win one
mile of the course of the water. The vehement course of the sea from the east
to the west.
And this is the cause why they are oftentimes enforced to sail first by the
Islands of Cuba and Hispaniola, and so into the main sea toward the North,
when they return to Spain, that the North wyndes may further their voyage,
which they can not bring to pass by a direct course: But of the motions of
the Ocean sea to and fro, this shall suffice. Let us now therefore rehearse
what they write of Dariena, and of their habitation there, which they call
Sancta Maria Antiqua, planted on the sea banks of Dariena. The situation of
the place, has no natural munition or defense, and the air is more
pestiferous then in Sardus. The Spanishe inhabitours are al pale and yelowe,
like unto them which have the yelowe iaundies: which nevertheless comes not
of the nature of the region, as it is situate under the heaven. For in many
regions being under the self same degree of latitude, having the pole of the
same elevation, they find wholesome and temperate air, in such places where as
the earth brings forth fair sprynges of water, or where wholesome rivers
run by banks of pure earth without mudde: but most especially where they
inhabit the sides of the hyls, and not the valleys. But that habitation which
is on the banks of the river of Dariena, is situate in a deep valley, and
environed on every side with high hills: By reason whereof, it receives the
Son beams at noonetyde dyrectly parpendicular over their heads, and are
therefore sore vexed by reflection of the beams, both before, behind, and
from the sides. For it is the reflection of the son beams which causes
fervent heat, By what means the Son beams are cause of fervent heat.
and not their access or neerenesse to the earth, forasmuch as they are not
passyble in themselves, as does manifestly appear by the snow lying
contynually vnmoulten upon certain high mountains, as your holiness knows
right well. The son beams therefore falling on the mountains, are reflected
downwarde into the valley, by reason of the object of the declining sides of
the hills, as it were the fall of a great round stone, rolled from the top
of a mountain. The valley therefore receives both those beams which fall
directly thereon, and also those which are reflected downewarde from every
side of the mountains. Their habitation therefore in Driena, The pernicious
air of Dariena.
is pernicious and unwholesome, only of the particular nature of the place, and
not by the situation of the region as it is plased under the heaven, or near
to the son. The place is also contagious by the nature of the soil, by
reason it is compassed about with muddy and stynkyng marshes, the infection
whereof is not a little increased by the heat. The vyllage is self is in a
marishe, and in manner a standing puddle, where, of the drops falling from the
hands of the bondemen, while they water the pauementes of their houses, Toades
are engendered immediately, Toades and Flees engendered of drops of water.
as I my self saw in an other place the drops of that water turn into flees
in the summer season. Furthermore, wheresoever they dygge the ground the
deapth of a handful and a half, there spryngeth out unwholesome and corrupt
water, of the nature of the river, which runs through the deep and muddye
channel of the valley, and so falls into the sea: Now therefore they consult
of remouyng their inhabitations. Necessity caused them first to fasten their
foot here, Necessity has no law.
because that they which first arrived in those lands, were oppressed with
such urgent hunger, that they had no respect to change the place, although
they were thus vexed by the contagion of the soil and heat of the Son,
beside the corrupt water, and infectious air, by reason of venomous vapors,
and exhalations rysyng from the same. An other great incommoditie was, that the
place was destitute of a commodious haven, being three leagues distant from the
mouth of the gulf: The way is also rough and difficult to bring vyttayles and
other necessaries from the sea. But let us now speak somewhat of other
particular things which chanced. Therefore shortly after that they were
arrived, there happened many things whereof they had no knowledge before. A
certain well learned physician of Civil, whom partly the authority of the
Bishop of Dariena, and partly the desire of gold, had allured to those lands,
was so scarred with lyghtnyng in the night season, lying in bed with his
wife, that the house and all the stuff therein being set on fire and burnt, A
house set on fire with lightnyng.
he and his wife being both sore scorched, ran forth crying, and almost
naked, hardely escapyng the danger of death. And an other time, as certain of
them stood one the shore, a great Crocodile suddenly carried away a masty of a
year and a half old, A dog devoured of a Crocodile.
as a kyte should have snatched up a chicken: and this even in the presence of
them all, Tanquam canis de Nilo.
where the miserable dog cried in vain for the help of his master. In the
night season they were tormented with the bytyng of Battes, which are there so
noisome, The bytyng of Battes.
that if they byte any man in his sleep, they put him in danger of life,
only with drawyng of blood: In so much that some have dyed thereof, falling
as it were into a consumption through the maliciousness of the venomous
wound. If these Battes chance to find a cock or a hen abroad in the night
season, they byte them by the combs, and so kyl them. They also which went
last into these regions, do write, that the land is troubled with Crocodiles,
Lions, and Tigers: but that they have now devised arts aod ingens how to
take them. Lions and Tigers.
Likewise that in the houses of their fellows, they found the hydes and cases
of such Lions and Tigers as they had killed. They write furthermore, that by
reason of the rankenesse and fruitefulnesse of the ground, kyne, swyne, and
horses, do maruelously increase in these regions, and grow to a much bygger
quantity then they which were of the first brood. Beasts wax higher in
their kind.
Of the exceedyng highness of the trees with their fruits, of the garden
herbs, fruits, plants, and seeds, which our men brought from Spain, and
sowed and set the same in these regions: likewise of the Hearts and other four
footed beasts both tame and wild, also of diverse kinds of fowls, birds,
and fyshes, they write even as we have declared in the decades before. Careta,
the king of the region of Cioba, was with them for the space of three days:
whom when they had friendly entertained, and showed him the secret places of
their ships, their Horses also, with their trappers, bardes, and other
furnimentes, beside many other things which seemed strange to him, and had
further delyted his mind with the harmony of their musycal instruments, and
given him many rewards, they dismyssed him half amassed with to much
admiration. He sygnifyed unto them, that there are trees in that prouynce, Note.
of the plankes whereof if ships were made, they should be safe from the
woormes of the sea, which they call Bromas. Broma or Bissa are worms which
destroy ships.
How these woormes gnawe and corrode the ships, we have declared before. Our
ships are greatly troubled with this plague, if they lie long in the havens
of these regions. But they affirm that the wood of this tree is so bitter,
that the woormes will not taste thereof. There is also an other tree peculyar
to these lands, A venomous tree.
whose leaves if they only touch the bare in any place of a man's body, they
cause great blysters, and those so malicious, that except the same be
forthwith healed with salt water or fasting spyttle, they do incontinently
engender deadly pains. They say likewise, that the savor of the wood is
present poison, and that it can no whither be carried without danger of life.
Perhaps their venomous arrows are made of this wood.
When thinhabitantes of the Island of Hispaniola had oftentimes attempted to
shake of the yoke of servitude, and could never bring the same to pass,
neither by open war, nor yet by privy conspiracies, they were determined in
the night season to have killed our men in their sleep with the smoke of this
wood: But when the Christian men had knowledge hereof, they compelled the poor
wretches to confess their intent, and punyshed the chief auctours of the
device. They have also a certain herb with the savor whereof they are
preserved from the hurt of this venomous wood, A preservative against poison.
so that they may bear it safely. Of these small things it shall suffyce to
have said thus much. They look daily for many greater things to certify us
of from the Islands of the south sea: The Islands of the south sea.
For at such time as the messenger which brought our letters departed from
thence, Petrus Arias prepared an expedition to that rich Island which lies in
the mouth of the gulf called Sinus S. Michaelis, The rich Island called Dites.
and reaches into the south sea, being also left untouched of vaschus, by
reason that the Sea was at that time of the year sore troubled with tempests,
as we have further declared in Vaschus his vyage to the south. We look
therefore daily for greater things then are hitherto paste: For they have now
taken in hand to subdue many other provinces, which we suppose to be either
very rich, or to bring forth some strange works of nature. Johannes Diaz
Solisius of Nebrissa (of whom we have made mention before) is sent by the
froont of the cape or point of Sancti Augustini (which reaches seven degrees
beyond the Equinoctial line, Cap. sancti Augustini. Of the evil success of
these viages, read decade, 3. Liber. 9.
and parteyneth to the dominion of the Portugales) to the intent to ouerrunne the
south side, from the back half of Paria, Cumana, Cuquibacca, with the havens
of Cartbago, and Sancta Martha, of Dariena also, and Beragua, that more perfect
and certain knowledge may be had of those tractes. Furthermore, one Johannes
Poncius was sent forth with three ships, to destroy the Canibales, An
expedition to destroy the Canibales.
both in the land and Islands there about: as well that the nations of the more
humane and innocent people may at the length live without fear of that
pestiferous generation, as also the better and more safely to search the
secrets and richesse of those regions. Many other likewise were sent diverse
and sundry ways, as Gasper Badaiocius to search the West parts, Franciscus
Bexerra, to sail by the corner of the gulf, and Valleius, to pass by the
mouth or entrance thereof to the East coasts of the gulf, to search the
secrets of that land, in the which Fogeda with his company had of late
begun to plant their habitation, and had builded a fortress and a vyllage.
Badaiocius departed first from Dariena, with fourscore soldiers well
appointed, whom Lodouicus Mercado followed with fyftye: To Bezerra were also
fourscore assigned, and threescore and ten to Valleius. Look decade.3. Lib.
9.
Whether they shall arryue at safe and commodious havens, or fall into
unfortunate stations, he only knows whose providence rules all: for as for
us men we are included within the knowledge of things after they have
chanced. Let us now therefore come to other matters.

The seventh book of the third decade.
PEtrus Arias the governor of the supposed continent, was scarsly entered into
the main sea with his nauye, onwarde on his vyage to Dariena, but I was
advertised that one Andreas Moralis a pilot, The nauigations of Andreas Moralis.
who had oftentimes ouerrunne the coasts of these new seas, and the Islands of
the same, was come to the court to sell such marchaundies as he brought with
him from thence. This man had diligently searched the tracte of the supposed
continent, and especially thinner regions of the Island of Hispaniola,
whereunto he was appointed by his brother Nicolaus Ouandus (the governor of
the Island, and chief Commendator of the order of the knights of Alcantara)
because he was a wytty man, and more apt to search such things then any
other: so that with his own hands he drew fair cards and tables of such
regions as he discovered. Wherein as he has been found faithful of such as
have since had better trial hereof, so is he in most credit amongst the best
sort. He therefore resorted to me, as all they are accustomed to do which
return from the Ocean. What I learned of him and diverse other, of things
heretofore unknown, I will now declare. A particular description of the Island
of Hispaniola.
The beginning of this narration, shall be the particular description of the
Island of Hispaniola, forasmuch as it is the head, and as it were, ye
principal mart of all the liberality of the Ocean, and has a thousand and
again a thousand, fair, pleasant, beautiful, Nereides are nymphs of the sea,
he means Islands. Tethis the wife of Neptunus and goddess of the sea.
and rich Nereides, which lie about it on every side, adournyng this their
lady and mother, as it were an other Tethis the wife of Neptunus, enuyroning
her about, and atte^ding upon her as their queen and patroness. But of these
Nereiades (that is to say, the Islands placed about her) we will speak more
hereafter. Let us in the mean time declare somewhat of the Island which our
men named Margarita Dives (which the Spanyardes call De las perlas) being now
well known, and lying in the south sea in the gulf called Sinus Sancti
Michaelis (that is) saint Michaels gulf. This Island has presently brought to
our knowledge many strange and wonderful things, and promises no small
hope of greater things in time to come. In this is found great plenty of
pearls, Great pearls.
so fair and great, that the sumptuous queen Cleopatra might have seemed to
wear them in her crowns, chains, and braslettes. Of the shelfyshes wherein
these are engendered, we will speak somewhat more in thend of this narration.
Hispaniola like unto the earthy paradise
But let us now return to Hispaniola, most like unto the earthly paradyse. In
the description hereof, we will begin of the imposition of diverse names, then
of the form of the Island, temperate air, and beneficial heaven, and finally
of the division of the regions. Therefore for the righter pronunciation of the
names, your holiness must understand, that they are pronounced with thaccent,
as you may know by the verge set over the heddes of the vowels, as in the name
of the Island Matinino, where the accent is in the last vowell, and the like to
be understood in all other names. They say therefore, that the first
inhabitours of the Island were transported in their Canoas (that is, The first
inhabitours of Hispaniola.
boats made of one whole piece of wood) from the Island of Matinino, being
like banyshed men driven from thence by reason of certain contrary factions
and deuisyons among them selves, like as we read how Dardanus came from
Corytho, and Teucrus from Creta into Asia, and that the region where they
placed their habitation, was afterward called Troianum. The like we read how
the Tyrians and Sidonians arrived with their navy in Libya by the fabulous
conduction of Dido. These Matinians in like manner being banyshed from their
own country, planted their first habitation in that part of the Island of
Hispaniola, which they call Cahonao, upon the bank of the river named
Bahaboni as is read in the beginning of the Romans that Eneas of Troy arrived
in the region of Italy, called Latium, upon the banks of the river of Tiber.
Within the mouth of the river of Bahaboni, lies an Island, where it is said
that thinhabitantes builded their first house, which they named Camoteia. This
house they consecrated shortly after, and honored the same reverently, with
continual gifts and monumentes, even until the coming of our men, like as
the Christians have ever religiously honored Jerusalem the fountain and
original of our faith: Jerusalem.
As also the Turks attribute the like to the city of Mecha in Araby, and the
inhabitants of the fortunate Islands (called the Islands of Canarie) to Tyrma,
builded upon a high rock, Mecha. The Islands of Canarie.
from the which many were wont with joyful minds and songs to cast them
selves down headlong, being persuaded by their priests that the souls of all
such as so dyed for the love of Tyrma, should thereby enjoy eternal
felicity. The conquerours of the Islands of Canarie, found them yet remaynyng
in that superstition even until our time, nor yet is the memory of their
sacrifyces utterly worn away: the rock also reserueth the old name unto this
day. I have also learned of late, that there yet remains in the Island some
of the faction of Betanchor the Frencheman, Betanchor a frenchman.
and first that brought the Islands to good culture and civility, being
thereto lycenced by the king of Castile, as I have said before. These do yet
(for the most part) observe both the language and manners of the French men,
although the heirs and successors of Betanchor, had sold the two subdued
Islands to certain men of Castile: Yet thinhabitours which succeeded
Betanchor, and builded them houses, and increased their families there, do
continue to this day, and live quietly and pleasauntly with the Spanyardes, not
grieved with the sharp cold of France. But let us now return to
thinhabitantes of Matinino and Hispaniola. The Island of Hispaniola was first
named by the first inhabitours Quizqueia, and then Haiti: and this not by
chance, The first names of Hispaniola.
or at the pleasure of such as divised these names, but of credulity and
belief of some great effect. For Quizqueia, is as much to say as, A great
thing, and that so great, that none may be greater. They interpret also, that
Quizqueia sygnifieth, large, universal, or all, in like signification as the
Greeks named their god called Pan, because that for ye greatness thereof, these
simple souls supposed it to be the whole world: and that the Son beams
gave light to none other world, but only to this Island, with the other
adjacent about the same, and therevppon thought it most worthy to be called
great, as the greatest of all other known to them. Haiti is as much to say
by interpretation, as, rough, sharp, or craggie. But by a fyguratiue speech
called denomination (whereby the whole is named by part) they named the whole
Island Haiti (that is) rough: Forasmuch as in many places the face of this
Island is rough, by reason of the craggie mountains, horrible thick wooddes,
and terribly dark and deep valleys, environed with great and high mountains,
although it be in many other places exceedyng beautiful and floryshyng. Here
must we somewhat digress from thorder we are entered into. Perhaps your
holiness will marvel by what means these simple men should of so long
continaunce bear in mind such principles, whereas they have no knowledge of
letters. So it is therefore, that from the beginning, Their manner of learning.
their princes have ever been accustomed to commit their children to the
governance of their wise men, which they call Boitios, to be enstructed in
knowledge, and to bear in memory such things as they learn. They give them
selves chiefly to two things: As generally, to learn thoriginall and success
of things, and perticulerly, to rehearse the noble factes of their
graundefathers, great graundefathers, and ancestors, Ballets and rhymes.
as well in peace as in war. These two things they have of old time composed
in certain myters and ballettes in their language. These rymes or ballettes,
they call Arei^os. And as our mynstrelles are accustomed to sing to the Harp
or Lute, so do they in like manner sing these songs, and dance to the same,
playing on Timbrels made of shells of certain fishes: These Tymbrels they call
Maguei. Singyng and daunceyng. Songs of love and mournyng.
They have also songs and ballettes of love, and other of lamentations and
mournyng, some also to encourage them to the wars, with every of them their
tunes agreeable to the matter. They exercise them selves much in daunceyng,
wherein they are very actyue, and of greater agilitie then our men, by reason
they give them selves to nothing so much, and are not hyndered with apparel,
which is also the cause of their swiftenesse of foot. In their (...) left
them of their ancestors, they have prophecies of the coming of our men into
their country. Prophesses.
These they sing with mournyng, and as it were with gronyng, bewail the loss
of their liberty and servitude. Note.
For these prophesies make mention that there should come into the Island
Maguacochios, that is, men clothed in apparel, and armed with such swoordes
as should cut a man in sunder at one stroke, under whose yoke their posterity
should be subdued. Their familiarity with spirits.
And here I do not marvel that their predecessors could prophecye of the
servitude and bondage of their succession (if it be true that is said) of the
familiarity they have with spirits, which appear to them in the night,
whereof we have largely made mention in the nienth book of the first decade,
where also we have entreated of their Zemes (that is) their Idols, and Images
of deuylles which they honored. The devil is driven away by baptism.
But they say that since these Zemes were taken away by the Christians, the
spirits have no more appeared. Our men ascribe this to the sign of the
cross, wherewith they defend them selves from such spirits: For they are
now all cleansed and sanctified by the water of baptism, whereby they have
renounced the devil, andare consecrated the holy members of Christ. Surueyers.
They are universally studious to know the bounds and limittes of their
regions and kingdoms, and especially their Mitani (that is) noble men: so that
even they are not utterly ignorant in the surueying of their lands. The common
people have none other care then of setting, sowyng, and plantyng. They are
most expert fyshers, by reason that throughout the whole year, they are
accustomed daily to plunge them selves in the ryuers, so that in manner they
live no less in the water then on the land. They are also given to huntyng:
For (as I have said before) they have two kinds of four footed beasts,
whereof the one is, little Cunnes, called Vtias, and other Serpents, named
Iuannas, much like unto Crocodils, Serpents. A Crocodile is much like to our
Ewte or Lyserte.
of eight foot length, of most pleasant taste, and living on the land. All
the Islands nooryshe innumerable birds and fowls: as Stockdoues, Duckes,
Geese, Hearons, beside no less number of Popingiais then Sparowes with us.
Every king has his subjects divided to sundry affairs: as some to huntyng,
other to fyshyng, and other some to husbandrye. But let us now return to
speak further of the names. We have said that Quizqueia and Haiti, were the
old names of this Island. The whole Island was also called Cipanga, Cipanga.
of the region of the mountains aboundyng with gold: like as our ancient
poets called all Italy Latium, Italy called Latium.
of part thereof. Therefore as they called Ausonia and Hesperia, Italy: even so
by the names of Quizqueia, Haiti, and Cipanga, they understood the whole Island
of Hispaniola. Isabella.
Our men did first name it Isabella, of queen Helisabeth, which in the
Spanyshe tongue is called Isabella, and so named it of the first Colonie where
they planted their habitation, upon the bank near unto they sea on the North
side of the Island, as we have further declared in the first decade. But of the
names, this shall suffyse. Let us now therefore speak of the form of the
Island. The form of the Island of Hispaniola.
They which first ouerran it, described it unto me to be like unto the leaf
of a Chestnut tree, with a gulf toward the west side, lying open against the
Island of Cuba. But the expert shypmaistier Andreas Moralis, brought me the
form thereof somewhat differyng from that. For from both the corners, as from
the East angle and the West, he described it to be indented and eaten with many
great gulfes, and the corners to reach forth very far, and places many
large and safe havens in the great gulf on the East side: A particular card
of Hispaniola.
But I trust shortly so to travail further herein, that a perfect card of the
particular description of Hispaniola may be sent unto your holiness. For they
have now drawn the Geographicall description thereof in cards, even as your
holiness has seen the form and situation of Spain and Italy, with their
mountains, valleys, rivers, cities, and colonies. Let us therefore without
shamfastnesse compare the Island of Hispaniola to Italy, sometime the head and
queen of the whole world. Hispaniola compared to Ita^ie.
For if we consider the quantity, it shall be found little less, and much
more fruitful. It reaches from the East into the West, five hundred and
forty miles, according to the computation of the later searchers, although
the Admiral somewhat increased this number, as we have said in the first
decade. It is in breadth somewhere almost three hundred miles, and in some
places narower, where the corners are extended: But it is surely much more
blessed and fortunate then Italy, The temprature of Hispaniola.
being for the most part thereof so temperate and floryshyng, that it is
neither vexed with sharp cold, nor afflicted with immoderate hear. It has
both the steyinges or conuersions of the Son (called Solstitia) in manner
equal with the Equinoctial, The Equinoctial.
with little difference between the length of the day and the night throughout
all the year. For on the south side, the day ascends scarcely an hour in
length above the night, or contrarywyse. But the difference is more on the
north side: Yet are there some regions in the Island in the which the cold is
of some force. Cold accidental. and not by the situation of the region.
But your holiness must understand this to be incident by reason of ye object
or neerenes of the mountains, as we will more largely declare hereafter: Yet
is not this cold so pearsyng or sharp, that thinhabitantes are molested with
snow or bytyng frost. In other places, Perpetual spring and summer.
the Island enjoys perpetual spryng time, and is fortunate with continual
summer and harvest. The trees floryshe there all the whole year, and the
meadows continue always green. All things are exceedyng fortunate, and grow
to great perfection. How wonderfully all garden herbs and fruits do
increase, Marvelous fruitfullnesse.
so that within the space of syxtene days after the seed is sown, all
herbs of small steames, as lettisse, borage, radish, and such other, come to
their full rypenesse, and also how herbs of the bygger sort, as Gourdes,
Melons, Cucumbers, Pompons, Sitrons, and such other, come to their perfection
in the space of thyrtie days, we have sufficiently, declared elsewhere. Of the
beasts transported out of Spain thither, Beasts.
we have said how they grow to a much greater kind: Oxen and swine of
exceeding bigness.
insomuch that when they fall into communication of the oxen or kyne, they
compare them in bygnesse to Elephantes, and swyne to Mules: but this somewhat
by an excessive kind of speech. We have also made mention how their swynes
flesh is more sauourye and of far better and of more pleasant taste, and
more wholesome then ours, Swine fed with Mirobalanes.
by reason that they are fed with the fruits of Mirobalane trees, and other
pleasant and nourishing fruits of that country, which grow there of them
selves, as do with us Beeches, Holly, and Oaks. Uines would also prosper there
with marvelous increase, if they had any regard to the plantyng thereof. The
like increase comes of wheat, if it be sown upon the mountains, where the
cold is of some strength: but not in the same playnes, by reason of to much
fatness and rankness of the ground. It is in manner incredible to hear, that
an ear of wheat should be bygger then a man's arm in the brawne, and more
then a spanne in length, bearyng also more then a thousand graynes, An ear of
wheat as big as a man's arm in the brawne.
as they all confess with one voice, and earnestlye affirm the same with
others. Yet they say that the bread of the Island called Cazabbi, made of the
root of Iucca, to be more wholesome, because it is of easier digestion, and is
cultured with less labor, and greater increase. The residue of the time which
they spend not in setting and plantyng, they bestow in geathering of gold.
They have now such plenty of four footed beasts, that Horses and ox hydes,
with sheep skynnes, and goat skynnes, and such other, Great plenty of
cattayle.
are brought from thence into Spain: so that now the daughter in many things
helps and succoureth her mother. Of the trees of brasyle, spyces, the grain
which colors scarlet in bright shyning red, mastix, gossampyne cotton, the
precious metal called Electrum, and such other commodities of this Island, we
have spoken sufficiently before. What therefore can chance more happy unto man
upon the earth, Incommodities of intemperate. regions
then there to live where he need not to be driven to close chaumbers with
sharp cold or fayntyng heat, nor yet in winter either to be laden with heavy
apparel, or to burn the shinnes with continual sittyng at the fire, which
things make men old in short time, by resolving the natural heat, whereof a
thousand diseases ensue. Wholesome air and water.
They also affirm the air to be very healthful, and the waters and ryuers to
be no less wholesome, as they which have their contynuall course through the
earth of the golden mines. Gold every where.
For there is in manner no ryuers, no mountains, and but few playnes, that are
utterly without gold. But let us now at the length come to the particular
description of the inner parts of this blessed Island. We have before declared
how it is in manner equally divided with four great ryuers, descendyng from
high mountains, whereof that which runs toward the East, is called Iunna,
as that toward the West is named Attibunicus, the third is Nahiba or Haiba,
which runs Southward, the fourth is called Iache, and falls toward the
North. But this shypmaister has brought an other description, observed of the
inhabitauntes from the beginning. Let us therefore divide the whole Island into
five parts, calling the regions of every province by their old names: and
finally make mention of such things as are worthy memory in every of them. The
beginning of the Island on the East side, is contained in the province named
Caizcimu, so named for that in their language Cimu signifies the front or
beginning of any thing. After this, follows the province of Huhabo, and then
Caihabo, the fourth is Bainoa. Guaccaiarima conteyneth the west corner. But the
last save one, Bainoa is of larger bounds then the three other. Caizcimu
reaches from the first front of the Island to the river Hozama, which runs
by the city of saint Dominicke. But toward the North side, The city of S.
Dominick.
it is ended at the rough mountains of Haiti. Hubaho, is encluded within the
mountains Haiti and the river Iaciga. Caeiabo the third province, contains
all that lies between Cubabo and Dahatio, even unto the mouth of the river of
Iaceha or Iache (one of the four which divide the Island equally) and ascends
to the mountains of Cibaua, where the greatest plenty of gold is found, out of
the which also the river Demahus spryngeth: and ioining with the sprynges of
the river of Naiba (being an other of the four which divides the Island toward
the south sea) falls to an other bank of the river of saint Dominick.
Bainoa, begins at the confines of Caiabi, and reaches even unto the Island
of Cahini, which lies near unto the sea banks of the North side of the
Island, where we said that they erected ye first colonie or habitation. The
province of Guaccaiarima, occupies the remanent toward the west: this they
named Guaccaiarima, Of provinces divided into regions.
because it is the extreme or uttermost part of the Island. For Iarima in their
language, signifies the tail or end of any thing, and Gua, is an article
which they use oftentimes in the names of things, and especially in the names
of their kings, as Guarionexius and Guaccanarillus. In the province of Cazium,
are these regions, Higuei, Guanama, Reyre, Xagua, Aramana, Arabo, Hazoa,
Macorix, Caiacoa, Guaiagua, Baguauimabo, and the rough mountains of Haiti.
Here let us speak somewhat of their aspirations, which they use otherwise then
the Latins do. It is to be noted that there is no aspiration in their vowels,
which has not the effect of a consonant. So that they pronounce their
aspirations more vehemently then we do the consonant.f. Yea, all such words
as in their tongue are aspirate, are pronounced with like breath and spirit as
is f. saving that heerin the nether lip is not moved to the uppermost teeth.
With open mouths and shaking their breasts they breath out these aspirations,
The pronunciation of the Hebrews and Arabians.

The Moors and Arabians possessed Spain.


ha, he, hi, ho, hu, as the Hebrews and Arabians are accustomed to pronounce
theyrs. I find also that the Spanyardes use the like vehemency in the
aspirations of those words which they have received of the Moors and Arabians
which possessed Spain, and continued there many years, as in these words
Almohadda, which signifies a pyllow or boulster, also Almohaza, that is a
horse comb: with diverse such other words, which they speak in manner with
panting breasts, and vehement spirit. I have thought it good to rehearse
these things, because among the Latins it oftentimes so chances, that only
the accent or aspiration, changes the signification of the word, as hora,
for an hour, and ora, for the plurale number of this word os, How the
aspiration changes the signification of words.
which signifies the mouth: also ora, which signifies regions or coasts.
The like also chances in ye diversity of ye accent, as occido I kill, and
occido I fall: even so in the language of these simple men, there are many
things to be observed. But let us now return to the description. In the
province of Hubabo, are these regions, Xamana, Canabacoa, Cubabo, with many
other, Diverse languages in the Island.
the names whereof I have not yet learned. The province of Cubabo, conteyneth
these regions, Migua and Cacacubana. The inhabitauntes of this region, have a
peculier language much differing from the common language of the Island, and are
called Maioriexes. There is also an other region called Cubana, whose language
differs from the other. Likewise the region of Baiohagua, has a diverse
tongue. There are also other regions, as Dahabon, Cybaho, and Manababo. Cotoy
is in the middle of the Island. By this runs the river Nizaus, and the
mountains called Mathaitin, Hazua, and Neibaymao, confine with the same. In the
province of Bainoa, are ye regions of Maguana, Iagohaiucho, Baurucco,
Dabaiagua, and Attibuni, so named of the river: also Caunoa, Buiaici,
Dababonici, Maiaguariti, Atiei, Maccazina, Guahabba, Anniuici, Marie^,
Guaricco, Amaguei, Xaragua, Yaguana, Azuei, Iacchi, Honorucco, Diaguo, Camaie,
and Neibaimao. In Guaccaierima ye last province, these regions are contained
Mauicarao, Guabagua, Taquenazabo, Nimaca, Baiona the less, Cabaini, Iamaici,
Manabaxao, Zauana, Habacoa, and Ayquiora. But let us entreat somewhat of the
particulers of the regions. In the province of Caizcimu, within the great gulf
of the beginning, there is a great cave in a hollow rock under the root of a
high mountain, about two furlonges from the sea, the entry of this cave is not
much unlike the doors of a great temple, being very large, and turning many
ways. Andreas Moralis the shypmaister, at the commandment of the governor,
attempted to search the cave with the smalest vessels. He says that by
certain privy ways many ryuers have concourse to this cave, Rivers denoured
of caves.
as it were a syncke or chanel. After thexperience hereof, they ceased to
marueyle whither other rivers ran, which coming fourscore and ten miles were
swalowed up, so that they appeered no more, nor yet fell into the sea by any
known ways. Now therefore they suppose that ryuers swalowed up by the
hollow places of that stony mountain, fall into this cave. As the shypmaister
entered into the cave, his ship was almost swalowed. For he says, that there
are many whyrlepooles and rysinges or boylynges of the water, which make a
violent conflict and horrible roryng, one encounteryng the other: Whirlepooles,
and conflict of waters.
also many huge holes and hollow places, so that what on the one side with
whirlpooles, and on the other side with the boylyng of the water, his ship
was long in manner tossed up and down like a ball. It greatly repented him
that he had entered, yet knew he no way how to come forth. He now wandered in
darkness, as well for the obscurenesse of the cave into the which he was far
entered, as also that in it were thick clouds, Clouds in the cave.
engendered of the moist vapors proceeding of the conflict of the waters, which
continually fall with great violence into the cave on every side. He compares
the noise of these waters, The Cataracts of Nilus.
to the fall of the famous river Nilus from the mountains of Ethiope, they were
also deaf, that one could not hear what an other said. But at the length
with great danger and fear, he came forth of the cave, as it had been out of
hell. About threescore miles distant from the chief city of saint Dominicke,
there are certain high mountains, A standing poole in the top of a high
mountain.
upon the tops whereof is a lake or standing poole inaccessible, never yet
seen of them which came latelye to the Island, both by reason of the
roughroughnesse of the mountains, and also for that there is no pathe or open
way to the tops of the same. But at the length the shypmaister being
conducted thither by one of the kings, ascended to the tops of the
mountains, and came to the poole. Fearne and bramble bushes, grow only in
cold regions.
He says that the cold is there of some force: and in token of winter, he
found fearne and bramble bushes, which two grow only in cold regions. These
mountains, they call Ymizui Hibabaino. This poole is of fresh water three
miles in compass, and well replenyshed with diverse kinds of fyshes. Many
small rivers or brooks fall into it. It has no passage out, because it is on
every side enclosed with the tops of mountains. But let us now speak of an
other poole, which may well be called a sea in the mydlande, and be compared
to the Caspian or Hircanian sea in the fyrme land of Asia, with certain other
lakes and pooles of fresh water. The Caspian and Hircanian sea.


The eight book of the third decade.
THe province of Bainoa being thrice as big as the three first, that is,
Caizcimu, Vhabo, and Caibabo, includes a valley named Caiouani, A great lake
of sour and salt water.
in the which there is a lake of salt, sower, and bitter water, as we read of
the sea called Caspium, lying in the firm land between Sarmatia and Hircania.
We have therefore named it Caspium, although it be not in the region of
Hircania. It has many swalowyng gulfes, by the which, both the water of the
sea spryngeth into it, and also such as fall into it from the mountains are
swalowed up. They think that the caves thereof, Sea Fysshes in lakes of the
midlande.
are so large and deep, that great fyshes of the sea pass by the same into
the lake. Among these fyshes, there is one called Tiburonus, which cutteth a
man in sunder by the myddest at one snap with his teeth, and deuoureth him. The
devouring Fyshe called Tiburonus.
In the river Hozama, runnyng by the chief city of saint Dominicke, these
Tiburoni do sometimes come from the sea, and devour many of thinhabitauntes:
especially such as do daily ploonge them selves in the water, to the intent to
keep their bodies very clean. The ryuers which fall into the lake, are
these. From the North side Guanicabon: The ryuers that fall into the lake
Caspium.
From the Southe, Xaccoei: from the East, Guannabo: And from the West, Occoa.
They say that these ryuers are great and continual, and that beside these,
there are.xx. other small ryuers which fall into this Caspium. Also on the
North side within a furlong of the lake, there are above two hundredth
springes, CC. springe^ within the space of a furlong.
occupying likewise about a furlong in circuit, the water whereof is cold in
summer, fresh also, and wholesome to be drunk. These sprynges make a river that
can not be waded over, which near at hand ioynyng with the other, falls
into the lake. Here must we stay a while. The king of this region found his
wife praying in a Chapel builded by the Christians within the precinct of his
dominion, A miracle.
and required her company to satisfy his fleshely lust. His wife reproved him,
and put him in remembrance to have respect to the holy place. The words
which she spoke to him were these, Teitoca, Teitoca, which is as much to say,
as, be quiet, be quiet. The Indian language.
Techeta cynato guamechyna: That is, God will be greatly angry. Guamechyna,
signifies God, Techeta greatly, Cynato angrye. But the husband halyng her by
the arm, said, Guaibba, that is, go, Cynato macabuca guamechyna: That is,
What is that to me if God be angry? And with these words as he proffered her
violence, sodeinly he became dumme and lame. A king stricken dumme and lame by a
miracle.
Yet by this miracle being stryken with repentance, he ever after led a
relygious life, insomuche that from thencefoorth he would never suffer the
Chapel to be swepte or decked with any other man's hand. By the same miracle,
many of thinhabitauntes, and all the Christians being moved, resorted devoutly
to the Chapel. They take it in good part that the king suffered the revenge
of that reproach. Let us now return to Caspium. That salt lake is tossed with
storms and tempests, and oftentimes drowneth small ships or fyssher boats,
and swaloweth them up with the maryners: In so much that it has not been
heard of, that any man drowned by shyppewracke, Such as are drowned in the
lake are not cast up again.
ever plunged up again, or was cast on the shore, as commonly chances of
the dead bodies of such as are drowned in the sea. These tempests, are the
dainty banquets of the Tiburones. This Caspium, is called Hagueigabon. In the
myddest hereof, lies an Island named Guarizacca, to the which they resort when
they go a fishyng: but it is now cultured. There is in the same plain, an
other lake next unto this, whose water is myxte of salt and fresh, A lake of
salt and fresh water.
and is therefore neither apt to be drunk, nor yet to be refused in urgent
necessity: This conteyneth in length twenty and five miles, and in breadth
eight miles, in some places also niene or ten. It receives many ryuers, which
have no passage out of the same, but are swalowed up as in the other. Water
spryngeth out of the sea into this also: but in no great quantity, which is
the cause that it is so commyxt. In the same province toward the west side, A
lake of fresh water.
there is an other lake of fresh water, not far distaunt from Caspius: this
the inhabitauntes call Iainagua. The same salt lake has on the North side
thereof, an other named Guaccaa: this is but little, as not past three or four
miles in breadth, and one in length, the water of this may well be drunk. On
the South side of the salt lake, there lies an other named Babbareo, of three
miles in length, and in manner round. The water of this is fresh, as of the
two other. This lake, because it has no passage out, nor yet any swalowyng
gulfes, conueyeth the superfluous waters to the sea, if it be increased with ye
streams which fall sometimes more abundantly from the mountains: this is in
the region of Xamana in the province of Bainoa. There is an other called
Guaniba, lying between the East and the South, near unto the side of Caspius:
this is ten miles in length, and almost round. There are furthermore many other
small standing pooles or lakes disparsed here and there in the Island, A lake of
ten miles in length.
which I will let pass, lest I should be tedious in remaynyng to long in one
thing. I will therefore make an end with this addition, that in all these
great plenty of fyshe and foul is nouryshed. All these lakes lie in a large
plain, the which from the East reaches into the West a hundredth and twenty
miles, being of breadth.xviii. miles where it is narowest, A plain of a
hundred and twenty miles
and.xxv. where it is largest. Lookyng toward the West, it has collaterally on
the left hand the mountains of Daiguani, and on the right hand, the
mountains of Gaigua, so called of the name of ye vale it self. At the roots
of the mountains of Caigua toward the North side, there lies an other vale
much longer and larger then that before named: For it contains in length
almost two hundredth miles, A plain of two hundred miles in length.
and in breadth thirty where it is largest, and about.xx. where it is
narowest. This vale in some part thereof, is called Maguana, in an other
place, Iguaniu, and else where, Hathathiei. And forasmuch as we have here made
mention of this part of the vale named Hathathiei, we will somewhat digress
from the discourse of this description, and entreat of a thing so strange and
marvelous, that the like has not been heard of. So it is therefore, that the
king of this region named Caramatexius, takes great pleasure in fyshing. Into
his nets chanced a young fyshe, of the kind of those huge monsters of the
sea which thinhabitours call Manati, not found I suppose in our seas, The
marvelous fyshe Manati.
nor known to our men before this time. This fyshe is four footed, and in
shape like unto a Tortoyse, although she be not covered with a shell, but with
scales, and those of such hardness, and couched in such order, that no arrow
can hurt her. Her scales are beset and defended with a thousand knobbes, her
back is plain, and her head utterly like the head of an Ox. She lives both
in the water, and on the land, she is slow of mouyng, of condition meek,
gentle, associable, A monster of the sea fed with man's hand.
and loving to mankind, and of a marvelous sense or memory, as are the
Elephant and the Delphyn. The king norished this fysh certain days at home
with the bread of the country, made of the root of Iucca and Panycke, and
with such other roots as men are accustomed to eat: For when she was yet but
young, he cast her into a poole or lake near unto his palace, there to be fed
with hand. This lake also receives waters, and casts not the same forth
again. It was in time paste called Guaurabo: but is now called the lake of
Manati, after the name of this fyshe, which wandered safely in the same for the
space of.xxv. years, and grew exceeding byg. Whatsoever is written of the
Delphines of Baian or Arion, are much inferior to the dooinges of this fyshe,
which for her gentle nature they named Matum, that is, gentle, or noble.
Therefore whenever any of the kings familyers, especially such as are known
to her, resort to the banks of the lake, and call Matum, Matum, Matum.
then she (as myndefull of such benefits as she has received of men) lifts
up her head, and comes to the place whither she is called, and there
receives meat at the hands of such as feed her. A fyshe caryeth men over
the lake.
If any desirous to pass over the lake, make signs and tokens of their
intent, she boweth her self to them, therewith as it were gentelly inuityng
them to amount upon her, and conueyeth them safely over. It has been seen,
that this monstrous fyshe has at one time safely carried over ten men singing
and playing. A marvelous thing.
But if by chance when she lyfted up her head she espied any of the Christian
men, she would immediately plunge down again into the water, and refuse to
obey, because she had once received injury at the hands of a certain wanton
young man among the Christians, who had cast a sharp darte at her, although
she were not hu^te, by reason of the hardenesse of her skin, being rough,
and full of scales and knobbes, as we have said: Yet did she bear in memory
thiniurie she sustained, with so gentle a revenge requityng thingratitude of
him, which had dealt with her so vngentelly. From that day whenever she was
called by any of her familiers, she would first look circumspectly about her,
least any were present apparelled after the manner of the Christians. She would
oftentimes play and wrestle upon the bank with the kings chamberlens, and
especially with a young man whom the king favored well, being also accustomed
to feed her. She would be sometimes as pleasant and full of play as it had
been a moonkey or marmaset, and was of long time a great comfort and solace to
the whole Island: For no small confluence as well of the Christians as of
thinhabitantes, had daily concourse to behold so strange a miracle of nature,
the contemplation whereof was no less pleasant then wonderful. They say that
the meat of this kind of fyshe, is of good taste, and that many of them are
engendered in the seas thereabout. But at the length, this pleasant playfelowe
was lost, The river Attibunicus.
and carried into the sea by the great river Attibunicus, one of the four which
divide the Island: For at that time there chaunc^d so terrible a tempest of
wind, and rain, with such floods ensuing, that the like has not lightly
been heard of. By reason of this tempest, the river Attibunicus so ouerflowed
the banks, that it filled the whole vale, and myxt it self with all the other
lakes: at which time also, this gentle Matum and pleasant companyon, following
the vehement course and fall of the floods, was thereby restored to his old
moother and natyue waters, and since that time never seen again. Thus having
digressed sufficiently, let us now come to the situation of the vale. It has
collatera^ly the mountains of Cibaua and Caiguam, which bring it to the South
sea. There is an other vale beyond the mountains of Cibaua toward the North,
this is called the vale of Guarionexius, because that before the memory of
man, The great vale of Guarionexius.
the predicessours and ancestors of king Guarionexius, to whom it is
descended by right of inheritance, were ever the Lords of the whole vale. Of
this king, we have spoken largely in the first narration of the Island in the
first Decade. This vale is of length from the East to the West, a hundred and
fourscore miles, and of breadth from the South to the North, thirty miles
where it is narowest, and fifty where it is brodest. It begins from the
region Canobocoa by the provinces of Huhabo and Caiabo, and ends in the
province of Bainoa, and the region of Mariena: it lies in the myddest between
the mountains of Cibaua, and the mountains of Cahonai and Caxacubuna. There
is no province nor any region, which is not notable by the majesty of
mountains, fruitfulness of vales, pleasantness of hills, and
delectablenesse of playnes, with abundance of fair ryuers running through the
same. There are no sides of mountains or hills, no ryuers, Gold in all
mountains* and gold and fyshe in all ryuers.
which abound not with gold and delycate fyshes, except only one river, which
from thoriginal thereof, with the sprynges of the same breakyng forth of the
mountains, comes out salt, and so continues until it perysh: This river is
called Babuan, and runs through the myddle of the region Maguana, in the
province of Bainoa. They suppose that this river has made it self a way under
the ground, Salt bays.
by some passages of plaster, or salt earth: for there are in the Island
many notable salt bays, whereof we will speak more hereafter. We have
declared how the Island is divided by four ryuers, and five provinces. There
is also an other particion, which is this, The whole Island consists of the
tops of four mountains, which divide it by the myddest from the East to
the West: in all these is abundaunce of nooryshyng moisture, and great plenty
of gold, of the caves also of the which, the waters of all the rivers (into
the which the caves empty them selves) have their original and increase. The
ryuers have their increase from the caves of the mountains. No hurtful or
ravening beast in the Island.
There are likewise in them horrible dens, obscure and dark vales, and
myghtie rocks of stone. There was never any noisome beast found in it, nor
yet any rauenyng four footed beast: no Lion, no Bear, no fierce Tigers, no
craf^ie Foxes, nor devouring Woolfes. All things are blessed and fortunate,
and now more fortunate, for that so many thousands of men are received to be
the sheep of Christ's flock, all their zemes and Images of deuylles being
rejected and utterly out of memory. The aucthours excuse.
If I chance now and then in the discourse of this narration to repeat one
thing diverse times, or otherwise to make digression, I must desire your
holiness therewith not to be offended: For while I see, hear, and write
these things, me seems that I am heerewith so affected, that for very joy I
feel my mind stirred as it were with the spirit of Apollo, as were the
Sibilles, whereby I am enforced to repeat the same again: especially when I
consider how far the amplitude of our religion spreads her wings. Yet
among these so many blessed and fortunate things, this one greeueth me not a
little: By what means the people of the Island are greatly consumed.
that these simple poor men, never brought up in labor, do daily peryshe
with intollerabe travail in the gold mines, and are thereby brought to such
desperation, that many of them kill them selves, having no regard to the
procreation of children: insomuche that women with child, perceiving that they
shall bring forth such as shall be slaves to the Christians, use medecines to
destroy their conception. And albeit that by the kings letters patentes it was
decreed that they should be set at liberty: yet are they constrained to serve
more then seems convenient for free men. The number of the poor wretches is
wonderfully extenuate, they were once reckened to be above twelve hundred
thousand heads: but what they are now, I abhor to rehearse. We will therefore
let this pass, and return to the pleasures of Hispaniola. In the mountains
of Cibaua, The pleasures of Hispaniola.
which are in manner in the myddest of the Island, in the province of Caiabo
(where we said to be the greatest plenty of natyue gold) there is a region
named Cotobi, The region of Cotobi, situate in the clouds.
situate in the clouds, environed with the tops of high mountains, and well
inhabited: it consists of a plain of.xxv. miles in length, and.xv. in
breadth. This plain is higher then the tops of other mountains: A plain in
the tops of mountains.
so that these mountains may seem to be the chief progenitors of the
other. This plain suffers alterations of the four times of the year, as the
Spring, Summer, Autumn, and winter. The higher, the colder. Moderate cold in
the mountains.
Here the herbs wax wythered, the trees loose their leaves, and the meadows
become hoare: the which things (as we have said) chance not in other
places of the Island, where they have only the Spring and Autumn. The soil
of this plain brings forth fearne and bramble busshes, bearyng black
berries, or wild raspes, which two are tokens of cold regions: Yet is it a
fair region, for the cold thereof is not very sharp, neither does it
afflicte thinhabitantes with frost or snow. They argue the fruitfulness of
the region by the fearne, whose stalks or steames are bygger then a spear or
Iauelyn. The sides of those mountains are rich in gold, Gold.
yet is there none appointed to dygge for the same, because it shall be needful
to have apparelled myners, and such as are used to labor: For thinhabitants
living contented with little, are but tender, Thinhabitantes of Hispaniola can
abide no labor nor cold.
and can not therefore away with labor, or abide any cold. There are two
ryuers which run through this region, and fall from the tops of the present
mountains: One of these is named Comoiayxa, whose course is toward the West,
and falls into the channel of Naiba: the other is called Tirecotus, which
runnyng toward the East, joins with the river of Iunna. The Island of Creta
or Candie, under the dominion of the Uenetians.
In the Island of Creta (now called Candie) as I passed by in my legacy to the
Soldane of Alcayr or Babylon in Egypt, the Uenetians told me, that there lay
such a region in the tops of the mountains of Ida, which they affirm to
be more fruitful of wheat corn then any other region of the Island: But
forasmuch as once the Cretences rebelled against the Uenetians, and by reason
of the straight and narrow way to the tops thereof, long defended the region
with arms against thaucthoritie of the Senate, and at the length, being
foreweryed with wars, rendered the same, the Senate commanded that it should
be left desarte, and the streightes of thentraunces to be stopped, least any
should ascend to the region without their permission. Yet in the year of
Christ M.D.ii. license was granted to the husband men to till and manure the
region, on such condition, that no such as were apt to the wars might enter
into the same. There is also an other region in Hispaniola, named Cotoby, after
the same name: this divides the bounds of the provinces of Vbabo and Caiabo.
It has mountains, vales, and playnes: but because it is barren, it is not
much inhabited: Yet is it richest in gold, for the original of the
abundaunce of gold begins herein, insomuch that it is not geathered in
small grains and sparks, as in other places: but is found whole, massy, and
pure, among certain soft stones, Pure and massy gold in the region of
Cotoby.

The vain of gold, is a living tree.

These colors of flowers are called Marchasites.


and in the veins of rocks, by breakyng the stones whereof, they follow the
veins of gold. They have found by experience, that the vain of gold is a
living tree, and that the same by all ways that it spreads and springs
from the root by the soft pores and passages of the earth, puts forth
branches, even unto the uppermost part of the earth, and ceasseth not until
it discover it self unto the open air: at which time, it shows forth
certain beautiful colors in the steed of flowers, round stones of golden
earth in the steed of fruits, and thynne plates in steed of leaves. These
are they which are disparcled throughout the whole Island by the course of the
ryuers, eruptions of the springes out of the mountains, and violent falls of
the flooddes: For they think that such grains are not engendered where they
are geathered, especially on the dry land, but otherwise in the rivers. They
say that the root of the golden tree extends to the center of the earth, and
there takes norishment of increase: The root of the golden tree.
For the deeper yt they dygge, they find the trunkes thereof to be so much the
greater, as far as they may follow it for abundaunce of water springing in
the mountains. Of the branches of this tree, they find some as small as a
thread, The branches of the golden tree.

Caves sustained with yyllers of gold.


and other as bygge as a man's finger, according to the largeness or
straightness of the ryftes and clyftes. They have sometimes chanced upon
whole caves, sustained and borne up as it were with golden pyllers, and this in
the ways by the which the branches ascend: the which being filled with the
substance of the trunk creepyng from beneath, the branche makes it self
way by which it may pass out. It is oftentimes divided by encountryng with
some kind of hard stone: The stones of the gold mines.
Yet is it in other clyftes noorished by the exhalations and virtue of the
root. But now perhaps you will ask me what plenty of gold is brought from
thence. You shall therefore understand, that only out of Hispaniola, What gold
is brought yearly from Hispaniola into Spayn
the sum of four hundred, and sometimes five hundred thousand ducates of
gold is brought yearly into Spain: as may be geathered by the fyfth portion
due to the kings Excheker, which amounts to the sum of a hundred and
fourscore, or fourscore and ten thousand Castellan (...) of gold, and
sometimes more. What is to be thought of the Island of Cuba and Sancti Iohannis
(otherwise called Burichena) being both very rych in gold, we will declare
further hereafter: to have said thus much of gold, it shall suffyse. We will
now therefore speak somewhat of salt, wherewith we may season and reserve
such things as are bought with gold. In a region of the province of Bainoa,
Salt of the mountains, very hard and clear.
in the mountains of Daiaguo, about twelve miles distant from the salt lake,
called Caspius, there are salt bays in the mountains, in a manner as hard as
stones, also clearer and whyter then cristall. There are likewise such salt
bays, which grow wonderfully in Laletania (now called Cataloma) in the
territory of the duke of Cadona, the chief ruler in that region: but such as
know them both, affirm that these of Bainoa are most notable. They say also,
Salt as hard as stones.
that this can not be cleft without wedges and beetelles of Iron: But that of
Laletana may easly be broken, as I my self have proved. They therefore
compare this to such stones as may easily be broken, and the other to marble.
In the province of Caizimu, in the regions of Iguanama, Caiacoa, and Guariagua,
there are springes whose waters are of marvelous nature, Springes of salt,
fresh, and sower water.
being in the superficial or uppermost part fresh, in the myddest myxte of
salt and fresh, and in the lowest part salt and sour. They think that
the salt water of the sea issues out softly, and the fresh to spryng out of
the mountains: The one falls down, and the other ryseth, and are not
therefore so universally myxte, whereby the one may utterly corrupt the other.
If any man lay his ear to the ground near to any of these sprynges, he
shall perceive the ground there to be so hollow, that the reboundyng noise of
a horseman coming, Hollow caves in the ground.
may be heard for the space of three miles, and a footeman one mile. In the
last region toward the South, named Guaccaiarima, in the lordship of Zauana,
they say there are certain wild men, which live in the caves and dens of
the mountains, Certain wyld men living in caves and dens.
contented only with wild fruits: these men never use the company of any
other, nor will by any means become tame. They live without any certain
dwelling places, and without tyllage or culturyng of the ground, as we read
of them which in old time lived in the golden age. They say also that these
men are without any certain language: Men without a certain language.
They are sometimes seen, but our men have yet laid hands on none of them.
If at any time they come to the sight of men, and perceive any making toward
them, they flee swifter then a Heart: Yea, they affirm them to be swifter
then Grehoundes. What one of these solitary wanderers did, Men as swift as
Grehounds
it is worth the hearing. So it is, that our men having granges adjoining near
unto the thick woods, certain of them repaired thither in the month of
September, in the year.M.D.xiiii. in the mean time, one of these wild men
came leapyng out of the wood, A wild man runnech away with a child.
and approchyng somewhat toward them with smyling countenance, sodeinly
snatched up a child of theyrs, being the son of the owner of the grange,
which he begot of a woman of the Island: He ran away with the child, and
made signs to our men to follow him: Many followed, as well of our men, as of
the naked inhabitants, but all in vain. Thus when the pleasant wanderer
perceived that the Christians ceased to pursue him, he left the child in a
cross way by the which the swyneheardes were accustomed to drive the swyne to
their pasture. Shortly after, a swynehearde found the child, and brought him
home to his father, yet tormenting him self for sorrow, supposing that wild
man to have been one of the kind of the Canibales, and that his son was now
devoured. In the same Island they geather pytch, Pitch of the rock.
which sweateth out of the rocks, being much harder and sourer then the
pytche of the tree, and is therefore more commodious to calke or defend
ships against the woormes called Bromas, whereof we have spoken largelye
before. This Island also brings forth pytche in two kinds of trees, Pitch
of two kinds of trees The Pyne tree.
as in the Pyne tree, and an other named Copeia. I need not speak of the Pyne
tree, because it is engendered and known in manner every where. Let us therefore
speak somewhat of the other tree called Copeia. The tree Copeia.
Pitche is likewise geathered of it, as of the Pyne tree, although some say
that it is geathered by distyllyng or droppyng of the wood when it is burnt. It
is a strange thing to heareof the leaf thereof, and how necessary provision
of nature is showed in the same. It is to be thought that it is the tree, in
the leaves whereof the Chaldeans (being the first fynders of letters) expressed
their minds before the use of paper was known. This leaf is a spanne in
breadth, The leaf of a tree in the sted^ of paper.
and almost round. Our men write in them with pynnes or nedles, or any such
instruments made of metal or wood, in manner as well as on paper. It is to be
laughed at, what our men have persuaded the people of the Island as touching
this leaf. The simple souls believe, They believe that leaves do speak.

A pretty story.


that at the commandment of our men, leaves do speak and disclose secrets.
They were brought to this credulity by this means. One of our men dwelling in
the city of Dominica, the chief of the Island, delivered to his servant
(being a man borne in the Island) certain roasted Connies (which they call
Vtias, being no bygger then myse) wyllyng him to carry the same to his friend,
which dwelt further within the Island. This messenger, whether it were that he
was thereto constrained through hunger, or entysed by appetite, devoured three
of the Connies by the way. He to whom they were sent, wrote to his freende in a
leaf how many he received. When the master had looked a while on the leaf
in the presence of the servant, he said thus unto him, Ah son, where is thy
faith? Could thy greedy appetite prevail so much with thee, as to cause
thee to eat the Connies committed to thy fidelity? The poor wretch
tremblyng and greatly amassed, confessed his fault, and therewith desired his
master to tell him how he knew the truth thereof. This leaf (quod he)
which thou broughtest me, has told me all. Then he further rehearsed unto
him the hour of his coming to his friend, Ignorance causes admiration.
and likewise of his departing when he returned. And thus they meryly deceive
these seely souls, and keep them under obedience: insomuche that they take
our men for Gods, at whose commandment leaves do disclose such things as
they think most hyd and secret. Both the sides of the leaf receives the
fourmes of letters, The leaf wherein they write.
even as does our paper. It is thycker then double parchement, and marvelous
tough. While it is yet floryshyng and new, it shows the letters white in
green, and when it is dry, it becomes white and hard, like a table of
wood, but the letters wexe yelowe: It does not corrupt or putrify, nor yet
loses the letters though it be wet, nor by any other means, except it be
burnt. There is an other tree named Xagua, the juice of whose sour apple,
being of a dark read color, stayneth and colors whatsoever is touched
therewith, A strong color of the juice of an apple.
and that so fyrmely, that no washyng can take it away for the space of twenty
days. When the apple is full ripe, the juice loses that strength. The apple
is eaten, and of good taste. There is an herb also, whose smoke (as we have
rehearsed the like before of a certain wood) is deadly poison. On a time when
the kings assembled together, An herb whose smoke is poison.
and conspired the destruction of our men, where as they durst not attempt
thinterprise by open war, their devise was, priuilye to lay many bundels of
those herbs in a certain house, which shortly after they intended to set on
fire, to the intent that our men, making have to quench the same, might take
their death with the smoke thereof: But, their purposed practyse being
bewrayed, the aucthours of the devise were punyshed accordyngly. Now (most
holy father) forasmuch as your holiness writes, that whatsoever we have
written of the new world, does please you right well, we will rehearse
certain things out of order, but not greatly from our purpose. Of the setting
the roots of Maizium, Ages, Iucca, Battatas, and such other, being their
common food, and of the use of the same, we have spoken sufficiently before:
But by what means they were first applied to the commodity of men, we have
not yet declared. We now therefore entende to entreat somewhat hereof.

The nienth book of the third Decade.
THey say that the first inhabitours lived contented with the roots of Dates,
The kinds of fruits wherewith thinhabitauntes lived first.
and Magueans, which is an herb, much like unto that which is commonly called
Sengrene or Orpin: also the roots of Guaiegans, which are round and great,
much like unto puffes ye of earth or mushromes. They did likewise eat
Guaieros, like unto Persnips, Cibaios, like Nuttes, Cibaioes and Macoanes, like
unto Onions, with diverse other such roots. They say that after many years, a
certain Boition, that is, a wise old man, saw upon the banks side a bush
like unto fenell, and transplanting the root thereof, brought it from wyldnesse
to a better kind, by nooryshing it in gardens. This was the beginning of
Iucca, which at the first was deadly poison to al such as did eat thereof raw.
Necessity the mother of al arts.
But for as much as they parceyued it to be of pleasant taste, they determined
many ways to prove the use thereof, and at the length found by experience,
that being sodde, or fried, it was less hurtful: by which means also, they
came to the knowledge of the venom lying hyd in the iuise of the root. Thus
by drying, salting, seasoning, and otherwise temperyng it, they brought it to
their fine bread, The fine bread Cazabbi, made of the roots of Iucca.
which they call Cazabbi, more delectable and wholesome to the stomach of man
then bread made of wheat, because it is of easyer digestion. The same is to be
understood of other roots, and the grain of Maizium, which they have chosen
for their chief meat among the seeds of nature, How Ceres first found
wheat and barley in Egypt.
as we read how Ceres the daughter of Saturnus, geathered wheat and barley
(with such other corn as are now most in use among men) in Egypt, of certain
graynes taken out of the mudde driven from the mountains of Ethiopia by
thincrease of the river Nilus, and left in the plain at such time as Nilus
resorted again to his channel. For the which fact, we read that the
antiquity gave divine honor to Ceres, who first nooryshed and increased such
chosen seeds. There are innumerable kinds of Ages, the variety whereof, is
known by their leaves and flowers. One kind of these, is called Guanaguax,
The roots of Ages.
this is white both within and without. An other named Guaraguei, is of violet
color without, and white within. The other kinds of Ages, they call
Zazaueios, these are red without and white within. Squiuetes, are white
within and without. Tunna, is altogether of violet color. Hobos is yelowe
both of skin and inner substance. There is an other named Atibunieix, the
skin of this is of violet color, and the substance white. Aniguamar, has
his skin also of violet color, and is white within. Guaccaracca, has a
white skin, and the substance of violet color. There are many other, which
are not yet brought to us. But I fear me lest in the rehearsal of of these.
The aucthours excuse.
I shall provoke the spurs of malicious persons against me, which will scorn
these our doings, for that we have written of many such small things, to a
prince occupied in such weyghtie affairs, as unto your holiness, upon whose
shoulders rests the burden of the whole Christian world. But I would ask of
these malicious enuyers of other men's trauayles, whether Pliny and such other
famous writers, Pliny.
when they directed and decicated such things to kings and princes, intended
only to profit them to whom they consecrated the fruit of their knowledge.
They sometimes intermixed famous things with obscure things, light with heavy,
and great with small, that by the furtheraunce of princes, their universal
posterity might enjoy the fruition of the knowledge of things. At other times
also being intent about particular things, and desirous of new things, they
occupied them selves in searchyng of particular tractes and coasts, with such
things as nature brought forth in the same, by this means to come the better
to more absolute and universal knowledge. Let them therefore contemn our
doing, and we will laugh to scorn, not their ignorance and slothfulness, but
pernicious curiousness: and therewith having pytie of their froward
dispositions, will commit them to the venomous Serpents of whom envy took
his first original. It shall in the mean time abundauntly content us, that
these things do please your holiness, and that you do not dispyse our simple
vestures, wherewith we have only weaued together, and not adourned,
geathered, and not described, such marvelous things, in the garnyshyng
whereof, nature has sufficiently showed her cunnyng. Our desire is none other
herein, but for your sake to do our endeavor that these things may not
peryshe: let every man take hereof what lyketh him best. Of the sheep or
Bullock sold in the market, nothing remains in the euenyng, because the
shoulder pleases one, the leg an other, and the neck an other: yea some
have most fantasy to the bowels, and some to the feet. Thus having yenough
wandered, let us return to our purpose, and declare with what words they
salute the kings children when they are first borne, and how they apply the
beginning of their lives to the end, and why their kings are called by many
names. Therefore when the king has a son borne, such as dwell near about
his palace or village, repair to the queens chamber, where one saluteth the
new borne child with one name, and an other with an other name. By what names
they salute the kings children when they are borne.

The names and tytles of the Roman Emperors.


God save thee thou shynyng lamp, says one: An other calls him, bright and
clear: Some name him the victourer of his enemies: and other some, the
puissaunt conqueror descended of blood royal, and bryghter then gold: with
diverse other such vain names. Therefore like as every of the Roman emperors
was called Adiabenicus, Parthicus, Armenicus, Dacicus, Gothicus, and
Germanicus, according to the titles of their parents and ancestors: even so
by thimposition of names invented by other kings, Beuchicus Anacacoa the lord
of the region of Xaragua (of whom and of the wise woman Anachaona his sister,
we have spoken largly in the first Decade) was called by all these names
following, Tureigua Hobin, which is as much to say as, a king shynyng as
bright as laton, Starei, that is, bright, Huibo, highness, Duiheynequen, a
rich flood. With all these names, and more then forty other such, does
king Beuchius magnify him self as often as he commands any thing to be
done, or causes any proclamation to be made in his name. If the crier by
negligence leave out any of these names, the king thinks it to sound greatly
to his contumely and reproach: The like is also of other. How they make their
testamentes.
How fondely they use them selves in making their testamentes, we will now
declare. They leave thinheritaunce of their kingdoms to theldest sons of
their eldest systers. If she fail, to theldest of the second sister, and so
of the third if the second also fail: For they are out of doubt that those
children come of their blood, but the children of their own wives, they count
to be not legitimate. So did great Alexander.
If there remain none of their systers children, they leave thinheritaunce to
their brothers: and if they fail, it descends to their own sons. Last of
all, if all these fail, they assign it to the woorthiest, as to him that is
of greatest power in all the Island, that he may defend their subjects from
their ancient enemies. They take as many wives as them lysteth. The kings
wives and concubines are buried with him.
They suffer the best beloved of the kings wives and concubines to be buried
with him. Anachaona the sister of Beuchius the king of Xaragua, being a woman
of such wisdom and cunnyng, that in making of rhymes and balattes she was
counted a prophetisse among the best, commanded, that among all the wives and
concubines of the king her brother, the fayreest (whose name was
Guanahattabenechina) should be buried alive with him, and two of her waytyng
maids with her: She would surely have appointed diverse other to that office,
if she had not been otherwise persuaded by the prayers of certain friars of
saint Fraunces order, They burye their jewels with them.
which chanced then to be present. They say that this Guanahattabenechina
had none in all the Island comparable to her in beauty. She buried with her
all her jewels, A dream of an other life after this.
and twenty of her best ornaments. Their custom is, to place beside every of
them in their sepultures, a cup full of water, and a portion of the fine
bread of Cazabbi. In Xaragua, the region of this king Beuchius, Where it
rayneth but seldom.
and in Hazua, part of the region of Caiabo, also in the fair vale of salt and
fresh lakes, and likewise in the region of Yaquino in the province of Bainoa,
it rayneth but seldom: In all these regions are fosses or trenches made of old
time, whereby they conueye the waters in order to water their fields, with no
less art then do thinhabitours of new Carthage, and of the kingdom of
Murcien in Spartaria for the seldom fall of rain. The region of Maguana,
divides the province of Bainoa from Caiabo, and Zauana from Guaccaiarima. In
the deep vales, they are troubled with rain more often then needs. Where it
rayneth much.
Also the confines of the chief city, named saint Dominike, are moister the^
is necessary. In other places, it raineth moderatly. There are therefore in the
Island of Hispaniola, Variable motions of the Elements.
diverse and variable motions of the elements, as we read the like of many
other regions. Of their colonies or mantions which the Spaniardes have erected
in this Island, The colonies and villages which the Spaniardes have builded.
we have spoken sufficiently before. They have since that time builded these
villages, Portus platae, Portus Regalis, Lares, Villanoua, Azuam, and Salua
terra. Having said thus much of the Island of Hispaniola, the mother and lady
of the other Islands, and as it were Tethys the most beautiful wife of
Neptunus the god of the sea, The other Islands about Hispaniola.
let us now entreat somewhat of her Nymphs and fair Nereides, which wait
upon her, and adourne her on every side. We will therefore begin at the
nearest, called the new Arethusa, The Island of Arethusa.
so named of the fountain Arethusa in the Island of Sicilie. This is famous by
reason of a spring, but otherwise unprofitable. Our men named it of late Duas
Arbores, because it has only two trees growing in it: near unto the which is
a fountain that comes from the Island of Hispaniola, through the secret
passages of the earth under the sea, and breaks forth in this Inde, A spring
runnyng under the sea from Hispaniola to Arethusa.
as the river Alpheus in Achaia runs under the sea from the city of Elde,
and breaks forth in ye Island of Sicilie in the fountain Arethusa. That the
fountain of this new Arethusa, has his original from the Island of
Hispaniola, it is manifest hereby, that the water issuyng out of the
fountain, brings with it the leaves of many trees which grow in
Hispaniola, and not in this Island. They say that the fountain has his
original from the river Yiamiroa, in the region of Guaccaiarima, confinyng
with the land of Zauana. This Island is not past a mile in circuit, and
commodious for fishermen. Directly toward the East (as it were the porter
keepyng the entrye to Tethys) lies the Island of Sancti Iohannis (otherwise
called Burichena) whereof we have spoken largely before: The Island of Sancti
Iohannis.
this abounds with gold, and in fruitful soil is equal with her mother
Hispaniola: in this are many colonies or mansions of Spaniardes, which apply
them selves to geatheryng of gold. Toward the west on the North side, great
Cuba (for the longnesse thereof, The Island of Cuba.
long supposed to be continent or fyrme land) wardeth our Tethys on the back
half. This is much longer then Hispaniola, and from the East to the west, is
diuiuided in the midst with the circle called Tropicus Cancri. Hispaniola and
the other lying on the South side of this, are encluded almost in the mydde
space between the said Tropike and the Equinoctial line, Habitable regions
under the Equinoctial.
which many of the old writers supposed to be uninhabitable and defart, by
reason of the fervent heat of the Son in that clyme, as they coniectured:
but they were deceived in their opinion. They affirm that rycher gold mines
are found in Cuba, The rich gold mine^ of Cuba.
then in Hispaniola. They say also that even now while I write these things,
there is gold geathered together ready to the meltyng, amountyng to the
quantity of a hundred and fourscore thousand Castellans of gold, an argument
surely of great richesse. Iamaica is more toward the South then these, and is
a pleasant and fruitful Island, The Island of Iamaica.
of soil apt for corn, graffes, and settes, it consists of only one
mountain: the inhabitants are warrelyke men, and of good wit, Colonus
compared it to Scicilie in bygnesse. They which of late searched it more
exactly, say that it is somewhat less, but not much. It is thought to be
without gold and precious stones, as the like was supposed of Cuba at the
beginning. The Island of Guadalupea (first named Caraqueira) lying on the South
side of Hispaniola, The Island of Guadalupea.
is four degrees nearer the Equinoctial. It is eaten and indented with two
gulfes (as we read of great Britanie, now called England, and Calidonia, now
called Scotland) being in manner two Islands. England and Scotland
It has famous Ports. In this they found that gum which the Apothecaries
call Animae Album, The gum called Anime album.
whose fume is wholesome against reumes and heaviness of the head. The tree
which engenders this gum, bears a fruit much like unto a Date, being a
spanne in length. When it is opened, it seems to conteyne a certain sweet
meal. As our husbandmen are accustomed to reserve Chestnuts, Dates.
and such other hard fruits, all the winter, so do they the Dates of this
tree, being much like unto a Fygge tree. They found also in this Island, Pine
trees.
Pyne trees, of the best kind, and such other dayntie dyshes of nature,
whereof we have spoken largelye before: Yea they think that the inhabitauntes
of other Islands, had their seeds of so many pleasant fruits from hence. The
Canibales.
For the Cambales, being a wild and wanderyng people, and ouerrunnyng all the
countreye about them, to hunte for man's flesh, were accustomed to bring home
with them whatsoever they found strange or profitable in any place: They are
intractable, and will admit no strangers. It shall therefore be needful to
overcome them with great power: For as well the women as men, are expert
archers, and use to inuenome their arrows. When the men go forth of the land
a man huntyng, the women manfully defend their coasts against such as attempt
to invade the same. And hereby I suppose it was thought, Whereby it was thought
that there were Islands of women.
that there were Islands in the Ocean, inhabited only with women, as Colonus
the Admiral him self persuaded me, as I have said in the first Decade. This
Island has also fruitful mountains and playnes, and notable ryuers. It
nourysheth honey in trees, and in the caves of rocks, as in Palma one of the
Islands of Canarie, Honey in trees and rocks.
honey is geathered among the briars and bramble bushes. About.xviii. miles
Eastward from this Island, lies an Island which our men named Desiderata,
being.xx. miles in circuit, The Island Desiderata. The Island Galanta.
and very fair. Also about ten miles from Guadalupea toward the South,
lies the Island of Galanta, being thirty miles in circuit, and plain: It
was so named for the neatenesse and beautifulness thereof. Niene miles distant
from Guadalupea toward the East, there are six small Islands, named Todos
Sanctos, or Barbata: these are full of rocks, and barren, The Islands of Todos
Sanctos, or Barbata.
yet necessary to be known to such as use to travail the seas of these
coasts. Again, from Guadalupea.xxxv. miles toward the North, there is an
Island named Monsserratus, conteynyng in circuit forty miles, having also in
it a mountain of notable heyght. The Island Monsserratus The Island Antiqua.
The Island named Antiqua, distante from Guadalupea thirty miles, is about
forty miles in circuit. Diegus Colonus the son and heir of Christiphorus
Colonus, told me that his wife (whom he left in the Island of Hispaniola at
his coming into Spain to the court) did write unto him, that of late among
the Islands of the Canibales, there is one found which abounds with gold.
On the left side of Hispaniola toward the South, near unto the haven Beata,
there lies an Island named Portus Bellus: The Island Portus Bellus Great
Tortoyses.

The generation of Tortoyses.


they tell marvelous things of the monsters of the sea about this Island, and
especially of the Tortoyses, for they say that they are bygger then great
round targettes. At such time as the heat of nature moves them to
generation, they come forth of the sea, and making a deep pyt in the sand,
they lay three or four hundred eggs therein. When they have thus emptied
their bag of conception, they put as much of the sand again into the pyt,
as may suffyse to cover the eggs, and so resort again to the sea, nothing
careful of their succession. At the day appointed of nature to the procreation
of these beasts, there creeps out a multitude of Tortoyses, as it were
pyssemares swarmyng out of an ant hill: and this only by the heat of the
Sun, without any help of their parents. The Eggs of Tortoyses.
They say that their eggs are in manner as bygge as Geese eggs. They also
compare the flesh of these Tortoyses, to be equal with veale in taste. There
are beside these, innumerable Islands, the which they have not yet searched,
Innumerable Islands.
nor yet is it greatly necessary to syft this meal so fynely. It may suffyse
to understand that there are large lands, and many regions, which shall
hereafter receive our nations, tounges, and manners, and therewith embrase our
religion. The Troyans did not sodeinly replenyshe Asia, the Tyrians Libya,
Troyans. Tyrians. Greeks. Phenitians. The North Islands.
nor the Greeks and Phenices Spain. As touching the Islands which lie on the
North side of Hispaniola, I have let pass to speak: For albeit they are
commodious for tyllage and fyshyng, yet are they left of the Spanyardes as
poor and of small value. We will now therefore take our leave of this old
Tethis, with her moist and watery Nymphs, and receive to our new acquayntance
the beautiful lady of the South sea, The Islands of the south sea.
rychly crowned with great pearls, the Island of Dites being rich both in
name and in treasure. In my Epistle book which I sent unto your holiness this
last year, I declared how Vaschus Nunnez Balboa, the Captain of them which
passed over the dangerous mountains toward the South sea, learned by report,
that in the prospecte of those coasts there lay an Island aboundyng with
pearls of the greatest sort, and that the king thereof was rich, The Island
of pearls.
and of great power, infestyng with wars the other kings his borderers, and
especially Chiapes and Tumacchus: We declared further, how at that time it
was left untouched by reason of the ragyng tempests which troubled that South
sea three months in the year. But it is now better known to our men, who
have now also brought that fierce king to humanity, and converted him from a
cruel Tiger, to one of the meek sheep of Christ's flock, Wild beasts must
be tamed with the rod.
sanctified with the water of baptism, with all his family and kingdom. It
shall not therefore be from our purpose to declare, by the governance of what
captains, or by what means these things were so happyly atchyued.

The tenth book of the third Decade.
AT the arryuall of Petrus Arias the new governor of Dariena, he gave
commandment that one Gasper Moralis should take in hand thexpedition to the
Island of Dites. He therefore took his vyage first to Chiapes and Tumacchus
kings of the South, An expedition to the Island of Dites in the south sea.
whom Vaschus before had conciled and left friends to the Christians. They
friendly and magnifically enterteyned our men, who prepared them a navy of the
kings boats to pass over into this Island, which they call Dites, The Island
of Margaritea.
and not Margarita or Margaritea, although it abound with pearls, which in
the latin tongue are called Margaritae. For they first called an other by this
name, Os Draconis, Paria.
which lies next to the mouth of Os Draconis in the region of Paria, in the
which also is found great plenty of pearls. Gasper brought with him only.lx.
armed men to the Island, for that he could convey over no greater number, by
reason of the smalnesse and narownes of their boats or barks, which they call
Culchas, made of one whole piece of timber, as we have said before. The king of
ye Island came forth against them fiercely, A conflict.
with cruel and threatening countenance, and with a great band of armed men,
crying in manner of a larome, and in token of the battle, Guazzauara,
Guazzauara, which is as much to say as, battle against ye enemy, and is (as
it were) a watch word to give thonset: wherewith also they threw their darts,
for they have not thuse of bows. They were so obstinate and desperate, that
they assailed our men with four Guazzauaras, that is, battayles. At the length
our men with certain of Chiapes and Tumacchus men (being old enemies to this
king of the Island) got the upper hand, by reason they assailed the king
sodeinly and unawares. Yet was he determined to assemble a greater power, and
once again to attempt the fortune of war, but that he was otherwise
persuaded by the kings his borderers, which counseled him to give over, and
submit him self, sometime by thexample of them selves and other, threatnyng
the destruction of his flooryshyng kingdom, and otherwhyles declaryng unto him
the humanity and gentleness of our men, by whose friendship he might obtain
honor and quietness to him and his: willing him furthermore to consider, what
chanced unto them which the year before resisted and adventured the hasarde
of the battle, as did these kings, Poncha, Pocchorrosa, Quarequa, ^hiapes,
and Tumacchus, with such other. By these persuasions, the king submitted him
self, and came friendly to our men, whom he conducted to his palace, which
they say to be marvelously adourned and princelyke. The king of the Island of
Dites submits him self. The kings palace.

A hundredth and ten pound weight of pearls.


As soon as they entered into the palace, he brought forth a basket of
curious workemanshyp, and full of pearls, which he gave them. The sum of
these pearls amounted to the weight of a hundred and ten pounds, after.viii.
ounces to the pound: being again rewarded of our men, with such tryfles as
they brought with them of purpose, as garlandes of Crystal, and glass, and
other counterfeit stones of diverse colors, with lookyng glasses also, and laton
belles, Axes and hatchets more esteemed then gold.
and especially two or three Iron hatchets (which they more esteem then great
heaps of gold) he thought him self abuntdantly recompensed. They laugh our
men to scorn, that they will depart with so great and necessary a thing for
any sum of gold: affyrmyng an axe or hatchet to be profitable for many uses
of men, and that gold serves only for wanton pleasures, and not to be
greatly necessary. Being therefore joyful and glad of the friendship of our
men, he took the captain by the hand, and brought him with certain of his
familiars to the highest tower of his palace, from whence they might prospecte
the main sea: then castyng his eyes about him on every side, and lookyng
toward the East, he said unto them, Behold, here lies open before you the
infinite sea, extended beyond the sun beams: The kings words.
then turnyng him toward the South and West, he signified unto them that the
land which lay before their eyes, the tops of whose great mountains they
might see, was exceedyng large: Islands rych in gold and pearls.
then coming somewhat nearer, he said, Behold these Islands on the right
hand and on the left, which all obey unto our empire, and are rich, happy,
and blessed, if you call those lands blessed which abound with gold and
pearl. We have in this Island little plenty of gold: but the deep places of
all the seas about these Islands are full of pearls, whereof you shall receive
of me as many as you will require, so that ye persist in the bond of
friendshyp which you have begun. I greatly desire your friendshyp, and would
gladly have the fruition of your things, which I set much more by then
millions of pearls: You shall therefore have no cause to doubt of any
unfaithfulness or breach of friendshyp on my behalf. Our men gave him like
friendly words, and encouraged him with many fair promyses to do as he had
said. When our men were now in a readynesse to depart, they couenaunted with
him to pay yearly to the great king of Castyle a hundred pound weight of
pearls. C. pound weight of pearls yearly for a tribute.
He gladly agreed to their request, and took it for no great thing, nor yet
thought him self any whit the more to become tributarie. With this king they
found such plenty of Hearts and Cunnies, that our men, standing in their
houses, Plenty of Hearts and Cunnies.
might kill as many as them list with their arrows. They live here very
pleasauntly, having great plenty of all things necessary. This Island is
scarsely six degrees distant from the Equinoctial line. They have the same
manner of bread, made of roots and the grain of Maxium, and wine made of
seeds and fruits, even as they have in the region of Comogra, and in other
places, Wine of fruits and seeds.
as well in the Islands, as in the firm land. This king is now baptized, with
all his family and subicctes. His desire was, at his baptism, to be named
Petrus Arias, after the name of the governor. When our men departed, The king
is baptized.
he accompanied them to the sea side, and furnyshed them with boats to return
to the continent. Our men divided the pearls among them, reseruyng the fifth
portion to be delivered to thoffycers of the kings Excheker in those parts.
The fyft part of pearls due to the king.
They say that these pearls were marvelous precious, fair, orient, and
exceeding byg: insomuch that they brought many with them bygger then hasell
nuttes. Byg pearls.
Of what price and value they might be, I consider by one pearl the which
Paulus, predicessour to your holiness, A pearl for a Pope.
bought at the second hand of a merchant of Uenice for four and forty
thousand ducates: Yet among those which were brought from this Ila^d, there was
one bought even in Dariena, for a thousand and two hundred Castellans of gold:
this was almost as byg as a mean walnut, An other pearl of great price.
and came at yt length to the hands of Petrus Arias the governor, who gave it
to that noble and faithful woman his wife, of whose manner of departure with
her husband, we have made mention before. We must then needs think that this
was very precious, which was bought so dear among such a multitude of
pearls, where they were not bought by one at once, but by pounds, and at the
least by ounces. It is also to be thought that the Uenecian merchant bought
his for no great sum of money in the East parts: But he sold it the dearer,
Nyse and superfluous pleasures.
for that he chanced to live in those lascivious and wanton days, when men
were given to such nyse and superfluous pleasures, and met with a merchant for
his purpose. But let us now speak somewhat of the shelfyshes, in the which
pearls are engendered. Diverse opinions of the generation of pearls.
It is not unknown to your holiness, that Aristotle, and Pliny his follower,
were of diverse opinions as concerning the generation of pearls. But these
Indians, and our men, rest only in one assertion, not assentyng to them in any
other: as, either that they wander in the sea, or, that they move at any time
after they are borne. They will therefore that there be certain green places,
as it were meadows, Herbs in the bottom of the sea.
in the bottom of the sea, bringing forth an herb much like unto Time, and
affirm that they have seen the same, and that they are engendered, noryshed,
and grow therein, as we see thincrease and succession of Oysters to grow
about them selves: Also that these fyshes delyghteth not in the conversation or
company of the sea dogs, nor yet to be contented with only one, two, or
three, or at the most four pearls, affyrmyng that in the fyshyng places of
the king of this Island, there was found a hundred pearls in one fyshe, the
which Caspar Moralis the captain him self, A hundred pearls in one shell
fyshe.
and his companions, diligently numbered: For it pleased the king at their being
there, and in their presence, to command his diverse to go a fyshyng for
those kind of fyshes. They compare the matrices of these fyshes, to the places
of conception in Hens, The matrice of the pearl fyshe.
in the which their eggs are engendered in great multitudes and clusters, and
believe that these fyshes bring forth their birth in like manner. For the better
proof whereof, they say that they found certain pearls coming forth of
their matrices, The birth of pearls.
as being now come to the time of their full rypenesse, and moved by nature to
come out of their moothers womb, openyng it self in time convenient:
likewise, that within a while after, they saw other succeed in like manner. So
that to conclude, they saw some coming forth, and other some yet abydyng the
time of their perfection: which being complete, they also became loose, and
opened the matrice. They perceived the pearls to be enclosed in the myddest
of their bellyes, there to be nourished and increase, as an infant sucking his
moothers pappes within her womb, before he move to come forth of her privy
places. And if it chance any of these shelfyshes to be found scattered in
the sand of the sea (as I my self have seen Oysters disparcled on the shores
in diverse places of the Ocean) they affirm that they have been violently
driven thither from the bottom of the sea by force of tempests, and not to
have wandered thither of them selves: But, that they become white by the
clearenesse of the morning deawe, or wax yelowe in troubled weather, or
otherwise that they seem to rejoice in fair weather and clear air, or
contrarywyse, to be as it were astonyshed and dymme in thunder and tempests,
with such other: the perfect knowledge hereof, is not to be looked for at the
hands of these unlearned men, which handle the matter but grossly, and
inquire no further then occasion serves. Yet do they affirm by thexperience
and industry of the diverse, that the greatest pearls lie in the deepest
places, Where the biggest, mean, and least pearls are engendered.
they of the mean sort higher, and the least highest of all, and nearer to the
brymme of the water: And say therefore, that the greatest do not wander, but
that they are created, nouryshed, and increase in the deepest places of the
sea, whyther few diverse (and that but seeldome) dare adventure to diue so
deep to geather them, as well for fear of the sea crabbes, which wander among
these pearl fyshes to feed of them, Sea crabbes.
and for fear of other monsters of the sea, as also least their breath should
fail them in to long remaining in the water: And this they say to be the
cause why the oldest (and therefore byggest) sea muscles inhabit ye deepest
places, The sea muscles wherein pearls are engendered.
from whence they are not lightly moved by tempests. Furthermore, how much the
bygger and older these fyshes are, they say that in their larger matrices, the
greater number and bigger pearls are found, and that for this cause there are
fewer found of the byggest sort. They think also, that when they first fall
from their fyshes in the deep places, they are devoured of other fyshes,
because they are not yet heard. Again, the smallest differ from the byggest
in a certain swelling or impostumation, which ye Spaniardes call a tympany:
For they deny that to be a pearl which in old muscles cleaves fast to the
shell, but that it is a wart, which being rased from the shell with a fyle, is
round and bright but only of one side, and not precious, being rather of the
nature of the fyshe it self, then of a pearl. They confess that they have
seen certain of these muscles cleauyng on rocks, yet these but few, and
nothing worth. It is also to be thought, that the pearl fyshes or sea
muscles which are found in India, Arabia, the red sea, or Taprobana, are
ruled in such order as the aforenamed famous aucthours have written: For their
opinion herein is not utterly to be rejected, forasmuch as they were learned
men, and trauayled long in the searchyng of these things. But we have now
spoken sufficiently of these sea fyshes, and of their eggs, which the fond
nysenesse and wantonness of men have made deerer then the eggs of hens or
geese. Let us therefore entreat somewhat of other particular things, which
are come to our knowledge of late. We have elsewhere largely described the
mouths of the gulf of Vraba, with sundry and variable regions divided with
the manifold gulfes of that sea: But as concerning the West coasts, in the
which our men have builded houses, and planted their habitations on the banks
of Dariena, I have no new matter to write. Yet as touching the East parts of
the gulf, I have learned as follows. They say that the universal land of
the East region of the gulf, The regions of the East side of the gulf of
Vraba.
from the corner thereof far reachyng into the sea, and from the extreme or
vttermoste mouth of the same, receyuyng the waters of the sea which fall into
it, even unto Os Draconis and Paria, is by one general name called Caribana,
of the Caribes or Canibales which are found in every region in this tract:
The region of Caribana.
But from whence they had their particular original, and how, leauyng their
native soil, they have spredde their generation so far, like a pestiferous
contagion, we will now declare. The original of the Canibales.
Therefore from the first front reachyng forth into the sea (in whose tract we
said that Fogeda fastened his foot) toward the corner, about niene miles
distant, there lies a village of Caribana, named Futcraca: The villages of
Caribana.
three miles distant from this, is the village of Vraba, of the which it is
thought that the whole gulf took his name, because this village was once the
head of the kingdom. About six miles from this, is Feti: Niene miles from
Feti, is Zerema: And about twelve miles from this, Sorache. Our men found all
these villages full of people, all the which give them selves only to
manhuntyng: Manhunters.
Insomuche that if they lack enemies against whom they may keep war, they
exercise cruelty against them selves, and either slaye the one the other, or
else drive the vanquyshed to flight. Whereby it is apparent, that by these their
continual wars, and dryuyng the one the other out of their countries, this
infection has gone so far, not only on the fyrme land, but also into the
Islands. I was also advertised of an other thing, the which to my judgment
seems worthy to be put in memory. One Coruales, a judge in causes of law
among the Spanyardes of Dariena, says, that on a time walkyng abroad with his
book in his hand, he met by the way with a fugityue, which had fled from
the great lands lying far toward the west, and remained here with a King
with whom he was entertained. When this man perceived the lawyer lookyng on his
book, marueylyng thereat, he came runnyng unto him, and by interpretours of
the king whom he served, spoke thus unto him, Books: Look in the beginning of
the book of the lands lately found.
Have you also books, wherein you may reserve things in perpetual memory? and
letters, whereby you may declare your mind to such as are absent? And
herewith desired that the book might be opened unto him, supposyng that he
should therein have found the letters of his own country: But when he saw
them unlike, he said further, that in his country there were cities fortified
with walls, and governed by laws, and that the people also used apparel: but
of what religion they were, I did not learn. Yet had our men knowledge both by
the words and signs of this fugitive, Circumcised people.
that they were circumcised. What now think you hereby (most holy father?) Or
what do you divine may come hereof, when time shall subdue all these under your
throne? Let us now entermyngle certain small things among these great
matters. What chanced to the Capitaynes which the governor sent diverse ways.
I have not thought good to pretermit that which chanced to Johannes Solisius,
who, to search the South side of the supposed continent, departed with three
ships from the port Ioppa (not far distant from the Islands of Gades or
Cales in the Ocean) the fourth day of the Ides of September, in the
year.M.D.xv. or what success Johannes Pontius had, whom the new governor
Petrus Arias appointed to vanquyshe and destroy the Caribes or Canibales, Look
decade iii. liber. vi.
deuourers of man's flesh: also to what end the voyages of the other captains
came, which were sent forth diverse ways at the same time, as Gonzalus
Badaiocius, Franciscus Bezarra, and Valleius, Johannes Solicius took the
matter in hand in an evil hour. The vioage of Johannes Solisius.
He sailed beyond the point of saint Augustine (which they call Cabo. S.
Augustini) toward the South side of the supposed continent beyond the
Equinoctial line. For (as we have said before) that point reaches Southwarde
to the seventh degree of the South pole, Cab. S. Augustini.
called the pole Antartike. He proceeded in that vyage six hundred leagues,
and found the land from the point to extend so far toward the South
beyond the Equinoctial, that he came to the thirtieth degree of ye South pole.
As he sailed thus forward, having now on his back half the stars named
Caput Draconis, John Solisius is slain of the Canibales.
(that is, the Dragons head) and the regions of Paria lying northwarde from
him, and prospectyng toward the pole Artyke, he chanced to fall into the
hands of the filthy Canibales: For these crafty foxes seemed to make signs
of peace, when in their minds they conceived a hope of a dainty banquet, The
fyrcenes of the Canibales.
and espying their enemies a far of, began to swalowe their spettle, as their
mouth watered for greedines of their pray. As unhappy Solisius descended, with
as many of his company as could en^er into the boat of the byggest ship,
suddenly a great multitude of thinhabitantes brust forth upon them, and ^lue
them every man with clubbes, even in the sight of their fellows. They carried
away the boat, and in a moment broke it all to fytters, not one escaping.
Their fury not thus satisfied, they cut the slain men in pieces, even upon
the shore, where their fellows might behold this horrible spectacle from the
sea. But they being stricken with fear through this example, durst not come
forth of their ships, or devise how to revenge the death of their Captain
and companyons. They departed therefore from these unfortunate coasts, and by
the way ladyng their ship with brasell, returned home again with loss,
Brasyle.
and heavy cheer. Of these things I was advertised of late by their own
letters. What they have else done, I shall have more particular knowledge
hereafter. Johannes Pontius was also repulsed by the Canibales in the Island of
Guadalupea, Johannes Pontius is repulsed by the Canibales.
being one of the chief Islands of their habitation. For when they saw our
men a far of on the sea, they lay in ambushe, suddenly to invade them when
they should come alande. Our men sent forth a few foot men, and with them
their Laundresses to wash their shertes and sheets: For from the Island of
Ferrea, being one of the Islands of Canarie (even unto this Island, for the
space of four thousand and two hundred miles) they had seen no land, where
they might find any fresh water, forasmuch as in all this large space the
Ocean is without Islands. At their coming therefore to land, the Canibales
assailed them, carried away the women, and put the men to such distress, that
few of them escaped. By reason whereof, Pontius being greatly discomfited,
durst not invade the Canibales, fearyng their venomed arrows, which these
naked manhunters can direct most certaynely. Thus good Pontius failing of his
purpose, was feign to give over the Canibales, whom (being safe and under the
house roof) he threatened to vanquish and destroy. Whyther he went from thence,
or what new things he found, I have as yet no further knowledge. By these
mysfortunes, Solisius lost his life, and Pontius his honor. Let us now speak
of an other, whose enterprise came to like purpose the same year. Johannes
Aiora, borne in the city of Corduba, The voyage of Johannes Aiora.

Look Decade iii. liber vi.


a man of noble parentage, sent in stead of the Lieuetenant (as we have said)
more covetous of gold, then careful of his charge, or desirous of prayle for
well deserving, sought occasions of quarelyng against the kings, and spoiled
many, violentlye extortyng gold of them against right and equity: and further,
handeled them so extremely, that of friends they became most cruel enemies,
insomuch that they ceased not with desperate minds, The lewd behavior of
John Aiora.
by all means they could, to slay our men openly or privily. By reason
whereof it is come to pass, that where before they bartered quietly,
exchanging ware for ware, they are now feign to do all things by force of
arms. When he had thus exacted a great quantity of gold of them (as it is
said) he fled priuilye, and took away a ship with him by stealth, as the
common rumor goes, nor yet hitherto have we hard whyther he went, or where he
is arrived. Some suspect that Petrus Arias the governor should consent to his
departure, because this Johannes Aiora, is brother to Gonsalus Aiora, the
kings historiographer, a man both learned, and expert in the discipline of
war, and so much the governors friend, that these two among a few, may be
counted examples of rare amity. I my self also am greatly bound unto them
both, and have long enjoyed their frendshyp: yet shall I desire them both to
pardon me in declaring my fantasy herein, that in all the turmoyles and
tragical affairs of the Ocean, nothing has so much displeased me, as the
covetousness of this man, who has so disturbed the pacifyed minds of the
kings. Now among these troublous chances, let us rehearse the variable
fortune of Gonsalus Badaiocius, The variable fortune of Gonsalus Badaiocius.
and his fellows, whose prosperous begynninges, ended with unfortunate
success. Gonsalus therefore in the month of May, in the year of Christ.1515.
departed from Dariena with fourscore armed men, directing his voyage toward the
South, and resting in no place until he came to the region of Cerabaro, which
our men named Gratia Dei, Cerabaro. Decade.iii.li.iiii.
distaunt from Dariena about a hundred and fourscore miles: for they call it
threescore leagues. He spent certain days here in idleness: for he could
neither by fair means, nor by foul, allure the king of the region to come to
him. While he lay thus idelly, there came to him other fyftie men, sent from
Dariena under the governance of captain Lodouicus Mercado, who departed from
Dariena in the calendes of May, to the intent to search the inner parts of
those regions. When they met together, they determined, after consultation, to
pass over the mountains lying toward the South, even unto the South sea
lately found. Behold now a wonderful thing, The South sea.
that in a land of such marvelous longitude in other places, they found it
here to be only about fyftie miles distant to the South sea: for they count
it.xvii. leagues, as the manner of the Spanyardes is to reckon, and not by
miles: Yet say they that a league consysteth of three miles by land, A league
contains four miles by sea and but three by land.
and four by sea, as we have noted before. In the tops of the mountains and
turnyng of the waters, they found a king named Iuana, whose kingdom is also
named Coiba, as is the region of king Careta, of whom we have made mention
elsewhere. But for as much as the region of this Iuana, is rycher in gold,
they named it Coiba Dites, that is, Coiba the rych: For, wheresoever they
dygged the ground, The golden region Coiba Dites.

Sand myxt with gold.


whether it were on the dry land, or in the wet chanelles of the ryuers, they
found the sand, which they cast forth, myxt with gold. Iuana fled at the
coming of our men, and could never be brought again. They spoiled all the
country near about his palace: yet had they but little gold, for he had
carried all his stuff with him. Here they found certain slaves, marked in the
faces after a strange sort: How their slaves are marked in the face.
For with a sharp prycke made either of bone, or else with a thorn, they make
holes in their faces, and forthwith sprinklyng a powder thereon, they moiste
the pounced place with a certain black or read juice, whose substance is of
such tenacitie and clamminesse, that it will never wear away: They brought
these slaves away with them. They say that this juice is of such sharpness,
and puts them to such pain, that for extreme doloure they have no stomach
to their meat certain days after. The kings which take these slaves in
their wars, use their help in seeking for gold, and in tyllage of the
ground, even as do our men. From the palace of Iuana, following the course of
the water about ten miles toward the South, they entered into the dominion of
an other king, whom our men named the old man, because he was old, not
passing of his other name. In the region of this king also, they found gold
in all places, Gold.
both on the land, and in the ryuers. This region is very fair, and
fruitful, and has in it many famous ryuers. Departing from hence, in five
days journey they came to a land left desolate: They suppose that this was
destroyed by civil discord, A fruitful region left desolate by civil
discord.
forasmuch as it is for the most part fruitful, and yet not inhabited. The
fyfth day, they saw two men coming a far of: these were laden with bread of
Maizium, which they carried on their shoulders in sackes. Our men took them,
and understood by them that there were two kings in that tract, the one was
named Periquete, who dwelt near unto the sea, the others name was Totonoga.
This Totonoga was blind, and dwelt in the continent. The two men which they
met, were the fyshers of Totonoga, whom he had sent with certain fardelles of
fyshe to Periquete, and had again received bread of him for exchange: For
thus do they communicate their commodities one with an other by exchange,
without the use of wicked money. By the conductyng of these two men, they came
to king Totonoga, dwelling on the West side of saint Michaels gulf, in the
South sea. They had of this king the sum of six thousand Castellans of
gold, both rude, Six thousand Castellans of gold.
and artifycially wrought. Among those groumes of rude or natyue gold, there
was one found of the weight of two Castellans, which argued the plentiful
rychenesse of the ground. Following the same coast by the sea side toward the
West, they came to a king, king Taracuru.
whose name was Taracuru, of whom they had gold, amountyng to the weight of
eight thousand Pesos. We have said before that Pesus is the weight of a
Castelane, not coined. From hence they went to the dominion of this kings
brother, named Pananome, who fled at their coming, and appeared no more
afterward. They say that his kingdom is rich in gold. They spoiled his
palace in his absence. Six leagues from hence, they came to another king,
named Tabor. Four thousand pesos of gold.

Salt.


From thence they came to the king of Cheru. He friendly entertained our men,
and gave them four thousand Pesos of gold. He has in his dominion many
goodly salt bays: the region also abounds with gold. About twelve miles
from hence, they came to another king called Anata, of whom they had xv.
thousand Pesos of gold, which he had gotton of the kings his borderers,
whom he had vanquished by war. A great part of this gold was in rude form,
because it was molten when he set the kings houses on fire whom he spoiled.
For they rob and slay the one the other, sackyng and fyryng their villages,
Their manner of war.
and wasting their countries. They keep war barbarously, and to utter
destruction, executyng extreme cruelty against them that have the overthrow,
Gonsalus Badaiocius, with his fellows, wandered at liberty, until they came to
this king, and had geathered great heaps of gold of other kings. For, what
in braslettes, collers, earerynges, breast plates, helmettes, and certain
bars wherewith women bear up their breasts, they had geathered together in
gold the sum of fourscore thousand Castellans, which they had obtained partly
by exchange for our things where they found the kings their friends, and
otherwise by forcyble means where they found the contrary. They had gotten
also forty slaves, whose help they used both for carriage of their victualles
and baggagies, in the steed of Moyles or other beasts of burden, and also to
relieve such as were sick and forweeried by reason of their long iourneies and
hunger. After these prosperous voyages, they came by the dominion of king
Scoria, to the palace of a king named Pariza, where (fearyng no such thing)
Pariza enclosed them with a great army, Gonsalus Badaiocius has the
overthrow and is spoiled of great riches of gold.
and assailed them straggelyng and unawares, in such sort that they had no
leisure to put on their armure. He slew and wounded about fyftie, and put the
resydue to flight. They made such have, that they had no respect either to the
gold they had geathered, or to their slaves, but left all behind them. Those
few that escaped, came to Dariena. The opinion of all wise men, as concerning
the variable and inconstant chances of fortune in humane things were false,
The inconstancy of fortune.
if all things should have happened unto them prosperously. For such is the
nature of this blind goddess, that she oftentimes delyteth in the overthrow
of them whom she has exalted, and takes pleasure in confounding high things
with low, and the contrary. We see this order to be impermutable, that who so
will apply him self to geather roots, shall sometimes meet with sweet
Lyqueresse, and other whiles with sour Cockle. Yet woe unto Pariza: for he
shall not long sleep in rest. The governor him self was of late determined
with three hunndred and fifty choice soldiers to revenge the death of our
men: but where as he by chance fell sick, his power went forward under the
conducting of his Lieuetenaunt Gaspar Spinosa, a Judge in cases of law in
Dariena. At the same time other were sent forth to the Island of Dites, to
exact the portion of pearls limited to the king for his tribute. What shall
succeed, time will bring to our knowledge. The other two attempted
thinhabitauntes beyond the gulf Franciscus Bezerra, The expedition of Fraunces
Bezarra aganst the Canibales.
passing over the corner of the gulf, and the mouths of the river of Dabaiba,
with two other captains, and a hundred and fifty soldiers well appointed,
went to make war upon the Canibales, even in Caribana their own cheifest
dominion, toward the village of Turufy, whereof we have made mention before in
the coming of Fogeda. They brought also with them diverse engines of war, as
three pieces of ordinance, whose shot were bygger then eggs: Gunnes.
likewise forty archers, and.xxv. hagbutters, to the intent to reach the
Canibales a far of, and to prevent their venomed arrows: But what became of
him and his company, or where they arrived, we have yet no perfect knoweledge.
Certain which came of late from Dariena to Spain reported, that at their
departure they of Dariena stood in great fear lest they also were tossed with
some misfortune. The other captain Valleius obtained the fore part of the
gulf, Valleius repulsed of his enemies.
but he passed over by an other way then did Bezerra, for he took the
beginning of Caribana, and Bezarra the end: Valleius returned again. But of
the threescore and ten men which he conueighed over with him, he left forty
and eight slain among the Canibales. These are the news which they bring that
came last from Dariena. There came to me the day before the Ides of October in
this year 1516. Rodericus Colmenares (of whom we have made mention before) and
one Franciscus Delapuente. This Franciscus was one of the under captains of
this band, whose chief captain was Gonsalus Badaiocius, who hardly escaped
the hands of king Pariza. These two captains therefore, Rodericus and
Franciscus, who departed from Dariena immediately after ye misfortune which
befell to Badaiocius and his company, The Islands of the South sea.
do both affirm, the one, that he has hard, In this sea lie the Islands of
Mollucca, most fruitful of spyces.
and the other, that he has seen, that in the South sea there are diverse
Islands lying westward from the Island of Dites, and Saint Michaels gulf, in
many of the which are trees engendered and noorished, which bring forth ye same
arromatical fruits as does the region of Collacutea. This land of
Collacutea, with the regions of Cochinus and Camemorus, Collacutea.
are the chief mart places from whence the Portugales have their spices:
Cochinus and Camemorus, from whence the Portugales have their spyces.
And hereby do they conjecture, that the land where the fruitfulness of
spice begins, should not be far from thence, insomuche, that many of them
which have ouerrunne those coasts, do only desire that leave may be granted
them to search further, and that they will of their own charges frame and
furnysh ships, and adventure the vyage to seek those Islands and regions.
They think it best that these ships should be made and prepared, He means
by the straight of Magellanus.
even in saint Michaels gulf, and not to attempt this vyage by saint
Augustines point, which way were both long and difficult, and full of a
thousand dangers, and is said to reach beyond the fourtieth degree of the
pole Antartike. The same Franciscus, being partener of the trauayles and
dangers of Gonsalus, says, that in ouerrunning those lands, he found great
heardes of Hearts and wild Bores, How they take Hearts and wild Bores.
and that he took many of them by an art which thinhabitantes taught him:
which was, to make pittes or trenches in their walks, and to cover the same
with boughs: By this means also they deceive all other kinds of wild and
four footed beasts. But they take fowls after ye same manner that we do: As
stock doves, Stock doves.
with an other tame stock dove brought up in their houses. These they tie by a
stryng, and suffer them to flee a little among the trees: to the which as other
birds of their kind resort, they kill them with their arrows. Otherwise they
take them with nets, Their manner of foulyng.
in a bare place purged from trees and bushes, and scattering certain seeds
round about yt place, in ye midst whereof they tie a tame foul or byrd, of
the kind of them which they desire to take: In like manner do they take
Popingiayes and other fowls. But they say that Popingiayes are so simple,
Popingiayes are easily taken
that a great multitude of them will flee even into the tree in whose boughs
the fouler sits, and swarm about the tame chatteryng Popingiay, sufferyng
them selves to be easily taken: For they are so without fear of the sight of
the fouler, that they tarry while he cast the snare about their necks, the
other being nothing feared hereby, though they see him draw them to him with
the snare, and put them in the bag which he has about him for the same
purpose. There is an other kind of foulyng, heretofore never heard of, and
pleasant to consider. A strange kind of foulyng.
We have declared before how that in certain of the Islands, and especially
in Hispaniola, there are diverse lakes or standing pooles: In some of these
(being no deeper then men may wade over them) are seen great multitudes of
water fowls: as well for that in the bottom of these lakes there grow many
herbs and weeds, as also that by reason of the heat of the Sun, pearsyng
to the natural place of generation and conception, where being doubled in
force by reflection, and preserved by moyster there, are engendered of the
slyminesse of the earth and water, and by the providence of the universal
creator, innumerable little fyshes, with a thousand sundry kinds of frogs,
worms, gnattes, flies, and such other. The fowls which use these lakes,
Fyshes and worms engendered of slyme. Fowls.
are of diverse kinds: as Duckes, Geese, Swannes, sea News, Gulles, and such
other. We have said also, that in their Orchardes they noryshe a tree which
bears a kind of great Gourdes. Gourdes of the tree.
Of these Gourdes therefore, well stopped least any water should enter in at
their ryftes, and cause them to sink, they cast many in the shalowe pooles,
where, by their continual wanderyng and waueryng with the motions of the wind
and water, they put the fowls out of suspection and fear: the fouler in the
mean time, disguising him self as it were with a visour, puts a great
gourde on his head, much like to a helmet, with two holes near about his eyes,
his face and whole head beside being covered therewith: and thus enters he
into the poole even unto the chynne. For being from their infancy exercised in
swimming, and accustomed to the waters, they refuse not to continue therein a
long space: the fowls thynking this Gourde to be one of the other that swymme
upon the water, the fouler goes softly to the place where he sees the
greatest flock of fowls, and with waggyng his head, counterfeyting the mouyng
of the waueryng Gourdes, draws near to the fowls, where softly puttyng
forth his right hand, he suddenly snatcheth one by the legs, and plungeth
her into the water, where he puts her into a bag which he has with him
of purpose: The other fowls supposyng that this dyued into the water of her
own motion to seek for food (as is their manner) are nothing moved hereby,
but go forward on their way as before, until they also fall into the same
snare. I have here for this cause entered into the declaration of their manner
of huntyng and foulyng, that by these more pleasant narrations, I may somewhat
mittigate and assuage the horror conceived in your stomach by the former
rehearsal of their blooddy acts and cruel manners. Let us now therefore
speak somewhat again of the new and later opinions, as concerning the swyft
course of the sea toward the West about the coasts of Paria, also of the
manner of geatheryng of gold in the gold mine of Dariena, as I was advertised
of late: and with these two quiet and peaceable things, Later opinions of the
swyft course of the Ocean toward the West.
we will make an end of the tragical affairs of the Ocean, and therewith bid
your holiness farewell. So it is therefore, that Andreas Moralis the pilot, and
Ouiedus (of whom we have made mention before) repaired to me, at my house in
the town of Matrite. As we met thus together, there arose a contention
between them two, as concerning this course of the Ocean. They both agree,
that these lands and regions parteynyng to the dominion of Castile, The
continent or fyrme land.
do with one continual tract and perpetual bond, embrase as one whole firm
land or continent, all the main land lying on the North side of Cuba, and
the other Islands, being also Northwest both from Cuba and Hispaniola: Yet as
touching the course of the water, they varry in opinion. For Andreas will that
this violent course of water be received in the lap of the supposed
continent, which bends so much, and extends so far toward the North, as
we have said: and that by the object or resistance of the land, so bending
and crookyng, the water should as it were rebounde in compass, and by force
thereof be driven about the North side of Cuba, and the other Islands, excluded
without ye circle called Tropicus Cancri, where the largenes of ye sea may
receive the waters falling from the narow streams, and thereby repress that
inordinate course, by reason that the sea is there very large and great. I can
compare his meaning to nothing more aptely, then to the swyft stream coming
forth of a myll, and falling into the myll poole: For in all such places where
waters run with a violent fall through narowe chanelles, and are then
received in large pooles, they are suddenly disparcled, and their violence
broken: So that whereas before they seemed of such force as to overthrow all
things being in their way, it can not then be perceived which way they run.
The Admiral him self Diegus Colonus, The vyages of Diegus Colonus.
son and heir to Christiphorus Colonus, the first fynder of these lands
(who had now in coming and going, four times passed through these seas)
being demanded of me what he found or perceived in saylyng too and fro:
answered, that there was much difficulty in returnyng the same way by the
which they go. But whereas they first take the way by the main sea toward
the North, before they direct their course to Spain, The viage from the new
lands to Spain
he says that in that tract he felt the ship sometimes a little driven
back by the contrary course of the water: Yet supposes that this chances
only by the ordinary flowyng and reflowyng of the sea, and the same not to be
enforced by the circumflection or course of the water, reboundyng in compass
as we have said: But thinks rather, that this main land or supposed
continent, should somewhere be open: and that the said open place, should be
as it were a gate, entry, or straight, diuyding the North parts of that land
from the South, by the which also the Ocean runnyng toward the West, may by
the rotation or impulsion of the heavens, be driven about the whole earth.
Ouiedus agrees with Andreas Moralis as touching the continual adherence and
closeness of the said continent: Yet neither that the waters should so beat
against the bendyng back of the West land, or be in such sort repulsed and
driven into the main sea: But says, that he has diligently considered, that
the waters run from the deepest and myddest of the main sea, toward the
West: Also, that saylyng near unto the shore with small vessels, he found
the same waters to return again toward the East, so that in the same place
they run together with contrary course, as we oftentimes see the like to
chance in ryuers, The contrary course of waters.
where by the object of the banks, diverse whirlepooles and turnynges arise in
the water. By reason whereof, if any chafe, straw, wood, or any other thing
of light substance be cast in any such places in ryuers, it follows, that all
such as run with the water in the myddest of the channel, proceed well
forward, but such as fall into the bendyng gulfes and indented margentes of
the crooked banks, are carried overthwart the channel, and so wander about
until they meet with the full and direct course of the river. Thus have we
made you partener of such things as they have given us, and written their
diverse opinions: We will then give more certain reason, when more certain
truth shall be known. We must in the mean time lean to opinions, until the
day come appointed of God to reveal this secret of nature, The point of the
pole star.
with the perfect knowledge of the point of the pole star. Having said thus
much of the course of the Ocean, a brief declaration of the gold mines of
Dariena, shall close up our Decades, and make an end of our trauayles. We
have said, that niene miles distant from Dariena, The gold mines of Dariena,
and the manner of geatheryng gold.
are the sides of the hills and the dry playnes in the which gold is
geathered, both on the dry land, and also on the banks, and in the chanelles
of ryuers. Therefore to all such as are wyllyng to geather gold, there is of
ordinary custom appointed to every man by the suruoyers of the mines, a
square plotte of ground, conteynyng twelve pases, at the arbitrament of the
chooser, so that it be not ground already occupied, or left of other. The
portion of ground being thus chosen (as it were assigned of the augures to
build a temple) they enclose their slaves within the same, whose help the
Christians use in tyllyng of their ground, and geatheryng of gold, as we have
said. These places appointed unto them, they keep as long as them list: and
if they perceive tokens of little gold, they require an other plot of ground
of twelve pases to be assigned them, leauyng the first in common: Our inclosers
would leave no such commens
And this is thorder which the Spaniardes inhabiting Dariena observe in
geatheryng of gold. I suppose also, that they use the like order in other
places: Howbeit, I have not yet enquired so far. It has been proved, that
these twelve pases of ground, have yielded to their choosers the sum of
fourscore Castellanes of gold. Auri sacra Fames.
And thus lead they their lives in fulfillyng the holy hunger of gold. But
the more they fill their hands with fyndyng, the more increases their
covetous desire. The more woodde is laid to the fire, the more furiously
rages the flame. Unsaciable covetousness is no more diminished with increase
of richesse, then is the dryness of the dropsye satisfied with drink. The
dropsy of covetousness.
I let pass many things, whereof I intend to write more largely in time
convenient, if I shall in the mean season understand these to be acceptable
unto your holiness: my duty and obseruaunce to whose authority, has
caused me the gladlier to take this labor in hand. The providence of the
eternal creator of all things, grant your holiness many prosperous years.

Here ends the three books of the Decades.
Of Cuba, Hispaniola, and other Islands in the West Indies seas: and of the
manners of the inhabitauntes of the same.
I Have partlye declared before in my Decades, how certain fugitives which
came out of the large West lands, Look Decade 3. Liber. 10.
arrived in the confines of Dariena, and how that marueiling at the books of
our men, they declared that they sometime dwelt in regions whose inhabitants
used such instruments, and were ruled by politic laws: Cities fortifyed with
walls.
Also that they had cities fortified with walls, and fair palaces, with
streates well paued, and common places whither merchants resort, as to the
burse or streate: These lands, our men have now found. Therefore who were
thauctors hereof, or what success they had herein, who so desires to know,
with the conditions of strange regions, and the manners of the people, let him
give diligent attendaunce to such things as follow. The Island of Cuba or
Fernandina.
Of the Island of Cuba (now called Fernandina, lying next unto Hispaniola on
the West side, and yet somewhat so bending toward the North, that the circle
called Propicus Cancri divides it in the myddest, whereas Hispaniola is
distant from the Tropike, and declinyng certain degrees toward the
Equinoctial line) we have spoken somewhat before. In this Island of Fernandina,
there are now six towns erected, whereof the chief is named Sanstiago, of S.
James, the patron of the Spaniards. In this, there is native gold found, both
in ye mountains and ryuers: by reason whereof they are daily occupied in
geathering and digging the same. But shortly after that I had finished my said
books, The Spaniards of Cuba attempt new vyages.
three Spaniards yt were the most ancient citizens of Cuba, as Franciscus
Fernandes of Corduba, Lupus Ocho, and Christophorus Morantes, determined to
seek new lands, as the minds of the Spaniards are ever unquiet and given to
attempt great enterprises. They furnished, at their own charges, three of
those ships which they call Carauels, and having first license of Diegus
Velasquen the governor of the Island, they departed with a hundred and ten men
from the West angle of Cuba: The West angle of Cuba.
For this angle is most commodious to relieve ships, and to make provision
for fresh water and fuel. Thus they sailed continually six days and a half
between the west and the South, contented only with the sight of the heaven
and the water, during which time, they suppose that they sailed not past
threescore and six miles: Note.
For they lay at anchor all night, wheresoever the falling of the Sun took
the day light from them, least by wanderyng in unknown seas, they might
chance to be cast vpp^^ rocks or sands: But at the length they chanced
upon a great Island, named Iucatana, whose beginning thinhabitaunt^^ call
Eccampi. The Island of Iucatana. A great city well builded.
Our men went to the city, standing on the sea side, the which, for the
bygnesse thereof, they named Cayrus, or Alcair, thinhabitauntes whereof
enterteined them very friendly. When they were entered into the city, they
marueyled to behold the houses builded like Towers, magnificall temples,
streates well paued, and great exercise of bying and sellyng by exchange of
ware for ware. Temples.
Their houses are either built of stone, or of brick and lyme, Humane people.
and artificially wrought. To the first porches of their houses, and first
habitations, they ascend by ten or twelve stayres: they are covered either with
tyles, slates, reads, or stalks of certain herbs, they gratified the one
the other with mutual gifts. The Barbarians gave our men many brooches and
iewelles of gold, Cunnyng artifycers.
very fair, and of cunnyng workemanshyp: our men recompensed them with
vestures of sylke and wool, counterfeyte stones, of colored glass and
crystal, Hawks belles of laton, and such other rewards, which they
greatly esteemed for the strangeness of the same: they set naught by lookyng
glasses, because they have certain stones much bryghter. This nation is
apparelled after a thousand fashions, with vestures made of gossampyne cotton
or bombage, Apparelled people.
of diverse colors. The women are covered from the girdle to the heel, having
diverse fasshions of vailes about their heads and breasts, with great cautell
least any part of their legs or feet be seen: they resort much to their
temples, unto the which the chief rulers have the ways paued from their own
houses: they are Idolatours, Circumcised Idolaters.
and circumcised, they occupy their manner of exchaunging with much fidelity:
they use to adourne the hears of their heads. Being demanded by
thinperpretours, of whom they received their circumcision: they answered, that
there once passed an exceedyng fair man by their coasts, who left them that
in token to remember him. Other say, that a man brighter then the Sun, went
among them, and executed that office: but there is no certayntie hereof. When
our men had remained there certain days, they seemed to be molestous to
thinhabitantes, according to the common saying, The longer a ghest taryeth, the
worse is his entertaynement: The which thing our men perceyuyng, they made the
more have away. Being therefore provided of all things necessary, they took
their viage directly toward the West, by the province which thinhabitauntes
call Comi, and Maiam. They ouerpassed these regions, taking only fresh water
and fuel in the same. The Barbarians, both men, women, and children, flocked
to the sea side, astonysshed greatly to behold the huge bygnesse of the
ships. Our men marueyled in manner no less to view their buyldinges, and
especially their temples situate near unto the sea, and erected after the
manner of towers. Thus at the length having sailed about a hundred and ten
miles, they thought it good to lay Anchor in a province named Campechium,
Campechium.
whose chief town consists of three thousand houses. A town of three
thousand houses.
Thinhabitantes came swimmyng to the ships, marueylyng exceedingly at the
manner of saylyng, and at the sails and other tackelynges: But when they heard
the thunder of the gunnes, saw the smoke, and smelte the savor of brimstone
and fire, they supposed that thunderbolts and lyghtnynges had been sent from
God. The king received our men honorably, and brought them into his palace:
where he feasted them well, after his manner. They are accustomed to eat
flesh, and have great plenty of beasts and fowls, Plenty of beasts and
fowls.
as Peacockes, and other, which they francke and feed in their houses: also
diverse kinds of wild fowls of the mountains, wooddes, and waters: likewise
Partriches, Quails, Turtle dooues, Duckes, and Geese. Of beasts, they have
Connies, Woolues, Lions, Tigers, Foxes, wild Boores, Hearts, and Hares. After
this banquet, the king with his train and famylie brought our men into a broad
cross way, where many streates do meet: In this, they showed them as it were
a great and high alter, builded four square of marble, Their Idols and
Idolatry.
compacte together partly with the tough cleye of Babylon called Bitumem, and
partly with small stones, it had on every side four stayres: Upon the altar
was an Image of a man made of marble, and fast by it the images of two beasts
of unknown shape, which seemed as though they would with yanyng mouth have
torn in sunder the belly of the man's Image. On the other side stood a great
Serpent, compact of the said tough cleye and small stones: This Serpent being
in length.xlvii. foot, and of the bygnesse of a large Ox, seemed to devour a
Lion of marble, and was al besparcled with fresh blood. Hard by the altar,
were three posts fastnes in the ground, the which three other trauersed, and
were sustained with stones. In this place offenders were put to death, in token
whereof they saw innumerable arrows stained with blood, some scattred, some
lying on heaps, and some broken: also a great number of men's bones, lying in a
court or yard near unto this funestal place, their houses are here also
builded of lyme and stone: Houses of lime and stone.
They named this king Lazarus, because they arrived at this land on saint
Lazarus day. Departing from hence, and directing their course still toward the
West, for the space of.xv. miles, The province Aquanil.
they came to a province named Aquanil, whose chief town is called Mosco,
Mosco.
and the king thereof Cupoton. He beheld our men with a froward countenance,
and sought occasion to do the^ some privy mischief, while they sought for
fresh water: For he made signs unto them, that on the further side of the
next hyl they should find sprynges of water, entending to have assailed them
in that narowe passage: But by the coloring of their forheades (as they are
accustomed in their wars) and by the bearing of their bows and other
weapons, our men perceived their wylynes, and refused to go any further: Yet a
thousand of the Barbarians assailed them unawares, and unprepared: The
Spanyardes are put to flight, and many slain.
by reason whereof, they were put to flight, and diverse of them slain in the
chase. Many that fled toward the ships, were entangled in the mudde and
maryshes near unto the shore: Twenty and two were slain with arrows, and
the resydue for the most part wounded. Franciscus Fernandes the governor of
the navy, received in this conflicte three and thirty wounds, and in manner
none escaped without hurt: If they had gone to the hills which were appointed
them, they had been slain every man. They therefore that escaped, returned to
the Island of Fernardina, from whence they came, where they were received of
their fellows with heavy cheer. But when Diegus Velasquen the governor of
the Island, had intelligence hereof, An other expedition.
he immediately furnyshed a new navy of four Caraueles, with three hundredth
men: Of this navy he appointed John Grisalua, his nephue, to be ye governor,
and assigned for under captains, Alphons Auila, Frannces Montegio, and Peter
Aluarado: For the pylot he assigned Antonie Alamino, who had the regiment of
the first navy. They attempted the same viage again, but declined somewhat
more toward the South, about threescore and ten miles. Before they saw any
land, they espied a tower a far of, by the view whereof, they came to an
Island named Cozumella, from the which they smelt sweet savors proceedyng
with the wind, The Island of Cozumella. Sweet sauoures.

A fruitful Island.


before they approached to the land by the space of three miles. They found
the Island to be xlv. miles in circuitie, it is plain, and of marvelous
fruitful soil, there is also gold in it, but it is not engendered there, but
brought thither from other regions: It abounds with honey, fruits, and
herbs, and has also great plenty of fowls, and four footed beasts. Their
order and manner of living, is in all things like unto theyrs of Iucatana:
likewise their houses, temples, Towers and temples.
streates, and apparel. In many of their houses, are great poastes of marble,
after the manner of our buyldyng. They found there, the fundations of certain
old towers ruinate, and one especially with.xviii. stayres ascendyng to it,
after the manner of solemn temples. They marueyled greatly at our ships and
manner of saylyng. At the first, they would admit no strangers: but shortly
after, received them gentlye. Their chief ruler (whom our men supposed to be
a priest) led them up to the top of the tower, where they erected a banner,
and addicted the Island to the dominion of the king of Castyle, namyng it
Sancta Crux, Cozumella named Scancta Crux,
because they entered into the same in the nones of May, being then the feast
of the holy cross. They say that it was called Cozumella* of king
Cozumellaus, whose ancestors were the first that inhabited the Island. In the
tower they found many chambers furnished with Images, made both of earth and
marble to the similitude of Bears: Idles like Bears.
these they call upon with a houling and lamentable songue, perfuming them with
sweet odours, and otherwise honoring them as their domestical gods: they
are also circumcised. Idolatry.
The king was in fair apparel, made of gossampine cotton, curiously wrought:
he was lame on the one foot, by reason that as he once exercised him self in
swimming, a deuouryng fyshe called Tuberon, byt of all the toes of one of his
feet: he entreated our men very friendly, and made them great cheer. After
they had been here three days, they departed: and saylyng still toward the
West, they espied great mountains a far of, but as they drew near, Gentle
people.
they perceived it to be the Island of Iucatana, being distant from Cozumella
only five miles. Directyng therefore their course toward the south side of
Iucatana, Iucanata but five miles from Cozumella.
they compassed it on that side which lies nearest to be supposed continent:
yet could they not sail round about it, by reason of the multitude of rocks,
shalowe places, and shelfes of sand. Then Alaminus the pilot turned his sails
to the North side, whereof he had better knowledge. Thus at the length, they
came to the town Campechium, and king Lazarus, with whom they had been that
attempted the first voyage the year before. At the first, they were gentlye
received, and required to resort to the town: but shortly after, The
Barbarians make resistance.
they repented that they had bydden them, and thereupon willed them to stay
about a stones cast from the town, and to proceed no further. When our men
desired that they might make provision for fresh water before their departure,
they assigned them to a certain well which they had left behind them,
declaring further, that it should be lawful for them to take water there, or
else no where. Our men rested that night in the feelde adjoining to the well:
the which thing the Barbarians suspectyng, assembled an army of three thousand
men, and encamped not far from them. Both parts passed a way the night
without sleep: they, fearyng lest our men should break into the town: and
our men, lest the Barbarians should invade them suddenly, on the one part with
Trumpettes, and on the other side with the noise of Tymbrels, kept them still
wakyng that were disposed to sleep. At the spryng of the day, the Barbarians
approached to our men's camp, and called for the interpretours of Cuba, whose
language is much agreeable unto theirs. They had devised to light a Torche of
franckensence, and to place the same between both the armies, to the intent
that if our men did not depart before the Torche were consumed, to stand to
their peril. The Torche was wasted, and the matter came to hand strokes. They
slew only one of our men with an arrowe, A conflict.
because his Target failed him: but many were wounded. After this conflict, our
men resorted to their ordinance, which they had planted near unto the well.
When they had discharged certain pieces, the Barbarians fled back into the
town, and our men were of fierce and greedy courrage to have pursued them,
but that Grisalua the governor would not suffer them. From thence they
proceeded to the last end of Iucatana, which they found to reach more then
two hundred miles from the East to the West. The length of Iucatana.
Here they found a commodious haven, and named it Portus desideratus. From
hence they sailed to other lands, and came to the region next to Iucatana
Westward, which they doubt whether it be an Island, or part of the fyrme land,
but think it rather to be annexed to ye contine^t: in this there is a gulf,
which they suppose to be encompassed with both the lands: but of this there
is no certentie. The inhabitauntes call this region Caluacam, The region of
Caluacam, or Oloan.
or otherwise Oloan. They found here also a great river, which by his violent
course and fall, drives fresh water two miles into the sea: this they called
Grisalua, after the name of the governor. The Barbarians marueylyng at the
huge greatness and moving of our shyps, The river Grisalua.
came swarmyng on the banks of both sides the river, to the number of six
thousand men, armed with targettes and breast plates of gold, (...) and (...)
bows and arrows, broad swoordes of heavy wood, and long iauelyns hardened
at the ends with fire. Thus standing in battle raye to defend their
coasts, and with proud countenaunces forbyddyng our men to come alande, both
parties watched all that night in arms. In the dawne of they day, our men
espied about a hundred Canoas (which we have said to be their boats) full
of armed men. Here also, the language of thinterpretours of Cuba agreed well
yenough with theirs. When they had admitted the peace proffered them by
thinterpretours, all the Canoas stayed, except one which approached toward the
ships. A certain ruler that was in this Canoa, demanded of our men what
they sought in other men's lands. They answered, Gold, and that for
permutation of other ware, and not of gift, or violently. The Canoa returned,
and the ruler certified the king hereof, who came gladly to the ships. When
he had saluted the governor, he called his chamberlain unto him, commaundyng
him to bring his armur, and other ornaments of gold, wherewith he armed
Grisalua from the top of the head, Armur of gold.
to the sole of the foot: insomuche that what so ever any man of arms, armed
at all parts, Expert artificers.
is among us accustomed to wear of Iron or steel when he comes into the
field, all such kind of furnitures made of gold, and wrought with
wonderful art, the king gave to the governor. He recompensed him with
vestures of sick, cloth, lynnen, and other of our things. In the beginning of
this Iucatana, when they sailed to Cozumella, they chanced upon a Canoa of
fishermen, to the number of niene, fyshyng with hooks of gold: they took
them all prisoners. Fyshe hokes of gold.
One of them was known to this king, who promised the day following, to send
the governor as much gold for his ransom, as the man him self waighed. But
the governor denied that he could release him, without the consent of his
fellows, and therefore kept him still, to prove what he could further know of
him. Departing from hence, and saylyng still westwarde, The Islands of
Sacrifice.
they found a great gulf, in the which three small Islands were situate: Of
these, they went to the byggest. But oh abominable cruelty, oh most corrupted
minds of men, Children sacrificed to Idols. Their Idols of marble.
and diuilyshe impiety. Let every godly man close ye mouth of his stomach,
lest he be disturbed. They offer young children of both kinds to their Idols
of marble and earth. Among their Idols of marble, there stands a Lion,
having a hole through the neck, into the which they pour the blood of the
miserable sacrifyce, that it may from thence run down into a syncke of
marble. Let us now declare with what ceremonies they sacrifice the blood of
these poor wretches. They cut not their throtes, but open the very breasts of
these seelye souls, and take out their hearts yet pantyng, with the hot blood
whereof, they annoint the lips of their Idols, and suffer the resydue to
fall into the syncke: This done, they burn the heart and bowels, supposyng
the smoke thereof to be acceptable to their gods. Of their Idols, one is
made to the shape of a man, bowyng down his head, and lookyng toward the
syncke of blood, as it were acceptyng the offering of the slain sacrifyce.
They eat the flesh of the arms, thyghes, and legs, especially when they
sacrifice an enemy taken in the wars. They found a stream of coniealed
blood, as though it had run from a boochery. For this mischeuous purpose,
they bring these wretches from the next Islands. They saw also innumerable
heads, and trunkes of bodies thus mangled, beside many other yet remainyng
whole, and covered with certain mattes. All the tractes of these regions abound
with gold and precious stodes. One of our men wandryng in the Island, chanced
to find two water pottes of alabaster, Gold and precious stones.
artificially wrought, and full of little stones of diverse colors. They say
also that they found a stone of the value of two thousand Castellans of
gold, which the sent to the governor. A stone of great price.
This Island they named the Island of sacrifice. Thinhabitauntes are circumcised.
There are also other Islands situate about this Coluacana, or Galuacam, the
which are inhabited only with women, living without the company of men, after
the manner of the Amazones. But they that ponder the matter more wisely, Islands
of women.
think them rather to be certain women which have vowed chastity, and
professed a solitary life, as the Nuns do with us, or as the virgins called
Vestales, or Bonae Deae, were accustomed to do among the gentiles in old time.
At certain times of the year, men of the other Islands resort unto them, not
for the intent of generation, but moved with pity, to help them to dress their
gardens, and till their ground. The report goes likewise, that there are
other Islands of corrupt women, to whom men resort for carnal copulation, and
that they cut of one of the pappes of their women children, lest it should
hinder their shootyng: also that they keep only the women children, and send
away the men children. Our men therefore drew near to the shore of Coluacana,
where they quietly exercised marchandies with thinhabitantes. The king gave
them a great Pot of gold: also braselettes, chains, brooches, with many other
jewels, and all of gold. Gold.
Our men again on the other part satisfied him with such stuff as they had
done other before. Here would they gladly have planted a new colonie or
habitation, but that the governor would not permit them, whereat they grudged
not a little. The houses and other edifices of this province, are builded like
unto Towers. It has also fyfteene great towns in it. Of these they affirm,
Houses like Towers.xv. great towns in the province of Coluacana. Towns of.xx.
thousand houses.
that they have seen some consistyng of more then twenty thousand houses, not
joining together, but disseuered with courts and gardens. They have also
certain large market places, encompassed with walls, and streates well paued:
likewise fornaces and ouens, made of lime and brick: furthermore al sorts of
handie crafts men, and very cunning artificers. This kings name was
Potanchanus, and the region is called Palmaria. The region of Palmaria.
The town where the king keeps his court, conteyneth.xv. thousand houses.
When they receive any strangers, and make a league of friendship with them, A
token of frendshyp.
they are accustomed with a knyfe made of a sharp stone to let them selves
blood in the tongue, hand, arm, or some other part of the body, and this
even in the sight of them whom they admit to friendship, in token that they are
ready to shed their blood in their friends causes. Their priests profess a
virtuous life, and live unmarried. What it is to have do to with women, Priests.
no man knows before he be married. Fornication and adultery (which seldom
chances among them) they count abomination. The women are of marvelous
chastity. Every noble man, after that he have had one wife, Chastity.
may have as many concubines as him lysteth: but a married woman taken in
adultery, is sold of her husband, but this only to the prince, The
punishment of adultery.
at whose hands it shall be lawful for her kynsfolke to redeem her. It is not
lawefull for such as are not married, to sit at the same table with them that
are married, or to eat of the same dyshe, or drink of the same cup. Marriage is
honored.
In the month of August and September, they absteyne.xxxv. days, not only
from flesh, whereof they have great plenty, but also from fyshe, Fasting.
and all other things that live by blood, and during these days, live only
with herbs and fruits. They reckon twenty days to the month, and twenty
months to the year. Our men consumed certain days here very pleasauntly.
When they departed, coasting still by the same shore, they came to an other
king, whom they named Ouandus. When he had intelligence that our men desired
gold, King Ouandus.
he brought forth certain plats of molten gold. But when the governor
signified unto him by the interpretours, that he desired great plenty of that
metal, the day following he brought him a man's image of gold, being a cubite in
length: Idols, jewels and ouches of gold.
also a fan of gold, and an Idol of one of his domestical gods, of curious
woorkmanship: likewise garlandes of stones of sundry colors, with many breast
plates, brooches, and other kinds of ornaments, and all of gold. He gave him
furthermore abundaunce of delicate meats, well salted, and powdered with
spices. When he had required our men to come alande, he commanded his
servants with all speed to prepare a great multitude of branches of trees,
and to wait upon our men to his palace. As they went thus in order, some
behind, and some before, on both sides, they seemed so to shadow our men with
bows, as though they had gone in a continual arbor. The king him self
having a Septer in his hand, did set them in their arraye, and some time
stryke such as were negligent in bearyng their bows. They showed them selves
obedient in all things, and with grave countenance humbled them selves to
receive his strypes. When he was demanded where he had such plenty of gold:
he poynted with his finger to the next mountains, Gold in mountains and
rivers.
and to the rivers descending from the same. They are so accustomed to the
rivers, and exercised in swimming, that it is all one to them to live in the
water and on the land. When they desire together gold, Their manner of
geathering gold.
they plunge them selves in the rivers, and bring from the bottom thereof both
their hands full of sand, which syftyng from hand to hand, they geather
out the graynes of gold. And by this means in the space of two hours, they
fill a reed as bygge as a man's finger. Sweet savors.
Of the sweet savors of these lands, many things might be spoken, the which
because they make rather to theffeminatyng of the minds of men, then for any
necessary purpose, I have thought best to omit them. The king also gave the
governor a young virgin, of twelve years of age, adourned with rich and
fair iewelles. Of the stones which he had of this king, A stone of great
price,
one was valued at two thousand Castellanes of gold. Thus at the length they
departed from this king, laden with gold and precious stones. Grisalua the
governor, sent one of the Carauelles to his uncle Diego Velasquen, governor
of the Island of Cuba, with messengers to deliver him the gold, iewelles, and
other ornaments, the resydue in the mean time still followed the tracte toward
the West. One of them in the which Frauncis Montegius the under governor was
carried sailed hard by the shore, and the other two kept aloof within
prospecte of the land. Thinhabitauntes of these coasts also, no less
marueylyng at the ships then did the other, came with twelve Canoas to
Montegius, desyryng him by thinterpretours to come alande, promysyng in the
name of their king, that he should be honorably entertained. But Montegius
answered, that he could not assent to their request, because his companions
were so far from him: Yet did he give them certain of our things, strange
unto them, and thanks for their gentleness. Shortly after, espying a great
town, they directed their course thither. Thinhabitauntes prohibyted them to
come alande, and came forth against them with bows and quiuers full of
arrows, broad swoordes made of heavy wood, and Iauelins hardened at the end
with fire. They shot at our men a far of, and our men discharged certain
pieces of ordinance against them. The Barbarians astonished at the noise of
the gunnes fled amayne, and desired peace. Here our men's vitayles began to
fail them, and their ships were broosed with long viages. Having therefore
found and done these things whereof we have spoken, Grisalua returned to the
Island of Eernandina well contented, but so were not his companions. We must
now diuerte somewhat from this matter, Other viages from Cuba o^ Fernandina.
and speak of an other navigations: and from thence will we return to these
lands which our men have found. So it is therefore, that Diegus Velasquen,
the governor of the Island of Fernandina, about the same time that he had sent
forth this navy of four Carauelles, he prepared an other navigations of only
one Carauell, and one brygantine, with forty and five men. These exercised
violent hands against thinhabitauntes of those regions where they arrived,
thynkyng that they might forceably draw them to the dyggyng of gold, because
they were Caffranite Idolaters and circumcised. There are at the sea side not
far from the supposed continent, Many Islands between Cuba and the fyrme
land.
many little Islands, of most fortunate and fruitful soil, whereof three are
thus named, Guanapan, Guanguan, and Quitilla. Out of one of these (which they
named Sansta Marina) they violently carried away three hundred men and women,
which they thrust into the Carauell, and returned immediately to Fernandina,
leauyng the brigantine with.xxv. of their fellows, to the intent to hunt for more
men. The haven where the Carauell first arrived, is called Carenas, being
distant from the angle of Cuba, Sanctiago the chief city of Cuba.
and the chief city of Sanctiago, two hundred and fyftie miles: For this
Island of Cuba, is very long, reachyng in length from the East to the West, and
situate directly under the circle called Tropicus Cancri, as we have said
before. Now shall you hear how fortune sought the revenge of these poor
wretches. Therefore as their keepers went aland, and few remained in the
Carauel, they perceiving occasion ministered whereby they might recover their
liberty, The Barbarians slep the Spaniardes with their own weapons
sodeinly snatched up our men's weapons, and slew six of them which yet
remained in the Carauell, while the residue leapte into the sea. And by this
means the Barbarians possessed the Carauell which they had soon learned to
rule, and thus returned to their own countries. But they sailed first to the
next Island, where they burnt the Carauel, and carried away the weapons with
them. From hence they conveyed them selves to their own countries with the
Canoas of this Ila^d. Here in like manner they privily assailed them that were
left with the brigantine, and slew many of them also: The residue that escaped,
fled to the brigantine, where they bewailed their fellows deaths, and
counted their own escape a victory. On the shore not far from the place
where they suffered this misfortune, there is a tree, in the top whereof they
set up a cross, and graued this inscription in the bark of the tree, Vannuis
Aldarieci. There is a river named Darien, on the bank whereof stands the
chief city of the supposed continent. The governor therefore having
intelligence hereof, The chief city of the supposed continent.
sent with all speed two ships of war well furnished, to the aid of them
that were left: but they were wise to late. Yet following the view of the
cross, they came to the shore, and red the letters graven on the tree, but
durst not attempt fortune. Thus with all their hardy soldiers departing from
hence with despair, they sailed to the next Island, out of the which they
carried away by violence five hundred men and women, supposyng likewise that
they might lawfully so do, because they were Idolaters and circumcised: But
the like chance happened unto them when they landed at Eernandina. For the
Barbarians, The Spanyardes are slain again with their own weapons.
espying opportunity, set upon the Spanyardes in one of the ships with their
own weapons, and slew their keepers: the residue that escaped, castyng them
selves into the sea, swamme to the next Carauell, and with their fellows
assailed the Carauell that was taken from them. This conflicte was so sharp,
that for the space of four hours, it was doubtful whether part should
obtain the victory. The Barbarians both men and women fought very fiercely,
as well to recover their liberty, as also to hold fast the pray which they
had gotten: But in fine, the Spanyardes had the upper hand, by reason they
were more expert in handlyng of their weapons, and rulyng of their Carauell.
The Barbarians being thus overcome, leapt into the sea, but the Spanyardes
took them again with the ship boats. The Barbarians are slain and put to
flight.
About a hundred of the Barbarians perished, being partly drowned, and partly
slain with the swoorde, and but few of the Spanyardes. These things thus
pacified, the resydue of the Barbarians were carried to the town of Sanctiago,
and condemned to labor in the gold mines. Shortly after they made out a new
viage to an other of the Islands, A multitude of Islands.
which lie there about so thick, Archipelagus*
that they commonly call the number of them Archipelagus, as they in our sea of
Ionicum are called Symplegades. An other viage
Here our men were cruelly handled, and as many of them as came alande either
slain or wounded. This Island they named Florida, because they arrived there
on Easter day, which the Spaniards call the floryshyng day of the
resurrection. They say also that in this tracte they saw.xxvi. Islands, which
Colonus had ouerpassed, xxvi. Islands about Hispaniola and Cuba.
and the same so to lie about Hispaniola and Cuba, as though they warded them
from the fury of the Ocean. In many of these they found native gold, of like
goodness to that which is found in Granatum. Thinhabitauntes also wear many
iewelles, Images of gold.
and have many Images of their domestical gods, made both of gold
artificially wrought, and also of wood gylted. Frauncis Cheregatus brought one
of their Idols with him, whereby may be considered of what wit and aptness
they are. It is a marvelous thing to see what manner of rasers they have, made
of certain yelowe stones, Rasers of stone.
clear and transparent like unto crystal, with these they shave and carue,
as though they were made of fine steel: When the edges are blunt with long
exercise, they sharpen them not with a whetstone, or powder, or any other
stone, but temper them only with water. They have also a thousand kinds of
instruments or tools, Instruments and tools.
and such other things of fine device, which were to long to rehearse. Let us
therefore return from whence we have digressed, as to Cozumella, Iucatana,
Lands like unto the earthly Paradyse.
Coluacana, or Olloa, being all lands lately found, and so rych, fruitful,
and pleasant, that they may in manner be compared to the earthly Paradyse.
Therefore, after that it was known to our men of how great moment these
tractes were, the Spaniards which inhabited the Island of Cuba, Annunstus being
the governor of the Island, furnished a new navy of ten Carauelles, An other
vyage of ten Carauels and five hundred men.
and five hundred men, with two small brigantines, as it were in the stead of
light horsemen, or forerunners, whose aid they might use as scoutes, to search
the ways for danger of rocks and shalow sands or shelfes. They shipte also
certain horses as five stoned horses, Horses and mares.
and.xxvi. mares, apt for the wars. For their general governor and Admiral
of the navy, they elected Fernando Cortesius, Fernando Cortesius.
who at yt time was ye chief ruler of the city of Sanctiago. For under
Capitaynes, they appointed Alfons Portucareius, Francis Montegius, Alfons
Auila, Aluerado Spatense, John Velasquen, and Diegus Ordassus, They still
followed the same wind, from the last angle of Cuba toward the West. As Soon
as Francis Fernandes of Corduba, and then John Grisalua came within prospecte
of the Island of Sacrifyces (whereof we have made mention before) sodeinly a
tempest of contrary wind prohibited them to take land, and drove them
backewarde to Cozumella, lying on the East side of Iucatana: The Island of
Cozumella.
this Island has only one haven, named saint John's port, and has in it
only six towns: also none other water then in wells and cesternes, because
it lacks ryuers and sprynges by reason it is plain, conteynyng only.xlv.
miles in circuit. At the coming of our men, thinhabitauntes fled to the
thick woods, and forsook their towns for fear: Our men entered into their
houses, where they found plenty of vittayles, and many ornaments parteynyng
to the furnyshyng of their houses, as hanginges and carpettes of diverse
colors, sheets also of gossampine cotton (which they call Amaccas) and much
apparel. They have furthermore innumerable books, Carpettes and sheets.

Innumerable books.


of the which with many other things sent to our new Emperor, we will
speak more largely hereafter. The soldiers wandered about the Island, and
viewed all things diligently, keepyng them selves still in battle raye,
least they might be sodeinly invaded. They found but a few of
thinhabitauntes, and only one woman in their company. By thinterpretours of
Cuba, and other which the Spaniardes took first from Iucatana, they persuaded
the woman to call the kings that were absent. They came gladly, and made a
league of friendshyp with our men, whereby they were restored to their houses,
and a great part of their stuff. They are circumcised Idolatours, and
sacrifyce children of both kinds to their Zemes, Circumcised Idolaters.
which are the Images of their familiar and domestical spirits, which they
honor as gods. When I enquired of Alaminus the pilot, also of Francis
Montegius, and Portucarerius, from whence they had the children they offered in
sacrifyce: they answered, They Sacrifyce Children.
that they bought them in the Islands thereabout, by exchange for gold and
other of their trafycke: For in all this so large a space of land, the
deuilyshe anxietie for the desire of wicked money, has not yet oppressed
thinhabitauntes. They say the same also of the Islands lately found, whereof
two are named Destam and Sestam, The Islands of Destam and Sestam.
whose inhabitants go naked, and for scarceness of children, sacrifice dogs,
which they nouryshe as well for that purpose, as also to eat, as we do
Cunnies: these dogs are dumme, The sacrifice of dogs.
and can not bark, having snoutes like unto Foxes. Such as they destinate to
eat, they gelde while they are whelps, whereby they wax very fat in the
space of four months. They reserve all the bytches for increase, and but
few dogs. Our men diswaded them from these superstitions, declaryng how
they were abominable, They are soon persuaded to our religion.
and detested of God. They were soon persuaded, and desired a law which they
might follow. Our men therefore declared unto them, that there was only one
God, which made heaven and earth, the giver of all good things, being of one
incomprehensyble substance, under triplicitie of person. As Soon as they heard
these words, they broke their Zemes, and pared, scraped, and washed the
pauements and walls of their temples. Our men gave them a painted picture of
the blessed virgin, which they placed reverently in their temple, This people
leaving one kind of Idolatry be taught another.
and about it a cross, to be honored in the remembrance of God and man, and
the salvation of mankind. They erected also an other great cross of wood in
the top of the temple, whyther they oftentimes resort together to honor
the Image of the virgin. Thinhabitauntes signified by thinterpretours, that in
the Island of Iucatana, not far from them, there were seven Christians
captives, which in time past were driven thither by tempest. The Island of
Cozumella, is only five miles distant from Iucatana. The governor Cortesius
being advertised hereof, furnished two Carauels with fifty men, An other viage
willing them incontinent to direct their viage thither, and to make search for
these me^. They took with them iii. interpretors of Cozumella (whose language
agrees with theirs) with letters to the Christians if any might be found. He
further declared unto them, how goodly a matter they should bring to pass, if
they could bring away any of them: For he no ways doubted but that by their
information, he should be fully certified of the commodities of all those
tractes, and the manners of thinhabitauntes. Thus they departed, with
commandment to return within the space of six days. But when they had
remained there now.viii. days, and heard no word of their Cozumellane
interpretours, whom they had sent alande with the message and letters, our men
returned to Cozumella without them, suspectyng that they were either slain, or
deteyned. And where as the whole navy was now determined to depart from
Cozumella, but that they were hyndered by contrary wind, they sodeinly espied
toward the west a Canoa coming from Iucatana, and in it one of the Christian
captives (named Hieronimus Aquillaris) who had lived seven years in that
Island: Aquillaris.vii. years captive in the Island of Iucatana.
With what joy they embrased the one the other, the chance may declare. They
were no less desirous to hear, then he to tell of the mysfortune which befell
to him and his companions. And here it shall not be greatly from my purpose,
briefly to rehearse how the thing chanced. In my Decades I have made mention
of a certain noble man named Valdiuia, whom the Spanyardes which inhabited
Dariena in the supposed continent of the gulf of Vraba, Valdiuia.
sent to the Island of Hispaniola to Colonus the Admiral and viceroy, with the
residue of the Senate and counsel there (to whom parteyneth the redress and
orderyng of all things in these new lands) to signify unto them in what
extreme necessity and penury they lived. Unhappy Valdiuia therefore, taking
this matter in hand in an evil hour, The shipwreck of Valdiuia.
was with a sodeine and violent whirle wind driven upon certain
quickesandes, in the prospecte of the Island of Iamaica, lying on the South
side of Hispaniola and Cuba. These blind and swalowyng sands, the Spaniardes
call vypers, and that by good reason, because in them many ships are
entangled, The quick sands called vypers.
as the Lisertes are implycate in the tails of the vypers. While the Carauell
thus wresteled with the water, it was so burst in sunder, that Valdiuia with
thirty of his fellows could scarcely with much difficulty discende into the
ship boat: where without ores, and without sails, they were carried away by
the violence of the water. For (as we have said before in our Decades) the seas
do run there continually with a violent course toward the West. They
wandered thus.xiii. days, The course of the sea toward the West.
not knowing whither they went, nor yet fyndyng any thing to eat. Famine
consumed seven of them, which were cast into the sea to feed the fyshes. The
residue likewise, in manner consumed by famyne, and falling from one calamity
into an other, were driven to Iucatana, and fell into the hands of a cruel
king, who slew Valdiuia the governor, with certain of his fellows: Valdiuia
is sacrificed to Idols.
and when he had first sacrifyced them to his Zemes, shortly after he ate
them, with his friends of that conspiracy. For they eat only their enemies
and strangers, and do otherwise absteyne from man's flesh. In this mean
time, while Hieronimus Aquillaris, How Aquillaris escaped.
with six of his fellows, were reserved to be sacrifyced the third day, they
brake their bands, escaped the hands of that cruel Tyrant, and fled to an
other king being his enemy, who received them, yet only as bondmen. It is a
strange thing to hear of the moother of this Aquillaris: For as soon as she
heard that her son was fallen into the hands of the nations that eat man's
flesh, she fell mad incontinent: so that whenever after, she saw any
meat roastyng at the fire, or only ready spytted to lay to the fire, she
ceased not to cry out in this manner, O me most wretched moother, behold the
members of my son. But to return to our purpose. When Aquillaris had now
received the governors letter, sent by the Cozumellane messengers, he
declared to the king his master (whose name was Taxmarus) what was their
errande thither, King Taxmarus.
and wherefore they were sent: vsyng in the mean time many large discourses,
in expressyng the great power and magnificence of their king, who had of late
arrived in those coasts: also of their humanity and gentleness toward their
friends and such as submitted them selves to them, and again their rigor and
fierceness against such as stubbernly either contemned them, or denied their
requests. With these words he brought Taxmarus into such fear, that the
master was now feign to desire his servant so to handle the matter, that they
might quietly enter into his dominion as his friends, and not as his enemies.
Aquillaris promised in their behalf yt they should not only come in peace,
but also to aid him against his enemies if need should so require. Whervppon
he dismissed Aquillaris, and with him three of his familiers and companions.
Thus they sailed together from Cozumella to Iucatana, to the river which they
had found before in the first viage thither, by the governance of Alaminus the
pilot. The mouth of a river stopped with sand.
They found the mouth of the river stopped with sand, as we read of the river
of Nilus in Egypt, when the wyndes (called Etesti) blow in summer, and
especially in the canicular days. Therefore where as they could not enter into
the river with the biggest vessels (although it be otherwise apt to receive
great ships) the governor caused two hundred men to be set alande with the
Brigantines and ship boats, wyllyng Aquillaris to offer peace to
thinhabitauntes. They demanded what our men required. Aquillaris aunsweared,
vittayles. There was a long space of sand by the side of the town, whyther
they wylled them to resort, promysyng to bring them vittayles thither the day
following. Our men went, and they came, according to their promise, and brought
with them eight of their Hens, being as bygge as Peacockes, of brownyshe
color, Turkey Hens.
and not inferior to Peacockes in pleasant taste. They brought also as much
bread made of Maizium (which is a grain not much unlike unto panyke) as
would scarcely serve ten hungry men, and herewith desired them to depart.
But when they perceived that our men made no have away, immediately there came
a great company of armed men toward them, demaundyng what they had to do thus
to wander in other men's lands. Our men made answer by Aquillaris, that they
desired peace, vittayles, and gold, for exchange of other things. They
answered again, that they would another peace nor war with them, but
threatened them to avoid the land, except they would be destroyed every man.
Our men said that they would not depart, without sufficient vittayles to
maintain their souldyers. They appointed the day following to bring them more
vittayles, but they broke promise: Yet perceiving the second day that our men
were encamped on the sand, and had reposed there that night, they brought them
as much more vittayles, and commanded them in the name of their king to
depart. Our men said that they were desirous to see the town, and to have
yet more store of vittayles. The Barbarians denied their request, and therewith
departed, whisperyng and mutteryng among them selves. In the mean time our men
were still so oppressed with hunger, that they were enforced to seek for
meat. The governor therefore sent his under captains to land with a hundred
and fyftie men. A conflicte.
As they went dispersed in diverse companyes about the villages of the country,
the Barbarians met with one of their bands, and put them to great distress:
But when their fellows, being not far from them, heard the noise of their
alarome, they came with all possible haste to their rescue. The governor on the
other side, placing his ordinance in the brygantines and ship boats,
approached to the shorre, with the resydue of his soldiers. The Barbarians
likewise, being ready furnyshed to the battle, came runnyng to the sea side,
to disturb them, that they should not come alande, and with their arrows
wounded many a far of unprepared. The gouernoure discharged about.xx. pieces
of ordinance against them: The Barbarians ar^ put to flight.
With the slaughter and terrible thunder whereof, and with the flame of the
fire, and smell of the brimstone, they were so astonished, and put to such fear,
that they fled and disparcled like wild beasts: whom our men pursuing, entered
into the town, which thinhabitantes forsook in manner for fear of their own
men, who^ they saw so dismaide. On the bank of this river there is a town of
such portentous biggnes as I dare not speak, but Alanimus the pilot, says
that it contains in circuit five hundred miles, and that it consists
of.xxv. thousand houses: The great town of Potanchana or Victoria. A town of
xxv. thousand houses.
Some make it somewhat less, but they all agree that it is exceedyng great and
notable. The houses are divided with gardens, and are builded of lyme and
stone, very artificial, and of cunnyng woorkemanship. To their haules,
chambers, parlers, or other places of habitation, they ascend by ten or
twelve stayres, and have certain spaces between every house: so that it is not
lawful for any to lade his neighbors wales with rafters or beams. Their
houses are separate one from an other by the space of three houses, and are for
the most part covered with reed and thatche, and many also with slate or
other stone. The Barbarians them selves confessed that they were that day
forty thousand men at the battle, Gunnes and horses.
which were vanquished of a few, by reason of the new and unknown kind of
feyght with gunnes and horses. For the governor had vnbarked.xvi. horses,
which were also at the battle, and so fyercely assailed the Barbarians on the
backehalfe, that they brake their array, and scattered them as it had been
flocks of sheep, overthrowing, wou^ding, and killing them on every side:
Which thing the seely wretches so imputed to a miracle, that they had not ye
power to occupy their weapones. For whereas before they had never seen any
horses, The men and the horse* thought to be one beast.
they thought that ye man on horseback and the horse had been all one beast,
as the antiquity did fable of the monster Centaurus. Our men possessed the
town.xxii. days, where they made good cheer under covert, while the owners
of the houses lay under the fyrmament, and durst not assail our men, who had
placed them selves in the stroungest part of the town, where some kept
contynual watch (lest the Barbarians should suddenly invade them) while other
gave them selves to rest and sleep. The inhabitauntes call this town
Potanchana: but our men for the victory which they obtained here, named it
Victoria. It is a marvelous thing to consider, the greatness, magnificence,
and finenesse of the building of certain palaces they have in the country, to
the which they resort somtymes for their solace and pastyme. Palaces of
marvelous bygnes and well builded.
These are curiously builded with many pleasant diuises, as galeries, solars
turrettes, portals, gutters, with chambers boorded after the manner of our
waynescot, and well floored. Four of our Spaniardes went into one of them, of
such greatness, that they wandered in the same for the space of four hours
before they could find the way out. At the length by the interpretours, and
certain captives, our men sent for the king, and such rulers as were next
under him in authority, wyllyng them to submyt them selves, and to come into
the town unarmed: geuyng the messengers further in commandment, to certify
them that in their so doing, they would commune with them as concerning
conditions of peace, and restore them their town. They came gladly, and entered
every man into his own house, upon condition, that they should ever
thereafter absteyne from such ceremonies and horrible sacrifices of man's
flesh, to devils, the mortal enemies to mankind, whose Images they honored,
and to direct the eyes of their minds to Christ our God, ye maker of heaven
and earth, who was borne into this world of a virgin, They receive our
religion.
and suffered death on the cross for the redemption of mankind, and finally to
profess them selves subjects to the Christian king of Spain. They promised
both, and were instructed as far as the shortness of time would permit.
Being thus restored, they recompensed our men with many rewards, supposyng
such men to be sent from heaven, which being so few in number, durst attempt
battle against so great a multitude. They gave our men also certain gold,
and twenty slaves. Departing therefore from hence, and coasting still along by
the same shore, they came again to the gulf which Alaminus the pilot found
before under Grisalua. This they named Bian Sancti Iohannis, that is, Saint
John's gulf, for Bian in the Spanishe tongue signifies a gulf. Here the
inhabitants resorted to them peaceably. About a mile from the shore, was a
town of a thousand and five hundred houses situate upon a hill. They proffered
our men half the town, A town of a thousand and five hundred houses.
if they would dwell with them for ever. This perhaps they did the rather,
either fearyng the example of the inhabitants of Potanchana, the fame whereof
might have come to their ears, or else hopyng that under the shadow of such
valiant men, they might obtain aid and succor against their enemies and
borderers. For (as I have said before) they destroy one an other with
contynuall war, for the desire to enlarge their dominions. Our men refused
parpetuall habitation, and accepted their friendly proffer for a time. As they
came alande, the people followed them on every side with bows in their hands,
which they held over our men's heads, to defend them from the rain, as
though they had walked in a continual arbor. Here they encamped. And lest
the residue left in the shyps should in the mean time wax slothful with
Idleness, Another voyage of two brigantines and fyftie men.
the governor gave commandment to Alaminus the pilot, and Francis Montegius,
to search the West parts of that land, while he relieved the weeried
soldiers, and healed such as were wounded. To them that went forward on this
viage, he assigned two brigantines with fyftie men. Unto this gulf, Where the
sea runs swyftly from the East to the West.
the course of the water was gentle enough and moderate: but when they had
sailed a little further toward the West, they found the sea running with so
swift a course, as if it were a great river falling from the tops of high
mountains, insomuch that in a short space of time it carried them fifty miles
from their fellows. When they were now entered into this violent stream of
water, they saw on their left hand a large plain sea, A conflict between the
waters coming from the West and from the South.
which met with the course of the other waters falling from the West. And like
as two great rivers that run contrary ways, make a vehement conflict where
they meet: so seemed the waters coming from the South, to resyst these
waters, as enemies that had entered into the right or possession of an other: On
the contrary part, they saw the land reachyng far both on the left hand
and on the right. In this strife between the waters, they were so tossed on
both sides, and entangled with whirlepoles, that they long wrestled without
hope of life. At the length, A dangerous and payneful vyage.
with much difficulty turnyng the stemmes or forpartes of their ships
against the stream from whence they came, and labouryng all that they might
with their ores and sails, they could scarsely overcome the rage of the
water, insomuche that were as they thought that they had in one night sailed
two miles, they found that they were driven back four miles: Yet at the
length with gods help, they overcame this daungerours conflycte. They spent
xxii. days in this little space of sea: And when they were now returned to
their fellows, The land of Coluacana.
declared unto them that that end was the land of Coluacana, which they
adjudged to be part of the supposed continent. The land which they saw a
far of before their face, The land of Baccalaos o^ Baccalearum.
they suppose either to be annexed to our continent* or to be joined to the
large North regions called Baccalaos, whereof we have made mention in our
Decades, in the voyage of Sebastian Cabote. This matter is yet doubtefull: but
we trust it shall once be better known. While Alaminus and Montegius searched
these secrets, the king of the province (whose name was Multoxumam) sent our
men, by one of his chief officers (being also his Lieuetenaunt of the said
town) many rich and goodly presents of gold, silver, and precious stones,
Rych presents of gold and precious stones.
set and wrought after a marvelous strange device, and with no less cunnyng
woorkemanshyp. Here they determined to send messengers to our new Emperor,
to know his pleasure, that they might in this province plant a new colonie or
habitation: and this did they without the advice of Diegus Velasquen the
governor of the Island of Cuba, or Fernandina, who first sent them forth, with
commandment to return again after they had searched these regions, and
obtained plenty of gold. While they consulted hereof, they were of diverse
opinions: but the most part alleged that in this case it was not requisite to
make the governor of their counsel, forasmuch as ye matter should be
referred to a higher Judge, as to the king of Spain him self. When they were
thus agreed, they received vittayles of the gentle king of the province, A new
colonie.
and assigned the place of their colonie twelve miles from the said town, in
a fruiteful and wholesome soil. For their general gouernoure, they elected
Cortesius the governor of the navy, against his will as some say. For other
magistrates to govern the city which they intended to build, This Cortesius
has written a book of these things.
he chose Portucarerius and Montegius, of whom we have made mention before:
They chose also certain messengers to send to the king by the conduction of
Alaminus the pilot: Furthermore, four of the princes of this province, offered
them selves wyllyngly to go with our men into Spain, to the intent to see our
lands, and that king whose power is so great, and whose authority reaches so
far: They brought likewise two women with them, which served and obeyed them
in all things, after the manner of their country. The people of this nation is
of brown or yelowyshe color. Both the men and the women have pendauntes of
gold and precious stones hanging at their ears: The men also bore their
nether lips full of holes, from the uppermost part of the lip, They wear
rings and plates at their lyppes.
even unto the neathermost part of the gum. At these they hang certain
rings, and plates of gold and silver, fastened to a small and thynne plate,
lying within between the lip and the gum. At the biggest hole in the midst
of the lip, there hangs a round plate of silver, as broad as the coin
called a Carolyne, and as thick as a man's finger. I do not remember that ever
I saw any thing that seemed more fylthy in mine eye: The diverse fantasies of
men.
Yet do they think that there is nothing more comely under the circle of the
moon, whereby we may see how vainly mankind wandereth in his own
blyndnesse. The Ethiopian thincketh the black color to be fayrer then the
white, and the white man thinks otherwise. They that are powled, think that
more decent then to wear a bushe, and they that wear beardes, judge it a
deformity to be shaven. As appetite therefore moves, and not as reason
persuades, men run after vanities, and every province is ruled by their own
sense, as writes saint Jerome. From whence they have their gold, we have
spoken sufficiently before. But as our men marueyled where they had their
silver, they showed them certain high mountains, Silver.
which are continually covered with snow, saving that at certain times of the
year the only tops are seen bare, because the snow is there molten, by
reason of ye thick and warm clouds. The plains therefore, or mild, soft,
and pleasant mountains, seem to bring forth gold, and the rough craggie
mountains with their cold valleys, are the places where silver is engendered.
They have also Laton, Note where gold and silver are engendered.

I think this Laton to be some kind of pure Copper, or else Copper that
holds gold. For Laton is an artificial metal, and has no natural mine.

Their books.


whereof they make such Mases and Hammers as are used in the wars, dygging
Mattockes also, and Spades: for they have neither Iron nor steel. But let us
now speak of the presents sent into Spain to the king: and first of the
books. These procuratours therefore of the new colonie of the province of
Coluacana, among other their presents, brought also a great number of books,
the leaves whereof are made of the inner ryndes or barks of trees, thinner
then either that of the Elm or of ye Salowe: these they smeere or anoint with
the pitche of molten Bitumem, and while they be soft, extend them to what
form them lysteth: When they be cold and hard, they rub them over with a
certain plaster. It is to be thought, that they beat the plaster into fine
flower, and so temperyng it with some byndyng moisture, to make a crust
therewith upon the leaves, whereon they write with any sharp instrument, and
blot the same again with a sponge or some such other thing, as merchant men
and noble men's stewards are accustomed to do with their writing tables made of
the woodde of fig trees. The leaves of their books are not set in order
after the manner of ours, but are extended many cubittes in length. The matters
which they write, are contained in square tables, not lose, but so bound
together with the tough and flexible clay called Bitumem, that they seem like
wooden tables which had been under the hands of cunnyng Bookbynders. Which
way so ever the book lies open, there are two leaves seen, and two sides
written, with as many lying under them, except the book be unfolded in
length, For under one leaf there are many leaves joined together. The fourmes
of their letters are nothing like unto ours, but are much more crooked and
entangled, like unto fyshhookes, Their letters.
knottes, snares, stars, fyles, dyse, and such other, much like unto the
Egyptian letters, and written in lines like unto ours. Here and there between
the lines, are pictured the shapes of men, and diverse beasts, and especyally
the Images of kings, and other noble men: Whereby it is to be thought, that in
such books, the factes of their kings are contained, What is contained in
their books.
as we see the like among us, how our printers express the sum of histories
in pictures, that men may thereby be the more allured to bye such books. The
coueringes of their books are also artificially wrought, and painted. When
they are shut, they seem to differ nothing from ours in form. In these
books are furthermore comprehended their laws, rytes of ceremonies and
sacrifyces, annotations of Astronomy, accomptes, computations of times, with
the manner of graffyng, sowing, and other things parteynyng to husbandry. They
begin the year from the going down of the seven stars, called Vergiliae,
or Pleiades, and count their months according to the mones. They name a
month, Tona, of the Moon, for in their language they call the Moon Tona.
They reckon the days by the sons: therefore as many days as they name, they
say, so many sons, the Son in their tongue, is called Tonatico. They
distribute the year (without any reason why) into twenty months, Temples
richely adourned.
and the month into as many days. The temples which they frequent, they
adourne with golden hangynges, and other ornaments of gold and silver, with
precious stones intermyxt. At the spryng of the day, they perfume their temples
with frankensence, and make their prayers before they take in hand any other
business. Prayer.
But oh horrible cruelty: for the inhabitants of al these tractes also, do
sacrifice children to their Idols, in like manner as we have said before. At
such time as the seeds lie in the ground, They sacrifice children and
captives.
and when the corn begins to show forth the ear, they destinate to their
Zemes such bondmen as they have bought, or such captyues as they have taken in
the wars, which they sacrifice after that they have made them great cheer,
and decked them in precious apparel. Also before they sacrifice these poor
wretches, they lead them about the town, while all the people salute them
humbly and reverently, A wrong way to heaven.
affyrmyng that in short space they shall be received into the company of the
gods. They honor their Zemes, with an other sharp kind of devotion: for they
let them selves blood, either in the tongue, Bloody gods.
lips, ears, legs, thyghes, or breast, which they take in their hands, and
hurl it up toward heaven, so that with the fall thereof the pauement of the
temple is all sparcled with blood, whereby they think that their gods are
well pleased. Villa Ricca.
From the new colonie (called Villa Ricca) niene miles distant, there is a
town of.xv. thousand houses, which thinhabitauntes call Cemobal, but our men
named it Siuilla. The king of this town had five men which he reserved to be
sacrifyced, whom when our men would have delivered, Siuilla Noua.
the king made humble request to them, saying that if they took away such men
as he had consecrated to be offered to the gods, they should bring utter
destruction to him and all his kingdom: For if our sacrifyces (said he) do
cease, The force of an old error.
our Zemes will take such displeasure with us, that they will suffer our corn,
graffes, and fruits, to be consumed of worms, scorched with drouth,
destroyed with flooddes, or blasted with lyghtnyng. Our men perceyuyng his
earnestness herein, thought it best to choose the least evil, perceyuyng
that it was yet no time to disquiet their minds, and therefore suffered them
to exercise their accustomed ceremonies. And although their priests promise
them immortal glory, eternal felicity, and perpetual conversation with the
gods after the stormy days of this life, yet do they with heavy
countenaunces give ear to their promises, and had rather be set at liberty.
Their priests are named Quines, in the plural number, Their priests live
chaste.
and Quin in the singular: they lead a pure and chaste life, and are honored
of the people with fear and reverence. They make fagottes of the bones of
their enemies which they have taken in the wars, Faggotes of bones.
and hang up the same at the feet of their Zemes, as tokens of the victories
obtained by their favor. To these they add certain titles and
superscriptions, as testimonies of the same. This is strange and worthy to be
noted, that when their children are a year old, the priests in their temples
with devout ceremonies and murmuryng words, power water in form of a cross
upon their heads with a cruet, A figure of baptism.
whereby they seem to baptize them: Neither do they, as the Jews and Turks,
think their temples polluted if any of a strange religion be present at
their sacrifyces and other solemnities. We have now spoken sufficiently of
their books, temples, and superstitions: The presents sent into Spain to the
king.

Two Images of gold and silver.


Let us now therefore come to the other presents which were brought to the
king. Among these, there were two broad and round plates (which some have
named the Images of the Sun and Moon) the one of silver, and the other of
gold, in largeness and roundnesse much like to the stones of handemylles:
yet but thynne, and in manner both of one circumference, that is.xxviii. spannes
in circuit. That of gold is of the weight of three thousand and viii.
hundred Castellanes, where as we have said before yt a Castellane is a coin of
gold which weygheth more then a Ducate by a trient, that is, the third part
of a pound. In the center of this, was the Image of a king of half a cubite
long, syttyng in a trone, and apparelled to the knee like unto a mawmet, with
such countenance as our paynters are wont to paynte fayries or sprites: about
the Image, were the shapes of trees and flowers, so that it seemed to sit as
though it had been in a feelde. The other of silver, was made to the same
similitude, being also in manner of the same weight, and both of pure metal.
They brought likewise certain graynes of rude gold (that is, such as was
never mo^ten) about the bygnesse of Fytches, or the pulse called Lintels, in
token of plenty of native gold: Also two cheynes of gold, Two cheynes of
gold marvelously beset with precious stones and iewelles.
whereof the one contained.viii. lynkes, in the which were set two hundred,
threescore, and two fair and clear read stones, and yet no rubies,
furthermore a hundred fourscore and three green stones, and yet no emerodes:
Nevertheless, these are in like estimation with them, as the other are with
us. At the edge of this cheyne, there hang.xxvii. golden belles, having
between every of them four jewels of precious stones enclosed in gold, at
every of the which in like manner hang certain spangles of gold. The other
cheyne consists only of four golden lynkes, beset round about with a
hundred and two read stones, and a hundred threescore and twelve green
stones, with.xxvi. golden belles, curiously wrought and placed in comely order.
In the very myddest of the cheyne, are ten great precious stones enclosed in
gold, at the which also hang a hundred golden pendauntes, of cunnyng
woorkemanshyppe. They brought furthermore twelve pair of lether buskynnes of
diverse colors, Buskyns.
some imbrodered with gold, and some with silver, with plates and jewels of
gold and precious stones enclosed, and at every of them certain golden
belles: Also certain myters, Myters.
beset with precious stones of diverse colors, among the which some are blewe
like unto Saphires. Of crestes, girdles, and fannes made of feathers, I wot not
what I should lay: but surely, if ever the wits and inventions of men have
deserved honor or commendation in such arts, How can we then call them
beastly or Barbarous?
these seem most worthy to be had in admiration. I do not marvel at gold
and precious stones, but am in manner astonyshed to see the woorkemanshyp excel
the substance: For I have with woonderyng eyes beheld a thousand fourmes and
similitudes, of the which I am not able to write, If they had changed their
gold for our Iron* they had not so soon been subdued.
and in my judgment I never saw any thing whose beauty might so allure the
eyes of men. As they marueyled at the natural beauty of the feathers of our
peacockes and pheasantes, so did we no less marueyle at the artificial
beauty of such things as they make of feathers and quilles, impaled with
gold: For I saw in many of their works, all manner of native colors, even in
the quilles, Quylles.
whereof they make such instruments. They brought also two helmettes, Helmets.
garnyshed with precious stones of a whitishe blewe color: One of these is
edged with belles and plates of gold, and under every bell two knobbes of
gold: the other, beside the stones wherewith it is covered, is likewise edged
with.xxv. golden belles and knobbes, and has on the crest a green bird, A
byrd.
with the feet, byll, and eyes, of gold: Also four spears, much like unto
troute spears, or yeele spears, the wood whereof is all covered with quilles
of diverse colors, Spears.
marvelously wreathed with golden wyers, and plates intermyxte: Every of these
spears have three pikes, whose edges or teeth are all of precious stones, made
fast with wyers of gold. Of like workmanship they brought a great scepter, A
scepter.
beset with precious stones and belles of gold: also a brasele^ of gold, and
shoes made of a Hearts skin, sowed and imbrodered with golden wyers, A
braselet. Shoes.
with a while sole beneath: Furthermore a glass of a bright blewe stone,
Glasses.
and an other of white, both enclosed in gold: Likewise a precious stone, of
the kind of them that are called Sphinges, enclosed in gold: Furthermore the
head of a great Lisarte, two great shelles, two Duckes, the shapes of diverse
other birds, fowls, and fyshes, B^^ds, fowls, and fyshes, of gold.

A crown of gold.


and all of massy gold: Furthermore.xxiiii. round and square targettes,
shieldes, and buckelers of gold, and five of silver: Also a triple crown of
plates and wyers o^ gold, marvelously wreathed with quilles and ^eathers of
diverse colors, having on the front a plate of gold, on the which is graven
the Image of the Idol Zemes. About this Image, hang four other plates, like
crosses of gold, in the which are graven the heads of diverse beasts, as
Lions, Tigers, Woolues, and such other. They brought also the similitudes of
certain beasts, made some of rods or twigs, Images of beasts.
and some of woodde, with the beasts own skynnes thereon, and garnyshed with
collers of laton belles: Likewise diverse sheets, weaued of gossampyne cotton
of sundry colors, Sheets.
whereof two are rychly frynged with gold and precious stones, and three other
with quilles and feathers intermyxte with gossampine cotton of sundry colors,
and checkered like the panes of a chest boorde: Some are on the one side, of
black, white, and read colors, and on the other side plain, without any
variety: Other some are wrought in like manner with variable colors, with a
wheel or circle of black in the myddest, intermyxte with shyning feathers, and
sparks of gold like stars: They brought also cloth of Aras or Uerdure, of
marvelous workemanshyppe: Cloth of Arras
Likewise a soldiers cloak, such as their princes wear in the wars, with
certain priuye coats of fence, A souldyers cloak.
and sundry tirements parteynyng to their heads, with also many such other
things, more beautiful to the eye then rich or precious, whereof to entreat
particulerly, it should be more tedious then profitable. I let pass here also
to speak of many particular nauigations, and of the travails and dangers
which they sustained in the same, with the monsters and secrets of nature they
saw, which are all contained in the registers of our Senate of the affairs of
India, Registers of thaffayres of India.
out of the which I have selected these few annotations, such as seemed to me
most meet to be published. Notwithstanding these rich and goodly presents,
yet were they that brought them, and also Coriesius the governor of the navy,
and aucthour of erecting their new colonie in those remote regions, adjudged
by the Senate to have done against right and equity, Thaucthoritie of the
Lieuetenaunt.
in that they attempted the same without thaduice of the governor of the Island
of Cuba, who sent them forth by the kings authority, whereas they did other
things beside their commission, yea although they went to the king, not first
knowing his pleasure whom the king had substitute his Lieuetenaunt in that
Island: insomuch that by his procuratour, he accused them before the Senate as
fugitive thieves and traitors. They on ye other part alleged, yt they had
done the king better service then he, and that they had showed sufficient
obedience, in appea^yng to the king as the higher Judge. But the governor
required by the virtue of his commission, and the kings letters pattents, yt
they might be beheaded for their disobedience against him, whom they knew to
be aucthorised by the king. They again replied, that they had not offended
the king, but rather deserved reward for their great dangers and travails.
Both the reward and punishment were deferred, and a day appointed when both
parties should be heard. Let us now therefore come to the Spanyardes of
Dariena, The Spanyardes of Dariena.
thinhabitours of the gulf of Vraba, in the supposed continent. We have said
before, that Dariena is a river runnyng toward the West side of the gulf of
Vraba: On the bank of this river, the Spanyardes planted their first colonie
or habitation, after they had vanquished king Chemaccus: this colonie they
named Sancta Maria Antiqua, by reason of a vow which they made to the virgin
Marie in the time of the battle against Chemaccus. Sansta Maria Antiqua.
To these (as we have made mention in the end of our Decades) was Petrus
Arias sent with a thousand and two hundred men, Petrus Arias whom the
Spanyardes name Pediarias.

This sea the Spanyardes call Mardelser.


at the request of Vaschus Nunnez Balboa, who was then the governor of
Dariena, and the first that found and discovered the large South sea heretofore
unknown. We have also declared, how at the arrival of Petrus Arias the new
governor, he divided his army into Centurions, that is, captains over
hundreds, whom he sent forth diverse ways. What tragedies followed hereof, I
will absolve in few words, because all are horrible and unpleasant: For
since we fynyshed our Decades, there has been none other then kyllyng,
sleying, murderyng, and accusing. The king made Vaschus governor but during
his pleasure. His courage was such, Contention between Vaschus and Petrus
Arias.
and his factes so notorious, that he could not long abide the hautynes of
Petrus Arias. To be brief, their falling out and discord, confounded all
things. John Cacedus the pulpit friar of the order of saint Frances, did his
uttermost endeavor to make them friends, promysyng unto Vaschus, the daughter
of Petrus Arias to wife: But no means could be found how these two, which
bore the chief rule, might be brought to agreement. At the length the matter
grew to such extremity, that Petrus Arias fyndyng occasion of quarellyng
against Vaschus, Petrus Arias commands that Vaschus be put to death.
sent process to the magistrates of the town, whereby he commanded them to
strangle Vaschus, and five other which were chief captains under him,
alleagyng that they and their confederates conspired to rebel in the South
sea, and that Vaschus him self for that intent had builded and furnished four
ships, to search the south coasts of the supposed continent: also, that to
his three hundred soldiers and companions which he had with him, he should
speak words of this effect as follows. My friends, and fellows of my long
pains and trauayles, Vaschus is accused.
how long shall we be subject to the commandment of other, sith we have
bydden the brunt, and overcome thinterprise for the which this new governor
was sent with so great a multitude? Who can any longer abide his pride and
insolency? Let us therefore follow these coasts whyther so ever fortune shall
drive us, and among these so many pleasant and fruitful provinces of this
large land, let us choose one, in the which we may with liberty spend
that portion of our lives which yet remains. Who can find us, or shall be able
to profer us violence? When these or the like words were declared to Petrus
Arias, he sent to the South parts for Vaschus, wyllyng him by the virtue of
his commission to repair to him forthwith. Vaschus obeyed, and at his coming
was cast in prison: yet constantly denying that ever he intended any such
thing. Witnesses were brought against him, and his words rehearsed from the
beginning: To conclude, he was judged worthy death, and was put to execution.
Vaschus is put to death.
And this is the reward wherewith the blind goddess oftentimes recompenseth
such as have sustained great trauayles and dangers, to be hyghly in her
favor. Petrus Arias leauyng his wife in Dariena, Petrus Arias.
embarked him self in the ships left of Vaschus, to the intent to search those
coasts: But whether he be returned or not, we have yet no certain
knowledge. He has also his fortune. Yet is there an other governor assigned,
Lupus Sosa.
whose name is Lupus Sosa, the viceroye of the Islands of Canarie. What stomach
Petrus Arias may have if he return, let good men judge. There was nothing done
under him worthy glory. Some think that he was at the beginning to slack
and negligent in his office, and not severe in correctyng errors and
misorders. But we will leave him, and rehearse somewhat whereof we have been
lately infourmed, as touching the great and deep river of Dabaiba, The great
river of Dabaiba or Grandis.
the which for the greatness and largeness thereof, our men named Grandis,
that is, great, as we have noted in our Decades. This river falls into the
furthest corner of the gulf of Vraba by seven ports or mouths, as does the
river of Nilus into the Egyptian sea, The gulf of Vraba.
whose large description you may also read in our Decades. That the mountains
on every side about this river are rich in gold, we have learned by
thinformation of thinhabitauntes, The rich mountains of Dabaiba.
of whom we made diligent inquisition. Vaschus, and beside him other
governors and Lieuetenauntes, have fouretymes entered into this river with
their armies in battle array, and with diverse kinds of ships, first for
the space of forty miles, then fyftie, and at the last fourscore, and at an
other time also ouerthwarte the river. Oh shameful chance, and detestable
cowardnesse of our men. Fierce and waclyke people.
A naked nation encountryng with them that had apparel, the armed against the
unarmed, had the overthrow in manner in all conflictes, and were either all
slain or wounded. They use inuenomed arrows, and are such expert archers,
that if they espy any place of their enemy bare or unarmed, they will not
lightly fail to stryke him there. They use also many darts, Darts.
which in the time of the battle they hurl so thick a far of, that they
take the light of the sun from their enemies as it were with a cloud. They
have likewise broad and long swoordes, Swoordes of heavy wood.
made of a heavy and hard kind of wood, wherewith they fight fiercely near
at hand. Vaschus him self received many wounds in encountryng with them. And
thus by reason of the fierceness of these Barbarians, the river of Dabaiba is
yet left unsearched. We will now speak somewhat more of the Island of
Hispaniola (which the Spanyardes call Spagnuola) the mother and chief of all
other lands or Islands whereof we intended to write. In it the Senate is now
restored, Hispaniola. Ouiedus writes that there are now five monasteries.
and five Judges assigned to give laws to all thinhabitauntes of those
tractes. But in short time, they shall cease geathering of gold, although
there be great plenty, by reason they shall lack laborers and myners,
forasmuch as thinhabitauntes whose help they used herein, are brought to a
small number, consumed partly by war, and many more by famine that year
that they dygged up the roots whereof they made their best bread, and left of
sowyng their grain of Maizium, which is their common food, supposing hereby
to have driven our men out of the Island, who had vittayles sent them from
Spain. New and strange diseases.
A great number of them also dyed of new and strange diseases, which in the
year of Christ a thousand five hundred and eightiene, consumed them like
rotten sheep. And (to say the truth) our men's insatiable desire of gold, so
oppressed these poor wretches with extreme labor and toil, where as before
they lived pleasauntly and at liberty, given only to plays and pastymes, as
daunsyng, fyshyng, foulyng, and huntyng of little Cunnies, that many of them
peryshed even for very anguyshe of mind, the which (with their unaccustomed
labor) are things of them selves sufficient to engender many new diseases.
But the king and the Senate have now determined, that they be reduced to a
people, and to give them selves only to increase, and tyllage of the ground:
and that only such as are bought or taken out of other regions, be appointed
to labor in the gold mines. But it shall suffyse to have said thus much of
the pestiferous hunger of gold: therefore I will speak of other matters. It is
a marvelous thing to consider how all things increase and prosper in this
Island. The sugar of Hispaniola.
There are now.xxviii. sugar presses, wherewith great plenty of sugar is
made. The canes or reeds wherein the sugar grows, are bygger and higher then
in any other place, and are as bygge as a man's arm in the brawne, and higher
then the stature of a man, by the half. This is more wonderful, that where as
in Ualentia in Spain (where a great quantity of sugar is made yearly) where
so ever they apply them selves to the great increase thereof, Sugar of
Valentia.
yet does every root bring forth not past five, or six, o^ at the most
seven of those reeds: A token of marvelous fruitfulnes.
whereas in Hispaniola o^e root bears twenty, and oftentimes thirty. Four
footed beasts and cattayle, are marvelously increased in this Island. And
albeit that the rauenyng hunger of gold has hitherto greatly hyndered our men
from tyllage of the ground, yet is there great plentye of wheat, which
prospers so well, that it yields some time a hundred fold, Wheat.
and this especially on the hills or rydges of the mountains prospectyng
toward the North: Uines do also increase here with no less fruitefulnesse.
Vines.
What should I speak of the trees that bear Cassia fistula, Cassia Fistula.
brought first into this Island from the other Islands near unto the supposed
Continent, as we have noted in our Decades? There is now such plenty hereof,
that after a few years we shall have a pound of the price that we pay now
for an ounce. Of the Brasyle, and Mirobalane trees, with other innumerable
prerogatives and benefytes which nature has plentifully given to this blessed
Island, Brasyle. Myrobalanes.
we have spoken sufficiently in our Decades. Yet have I thought good to repeat
part of the same, because I think that the wits of many readers have
diuerted from the weight of great affairs, to the recordation of such
pleasant things: And yet do not such things as are sauerie, engender
tediousness, so that a precious matter be adiourned with a precious vesture.

A brief rehearsal of the contents of the books of the first Decade, and so
following of all the other Decades. Folio. 8.
IN the first book is declared how Christophorus Colonus, otherwise called
Columbus, persuaded Fernando and Elizabeth princes of Spain, to further his
attempt in searchyng new and unknown lands in the West Ocean. Also of
the.vii. Islands of Canaria, by whom they were found and conquered.

How Colonus found the Islands of Hispaniola, and Cuba, and of the fierce
people called Canibales or Caribes, which are accustomed to eat man's flesh.

Of the roots called Ages, Iucca, and the grain Maizium, whereof the people
of the Islands made their bread.

Of the gold found in the sands of ryuers, and of the Serpents which are
without hurt: also of turtle doves, ducks, and popingaies.

Of Mastix, and Aloe, with diverse fruits and trees unknown to us, and of the
fruitefulnesse of the Island of Hispaniola, which the Spanyardes call Spagnuola.

Of the second viage of Colonus into these regions, and how he was furnished
with.xvii. ships, and a thousand and two hundred soldiers, with all kind
of artillarie, artificers, and grain to sow: and of the tree from the which
water droppeth continually into a trenche made by man's hand.

The contents of the second book. Fol. 12.
How Colonus departing from the Islands of Canarie, sailed viii. hundred and
twenty leagues in.xxi. days, and, came to Dominica an Island of the Canibales:
and of the fragrant sauoure of spices which proceeded from the Islands.

Of the Islands of Galanta or Galana and Guadalupea, and of the trees which
bear that kind of cotton which the Italians call Bombasine, and the Spanyardes
Algadon.

Of diverse kinds of Popingiayes, and of the Island of Matinino or Madanino,
being inhabited only with women: also of diverse other fruitful Islands, and
of a conflicte which the Spanyardes had with the Canibales.

Of certain Islands in the which are seen the mines of metals and precious
stones, and of the fruitful and populous Island called Burichena, or Boriquen,
or Insula. S. Iohannis.

How all the Admirals men which at his first viage he left in Hispaniola,
were slain in his absence by the rebellion of Guaccanarillus, king of the
region of Xamana: and of the free kind of life which they lead that have not
the use of money.

Of the seven maidens which swam three miles in the sea, and of the manner of
geathering of gold in the sands of rivers.

The contents of the third book. Fol. 17.
A Particular description of the Island of Hispaniola, which Colonus thinks
to be Ophir, from whence king Solomon had his great riches of gold.

Of the marvelous fruitfulness of Hispaniola, and of the sugar canes growyng
there.

Of the golden regions of Cipanga or Cibaua, and of the ryuers in whose sands
is found great plenty of gold.

Of certain graynes of gold of exceeding great quantity.

Of wild vines of plesaunt taste, and of grass which in four days grows
as high as wheat.

Of the Island of Iohanna or Cuba, being the end of the East and the West, and
of the fruitful and populous Island of Iamaica.

How the Admiral thought that he had sailed about the lowest Hemisphere or
half circle of the earth, and of a secret of Astronomy touching the same
matter.

How the Admiral gave names to seven hundred Islands, and passed by three
thousand unnamed.

Of certain serpents like unto Crocodiles of eight foot long, whose flesh is
delicate to be eaten, and of certain trees which bear Gourdes.

Of the river whose water is very hot, and of the huntyng fyshe which takes
other fyshes.

Of great abundaunce of Tortoyses as bygge as targets, and of a fruitful
mountain well inhabited.

Of dogs of deformed shape and dumb, and of white and thick water.

Of woods of Date trees, and Pyneapple trees, and of certain people apparelled
like white friars.

Of certain trees which bear spices, and of Cranes of exceedyng bygnesse.

Of stock doves of more pleasant taste then partriches.

An oration of a barbarous governor as touching the immortality of the soul:
Also of the reward of virtue, and punishment of vice.

A similitude of the golden world, and of provision without care.

How the Admiral fell sick by reason of to much watcheyng, and of a
sedi^ion which rose among the Spaniardes in the Island of Hispaniola.

The Contents of the fourth book. Fol. 25.
HOw the Kings of the Island of Hispaniola, were by the Spaniardes
mysbehauiour provoked to rebellion, and how the Admiral sent for them.

How king Counaboa the Lord of the house of gold, that is, of the mountains
of Cibaua, conspired the Admirals death, and how he with his family were taken
prisoners.

Of a great famine that chanced in the Island of Hispaniola, and how the
Admiral builded certain fortresses.

Of a piece of rude gold wayghing twenty ounces, and of the mine of the rich
metal called Elestrum.

Of the mountain in the which is found great plenty of Amber and Orpement:
and of the woods of Brasyle trees.

How the inhabitants are put to their tribute, and how the nature of ye
Region disposes the manners of the people.

How the brother of king Caunaboa came against the Admiral with an army of
five thousand naked men, and how he was taken, and his army put to flight.

Of the fruitful vale Magona, in the sands of whose ryuers is found great
plenty of gold: and of certain whirlewindes and tempests.

How the Admiral sent forth his brother Bartholomeus Colonus with an army of
men to search the gold mines, and of the Fosses which he found to have been
dygged in old time.

The Contents of the.v. book. Fol. 27. for 29.
How the Lieuetenaunt builded a fortress in the gold mines, and prepared
instruments for the purging and finyng of the gold.

How certain ships laden with vittayles, came from Spain: And how the
Lieuetenaunt sent the kings which rebelled, with three hundred captives into
Spain.

How the Liefetenaunt removed his habitation, and builded a fortress which
he called saint Dominickes tower, also how he passed over the river Naiba, and
entered into the wooddes of Brasyle trees.

How the great king Beuchius Anacauchoa, frendelye entertained the
Lieuetenaunt, and brought him to his palace, where the kings wives and
concubines received him honorably with pompes and triumphs.

Of the fortresses which were erected in Hispaniola, and how the Lieuetenaunt
exacted tribute of the kings which rebelled again.

How the Lieuetenaunt set upon the kings unawares in the night season, and
took.xiiii. of them prisoners.

How king Guarionexius, captain of the conspiracy, was pardoned, and how he
persuaded the people to obedience.

How king Beuchius Anacauchoa, sent messengers to the Lieuetenaunt to repair
to his palace, where he found.xxxii. kings ready with their tributes: And how
the queen Anacaona entysed him to eat of the Serpents flesh.

How the Serpents flesh is prepared to be eaten, and how delicate meat
their eggs are if they be sodden.

How queen Anacauchoa, sister to king Beuchius Anacauchoa, entertained ye
Liefetenant, and gave him much household stuff, and many vessels of Hebene wodd
artifically wrought and carved

How king Anacauchoa and the queen his sister went aboorde the Lieuetenantes
ship, and how greatly they were amassed to behold the furniture thereof.

How Roldanus Xeminus a Spanyarde, rebelled in the Lieuetenauntes absence, by
whose mysdemeanour also king Guarionexius was provoked to a new conspiracy,
and with him Maiobanexius the king of the mountains.

The contents of the syxt book. Foli. 35.
THe third viage of Colonus, and how he diuerted from his accustomed raze by
the Islands of Canarie to the Island of Madera, for fear of certain french
pirates and rotters.

Of the.xiii. Islands which in old time were called Hesperides, and are now
called the Islands of Caput Viride, or Cabouerde. Also of the Tortoyses of the
Island of Bonauista, wherewith the leper is healed.

How the Admiral found contagious air and extreme heat near the
Equinoctial, where the north pole was eleuate only five degrees, and how
saylyng from thence westwarde, he found the stars placed in other order, and
the sea rysyng as it were the back of a mountain.

How the Admiral saylyng westwarde, and never passing out of the clyme or
paralels of Ethiope, found a temperate Region, and people of goodly
corporature: and what difference is between the natures of Regions being under
one paralele and one elevation of the pole.

Of the Islands of Puta and Margarita, and of the swyfte course or fall of the
Ocean from the East to the West.

Of the gulf called Os Draconis, and of the conflicte between the fresh water
and the salt.

Of a sea of fresh water, and a mountain inhabited only with Monkyes and
Marmasettes.

Of the fair, rich, and large region of Paria, and how friendly
thinhabitantes entreated the Admiral and his men.

Also of pleasant wine made of diverse fruits, and of great abundaunce of
pearls and gold.

Of the regions of Cumana, Manacapana, and Curiana, being regio^s of ye large
province of Paria, and of ye sea of herbs or weeds.

A certain secret as touching the pole stars, and the elevation of the
same, also of the roundnesse of the earth.

Of the mountains of Paria, in the tops whereof Colonus earnestly affirms
the earthly paradise to be situate, and whether Paria be part of the firm
land or continent of India.

The contents of the.vii. book. Fol. 39.
How Roldanus Xeminus with his confederates, accused the Admiral to the king,
and how he pourged him self, and accused them.

How king Guarionexius rebelled again, and with him king Maiobannexius: also
how they with other kings came against the Lieuetenaunt with an army of
eight thousand naked and painted Ciguauians: also two rare examples of
frendshyp and faythfulnesse in barbarous princes.

How Colonus the Admiral and the Lieuetenant his brother were sent bound into
Spain, and new officers appointed in their places.

The contents of the eight book. Fol. 43.
THe navigations of Petrus Alphonsus from Spain to Paria, where in the region
of Curiana, he had in short space.xv. ounces of pearls, and great plenty of
victuals, for hawks belles, pinnes, lokyng glasses, and such other tryfles.

Of certain conjectures whereby Paria is thought to be part of the fyrme land,
and of the golden region of Cauchieta, where in the month of November the air
is temperate and not cold.

How Alphonsus had a conflict with the Canibales, and how they are accustomed
to invade other countries.

Of great abundaunce of salt in the region of Haraia, and how the dead bodies
of their princes are dried, reserved, and religiously honored.

How Alphonsus at his return to Spain from Curiana, brought with him
threscore and sixteen pound weight of pearls, which he bought for our
tryfles, amountyng only to the value of five shillynges.

The contents of the nienth book. Fol. 47.
THe navigations of Vincentius Pinzonus and Aries Pinzonus, and how they sailed
beyond the Equinoctial line, lost the sight of the north star, and found
the stars in other order.

How Vincentius passing the Equinoctial toward the South pole, found fierce
and warlyke people of great stature, and of the sea of fresh water.

How Vincentius directing his course toward the Northwest from the
Equinoctial, recovered the sight of the Northpole, and by the regions of
Mariatambal, Camomorus, and Pericora, came to the fair and rych province of
Paria, and to the regions of Os draconis, Cumana, Manacapana, Curiana. etc.

A conjecture that Paria (whereby is meant that main land now called America)
should be part of the fyrme land or continent of India, beyond the river of
Ganges and no Island, and of the exceeding great river Maragnonus replenished
with Islands.

Of Boriostomea and Spiriostomea, the mouths of the famous river of Dunabius
called in old time Ister, and of the commodities of the regions and Islands
about Paria: also of the woods of Brasile trees.

Of many fruitful Islands wasted and left desolate by reason of the Canibales
cruelty, and of the trees of Cassia Fistula: also of other trees of exceeding
bygnesse.

The description of a certain monstrous beast, and how Vincentius lost two
of his shyps by tempest.

How Vincentius at his return to Spain, brought with him Cinamome, Ginger,
and certain precious stones called Topases: And of the nauigations of certain
other inhabitants of the town of Palos.

Of the precious medicine called Animae Album, and of the diverse superstitions
of the inhabitauntes of Hispniola: also of their Idolatry, and how they
honor the Images of deuylles, which they call Zemes.

The Contents of the tenth book. Fol. 54.
OF great plenty of gold, pearls, and frankensence, found in the regions of
Paria, and of innumerable beasts in shape differyng from ours.

How the Spaniardes proffered them selves to conquer the new found lands,
being in largeness thryse as great as Europe, beside the South lands
parteynyng to the Portingales, and how the nature of the place alters the
fourmes and qualities of things.

Of the Island of Cuba, and of the gold mines of the Island of Sancti
Iohannis, otherwise called Burichena, or Buchena. Also of the rich gold mines
of Hispaniola, and of the order of workyng in the same.

Of the two chief gold mines of Hispaniola, and of a piece of gold weighing
three thousand three hundred and ten pound weight.

How the gold is fined and distributed* and how that only in the melting shops
of the two golden mines of Hispaniola, is molten yearly above three hundred
thousand pound weight of gold.

How thenterpryses of the Spanyardes are not inferior to thactes of Saturnus
or Hercules, and how the Admiral discovered the land over against the West
corner of Cuba, and the Island of Guanassa.

The Contents of the books of the second Decade.
The contents of the first book. Fol. 57.
HOw after the death of Colonus the Admiral, the king gave free license to all
such as would attempt any vyages, and of the nauigations of Diego Nicuesa, and
Alphonsus Fogeda.

Of the Island Codego and the region of Caramairi, and of certain sweet
apples which turn into woormes when they are eaten, whose trees are also
contagious.

How Alphonsus Fogeda, the Lieuetenaunt of Vraba, encou^tring with the
Barbarians, had the overthrow, and how in this conflicte fyftie of his men
were slain, with Johannes de la Cossa their captain.

How Fogeda, and Nicuesa the Lieuetenaunt of Beragua, revenged the death of
their companyons, and how Fogeda came to the Island Fortis and the region of
Caribana, where he was repulsed from the gold mines by the fierceness of the
Barbarians, vsyng arrows infected with poison.

How Fogeda was wounded in the thygh with a venomous arrowe, and his men
almost consumed with famyne.

How a Brigantyne was drowned with the stroke of a Fyshe: and of the
navigations of Ancisus from Hispaniola to Vraba.

Of the lamentable shypwracke of Ancisus, and of the Date trees and wild Bores
which he found.

Of the fruits or apples of the trees called Cedars of Libane, which bear
old fruits and new all the year.

How only three of the Caniballes with their bows and inuenomed arrows
assailed Ancisus with a hundred of his men, in which conflict they wounded and
slew many^als^, of their swiftness of foot.

Of the great river of Dariena, and how Ancisus encountered with five hundred
of thinhabitauntes of the gulf of Vraba, and put them to flight: also, how he
found great plenty of wrought gold and household stuff in a thycket of
reeds.

The contents of the second book. Fol. 63.
How Nicuesa lost his fellows in the dark night, and went past the mouth of
the river Beragua which he sought, and how the captains of the other ships
consulted how to find him: also, of the river Lagartos in the which great
Lisartes are found, much like unto the Crocodiles of Nilus.

How the captains forsook their ships, that the souldyers might be
without hope of departure, and of the miserable chance of Petrus de Vmbria and
his fellows.

By what chance Nicuesa was found, and of the calamities which he and his
company sustained: also, of the region of Gracia Dei or Cerabaro, and of the
river of Sansti Matthei.

How Nicuesa caused them to remove their habitation from Beragua to point
Marmor, where he builded a fortress, and how his men by war and famyne, were
consumed from seven hundred and odd, to scarsely one hundred.

How one Vaschus Nunnez usurped thaucthoritie of the Lieuetenauntshyp of Vraba
in thabsence of Fogeda, and of the navigations of Rodericus Colmenaris from
Hispaniola to Vraba.

Of the river Baira discendyng from the top of a high mountain covered with
snow, and how Rodericus Colmenaris in a conflicte against the Barbarians,
lost.xlvii. of his men, by reason of their inuenomed arrows.

Of the force of the poison wherewith the Barbarians infecte their arrows, and
a remedy for the same: also, how Colmenaris by gunshot and kyndlyng fyers on
the high tops of the rocks, came to the Spanyardes, left desolate in Dariena.

The contents of the third book. Fol. 67.
How Nicuesa was sought forth to acquict the contentions of Vraba, and how
he was again rejected.

How Vaschus Nunnez invaded, took prisoners, and spoiled the kings borderyng
about the region of Vraba, and how Ancisus Lieuetenaunt for Fogeda was cast in
prison, and afterward set at liberty.

How Ancisus took his viage from Vraba to Spain, to accuse Vaschus, who also
at the same time sent Valdiuia, as well to speak in his defense, as also to
certify the king of their doyngs.

How king Careta conspired with the Spanyardes against king Poncha, whom they
put to flight, and spoiled his village.

How king Comogrus friendly enterteyned the Spanyardes, and brought them to
his palace, where he showed them the dried carkases of his ancestors
reserved, and sumptuously apparelled, and how the kings elder son gave
Vaschus and Colmenaris four thousand ounces of wrought gold, and fyftie
slaves: also, a wyttie oration which he made to the Spanyardes, wherein he
certifyed them of a country exceedyng rych in gold. etc.

The contents of the fourth book. Fol. 72.
OF horrible thunder and lyghtnyng in the month of November, and of grain
which waxes ripe thryse a year: also, how digestion is strengthened by
outward cold.

How Valdiuia is sent again into Hispaniola, to move the governor and
counsel there to send into Spain to the king for a supply of a thousand
souldyers, to make way to the golden mountains, and how he carried with him
the kings portion, that is, the fyft part of gold and other things.

How Vaschus invaded the kings inhabytyng the regions about the gulf of
Vraba, and how he put king Dabaiba to flight, in whose village he found
wrought gold, amountyng to the weight of seven thousand Castellans.

Of Battes as byg as Turtle dooues, which sometime byte men in the night in
their sleep, whose biting is also venomous, but is healed with water of the
sea, or by cauterization, as are also the wounds of venomous arrows.

Of the Island of Cannafistula, and a town of five hundred houses, whose king
Abenamachei was taken, and his arm cut of in the fight.

Of trees of exceedyng bygnesse and heyght, and how king Abibeiba had his
palace in the top of a tree, from the which he was enforced to descend and
entreat of peace.

The contents of the fyfth book. Fol. 75.
How king Abraiba slew a captain of the Spanyardes, and caused the kings to
rebel: also, how they were put to flight, and many of their men slain.

Of five kings which attempted a new conspiracy with a hundred great Canoas,
and five thousand men, and how their intent was bewrayed by a woman, and
prevented: also, how Rodericus Colmenaris sacked the village of Tichiri, and
hung the king thereof, with four of his chief rulers, and commanded them to
be shot through with arrows.

The contents of the sixth book. Fol. 77.
How Vaschus with his confederates, sent Johannes Quicedus and Colmenaris from
Dariena to Hispaniola, and from thence to Spain to the king, for a thousand
men to pass over the mountains to the golden regions, and what miseries they
sustained in that viage: also of the death of Valdiuia, Zamudius, and Fogeda.

Of the prosperous viage of Ancisus, and how God wrought miracles by the
simple faith of a mariner: also, how God respects thinfancie of faith for
zeales sake, and how one religion turned into another, holds still many
things of the first.

How many of the Barbarians were baptized by reason of the miracles, and how
they rewarded the priests by whom they were baptized.

How Ancisus shortly after his arryuall in Spain, resorted to the court, and
made his complaynt to the king of thinsolencie of Vaschus, whereupon the king
gave sentence against him, and how apt the Barbarous nations are to embrase the
Christian faith.

The contents of the seventh book. Fol. 81.
How Quicedus and Colmenaris the procuratours of Dariena, were honorably
enterteyned at the court, and brought to the kings presence, and how their
complexion was changed by alteration of the air.

How Petrus Arias, a noble man, was elected governor and Lieuetenaunt of
Dariena, and how other of the court labored for the same office: also, how
the bishop of Burges spoke to the king in his behalf.

How Petrus Arias had a thousand and two hundred souldyers appointed him at
the kings charges, and of the kings custom house in the city of Civil,
called the house of the contractes of India.

How a great number of Spanyardes proffered them selves to go at their own
charges, and of a restraint made that no stranger might pass without the
kings license: also, how the aucthour reproves Aloisius Cadamustus, a writer
of the Portugales viages.

How Petrus Arias shortly after his departure from Civil. lost two of his
ships, and was driven back again by tempest, and how being newly
furnyshed, he passed the Ocean with more prosperous wyndes.

The third viage of Vincentius Pinzonus, and how he came to the regions of
Paria, where encountryng with thinhabitauntes, he put them first to flight, but
after falling to entreaty of peace, they gave him great plenty of gold, and
abundaunce of masculine frankensence, with diverse other princely presents.

Of the great multitude of Popingiayes which are in the region of Paria, and
how thinhabitours are apparelled: also, of the five kings that made a league
of friendshyp with Vincentius.

How Vincentius sailed Eastwarde by the tracte of the region of Paria, until
he came to the point of that long land, which the aucthour supposes to be the
great Island Atlantike, Cap. 5. August.
whereof the old writers make mention.

The contents of the.viii. book. Fol. 86.
A Contention between the Castilians and Portugales, as concerning the
division of the new found lands, and how the controversy was fynished by
the bishop of Rome.

How Don Christopher the governor of the Island of Sancti Iohannis, was
slain by the Caniballes, and the bishop put to flight: also, of the other
bishops of the Islands.

How the Caniballes of the Island of Sancta Crux, slew and ate a king, with
certain of his men, being friends to the Christians, and made faggottes of
their bones, and how quarellyng with our men, they put them to silence.

The contents of the.ix. book. Fol. 87.
OF the marvelous fruitfulness of the regions of Beragua, Vraba, and Dariena,
and of the diverse kinds of trees and fruits: also, of the pleasant taste of
swynes flesh, being fed with the fruits of Mirobalane trees.

Of Lions and Tigers, and other wild beasts, and of a beast of strange
form.

Of the ryuers of the gulf of Vraba, as the river of Dariena and Rio Grandis,
and how the great serpents called Crocodiles, are found in other ryuers
beside Nilus in Egypt: also, how thaucthour of this book was sent Ambassador
to the Soldane of Alcayr in Egypt.

Of the Portugales nauigations, and of the river Senega found by them to be a
channel of Nilus: also, of the multitude of byrds and fowls being in the
maryshes of Dariena.

A phylosophicall discourse of thoriginall and generation of sprynges and
ryuers, and of the breadth of the land diuydyng the North and South Ocean.

Of the great river Maragnonus, and of the earthly Paradyse, and how springs
are engendered by co^uertion of air into water.

Of the often fall of rain under the Equinoctial line, and of the pores of
the sea opened by the South wyndes.

Of the great ryuers of Tanais, Ganges, Danubius, and Eridanus, famous to the
old writers, and how certain ryuers runnyng through the caves of the earth,
break forth into spryngs a far of.

The contents of the.x. book. Fol. 91.
How the new found lands discovered by the Spaniards in the West Ocean, are
eight times bygger then Italy, beside that which the Portugales possess, and
of the cards of the sea drawn by Colonus and Americus Vesputius.

The order of measuryng the land, and how a league conteyneth four miles by
sea, and but three by land.

The Navigations of Johannes Dias, and of the sundry eleuations of the pole
star.

Of the Island of Boiuca or Agnaneo, and of the spryng whose water being
drunk, causes old men to look young.

How Nicuesa and his souldyers were so oppressed with famine, that they were
driven to eat mangie dogs, Toades, and dead men, and how a broth made of a
dog skin, was sold for many pieces of gold.

The Contents of the books of the third Decade.
The contents of the first book. Fol. 94.
OF the desperate adventure and good fortune of Vaschus, and how with a
hundred fourscore and ten men, he brought that to pass for the which Petrus
Arias was sent with a thousand and two hundred fresh souldyers.

How Iron serves for more necessary uses then gold, and how superfluities
hinder liberty.

How Vaschus in one conflicte slew six hundred Barbarians with their kings,
and how he found the house of king Quarequa infected with unnatural lechery,
commaundyng that the king and forty such as he kept for that purpose, should
be given for a pray to his dogs which he used to serve in the wars against
these naked people.

Of a region of black Moors, and how Vaschus came to the tops of the
mountains, where gyuyng thanks to God, he beheld the new South Ocean,
never before seen nor known to men of our world.

How Vaschus put king Chiapes to flight, and after made a league of friendshyp
with him, and how the king gave him.iiii. hundred pounds weight of wrought
gold.

How king Coquera was put to flight, who also being received to friendshyp,
gave Vaschus six hundred and fyftie pounds weight of wrought gold.

Of the gulf called Sinus. S. Michaelis, being full of inhabited Islands, and
of the manly courage and godly zeal of Vaschus: also, of the rysyng and
falling of the South sea.

How king Tumacchus being driven to flight and afterward reconciled, gave
Vaschus six hundred and fourtiene peeses of gold, and two hundred and forty
of the greatest and fairest pearls, and how the king caused his men to fyshe
for pearls.

Of the Island called Margaritea Dives, and of the abundance of fair and great
pearls found therein.

Of habitable regions under the Equinoctial line, and of the Portugales
nauigations to the Antipodes, inhabityng the five and fyftie degree of the
South pole: also, a declaration of Antipodes, and of the stars about the
South pole.

The contents of the second book. Fol. 101.
OF the manner of fyshyng for pearls, and of the three kinds thereof: also,
diverse other questions concerning pearls.

Of the multitude of the shell fyshes wherein pearls are engendered and found
in manner in all places in the South sea, and of abundaunce of gold found
almost in every house: also, how the treasury of nature is in those coasts,
and of the gold mines of Dariena.

How king Teaocha gave Vaschus.xx. pounds weight of wrought gold, and two
hundred pearls: also, of desartes full of wild beasts, and how Vaschus was
troubled with great heat in the month of November.

How a dog Tiger was taken, and his whelps tied in cheynes and torn in
pieces: also, how Vaschus gave.iiii. kings to his dogs to be devoured.

Of the use of dogs in their wars, and of the fierceness of the Caniballes.

How king Bononiana favored the Christians, and gave Vaschus xx. pound weight
of wrought gold: also, his oration to Vaschus.

A similitude prouyng great plenty of gold in the regions of the South sea,
and of the trauayles which old souldyers are able to sustain.

The contents of the third book. Fol. 105.
How king Buchibuea submitted him self to Vaschus, and sent him certain
vessels of gold: also, how king Chiorisus sent him.xxx. dyshes of pure gold.

How Iron serves for more necessary uses then gold: also, an example of the
life of our first parents.

How king Pocchorrosa submitted him self, and gave Vaschus fyftiene pound
weight of wrought gold: also, how Tumanama the great king of the golden
regions toward the South sea, is taken prisoner: likewise how he gave
Vaschus.xxx. pound weight of pure and wrought gold, and his noble men.lx.
pounds weight of gold.

Of the cause of vehement wyndes near unto the Equinoctial line, and of the
color of the earth of the golden mines.

Of the large and fruitful plain of Zauana, and of the river Comogrus: also
how king Comogrus, baptized by the name of Charles, gave Vaschus.xx. pound
weight of wrought gold.

Of the good fortune of Vaschus, and how he was turned from Goliath to
Elizeus, and from Anteus to Hercules, and with what facility the Spaniardes
shall hereafter obtain great plenty of gold and pearls.

Of the Spanyardes conquestes, and fierceness of the Canibales: also an
exhortation to Christian princes to set forward Christ's religion.

The contents of the fourth book. Fol. 110.
THe fourth viage of Colonus the Admiral from Spain to Hispaniola, and to the
other Islands and coasts of the firm land: also of the floryshyng Island
Guanassa.

Of the seven kinds of Date trees, wild vines, and Mirobalanes: also of
birds and fowls.

Of people of goodly stature which use to paynt their bodies, and of the
swyfte course of the sea from the east to the west: also of fresh water in the
sea.

Of the large regions of Paria, Os Draconis, and Quiriquetana, and of great
Tortoyses and reeds: also of the four fruitful Islands called Quatuor
Tempora, and.xii. Islands called Limonares.

Of sweet sauoures and wholesome air, and of the region Quicuri, and the haven
Cariai or Mirobalanus: also of certain civil people.

Of trees growyng in the sea after a strange sort, and of a strange kind of
Monkyes, which invade men, and feyght with wild Bores.

Of the great gulf of Cerabaro replenished with many fruitful Islands, and
of the people which wear cheynes of gold made of ouches, wrought to the
similitude of diverse wild beasts and fowls.

Of five villages whose inhabitauntes give them selves only to geatheryng of
gold, and are painted, vsyng to wear garlandes of Lions and Tigers claws:
also of seven ryuers, in all the which is found great plenty of gold, and
where the plenty of gold ceasseth.

Of certain people which paynt their bodies, and cover their privy members
with shelles, having also plates of gold hangyng at their nosethrylles.

Of certain woormes, which being engendered in the seas near about the
Equinoctial, eat holes in the ships, and how the Admirals ships were
destroyed by them.

How the king of Beragua entertained the Lieuetenaunt, and of the great
plenty of gold in the river of Duraba, and in all the regions there about,
also in roots of trees and stones, and in manner in all ryuers.

How the Lieuetenaunt and his company would have erected a colonie beside the
river of Beragua, and was repulsed by thinhabitauntes.

How the Admiral fell into the hands of the Barbarians of the Island of
Iamaica, where he lived miserably the space of ten months, and by what
chance he was saved and came to the Island of Hispaniola.

Of wholesome regions, temperate air, and continual spryng all the whole year:
also of certain people which honor gold religiously, during their golden
harvest.

Of the mountains of Beragua, being fyftie miles in length, and higher then
the clouds: also the description of other mountains and regions thereabout,
comparyng the same to Italy.

Colonus his opinion as touching the supposed continent and ioynyng of the
north and south Ocean: also of the breadth of the said continent or firm
land.

Of the regions of Vraba and Beragua, and the great river Maragnonus, and the
river of Dabaiba or Sancti Iohannis: also of certain maryshes and desolate
ways, and of Dragons and Crocodiles engendered in the same.

Of.xx. golden ryuers about Dariena, and of certain precious stones,
especially a Diamonde of marvelous byggnesse bought in the province of Paria.

Of the heroical factes of the Spanyardes, and how they contemn effeminate
pleasures: also a similitude proving great plenty of gold and precious stones.

The contents of the fyft book. Fol. 119.
THe navigations of Petrus Arias from Spain to Hispaniola and Dariena, and of
the Islands of Canarie: also of the Islands of Madanino, Guadalupea, and Galanta.

Of the sea of herbs, and mountains covered with snow: also of the swyft
course of the sea toward the West.

Of the river Gaira, the region Caramairi, and the port Carthago, and Sancta
Martha: also of Americus Vesputius, and his expert cunnyng in the knowledge of
the card, compass, and quadrant.

How the Canibales assailed Petrus Arias with his whole navy, and shot of
their venomous arrows even in the sea, also of their houses and household
stuff.

How Gonsalus Ouiedus found a Sapphire bygger then a goose egg: also Emerodes,
Calcidonies, Iaspers, and Amber of the mountains.

Of woods of Brasyle trees, plenty of gold, and marchasites of metals, found
in the regions of Caramairi, Gaira, and Saturma: also of a strange kind of
marchaundies exercised among the people of Zunu.

That the region of Caramairi is like to an earthy Paradise, and of the
fruitful mountains and pleasant gardens of the same.

Of many goodly countries made desolate by the fierceness of the Canibales,
and of diverse kinds of bread made of roots: also of the manner of plantyng the
root of Iucca, whose iuise is deadly poison in the Islands, and without hurt
in the continent or fyrme land.

Of certain golden ryuers, Hearts, wild Boores, fowls, gossampine, white
marble, and wholesome air: also of the great river Maragnonus, discending from
the mountains covered with snow, called Serra Neuata.

How Petrus Arias wasted certain Islands of the Canibales, and how by the swyft
course of the sea, his shyps were carried in one night forty leagues beyond
thestimation of the best pilotes.

The contents of the sixth book. Fol. 124.
OF sundry opinions why the sea runnneth with so swyft a course from the East
to the West, and of the great gulf of the North part of the fyrme land.

The viage of Sebastian Cabot, from England to the frosen sea* and how being
repulsed with Ise in the month of July, he sailed far Westwarde.

Of people apparelled with beasts skins, and how Bears take fyshes in the
sea, and eat them.

How Sebastian Cabot, after that he had discovered the land of Baccallaos or
Baccallearum, was called out of England into Spain, where he was made one of
the assistaunce of the counsel of the affairs of India, and of his second
viage.

Of the Island Fortis, and how a great foul as bygge as a Storke lyghted in
the governors ship: also how he arrived at Dariena with the kings navy.

How Vaschus received the new governor, and of habitable regions under the
Equinoctial.

How Petrus Arias the new governor distributed his army to conquer the South
regions rich in gold, and to erect new colonies in the same.

Of the rich gold mines of Dabaiba, and of the expedition against the king of
that region.

Of the violent course of the sea from the East to the West, and of the
difficult saylyng against the same.

Of the pestiferous and unwholesome air of Sancta Maria Antiqua in Dariena, and
how the Spaniardes were of necessity enforced to plant their first colonie and
habitation there.

The cause of the variety of regions lying all under one degree or parallel,
and by what means the Son beams are cause of fervent heat.

Of toades and flees engendered of drops of water, and of a house set on fire
with lyghtnyng.

Of a Dog devoured of a Crocodyle, and of venomous biting of great Bats: also
of Lions, Tigers, and other wild beasts.

How in these regions all four footed beasts grow to a bigger quantity then
they which were of ye first brood: also of certain trees of whose planckes if
shyps be made, they are safe from the worms called Broma or Bissas.

Of a tree whose wood is present poison if it be only borne about, and of an
herb that is a preservative against the same.

Of the rich Islands of the south sea, and of certain expeditions against the
Canibales.

The contents of the.vii. book. Fol. 130.
THe particular description of the Island of Hispaniola, and of the rich Island
called Margaritea Dives, lying in the South sea: also of the great abundaunce
of bygge pearls found in the same.

How the auctoure compares Hispaniola to the earthly Paradyse, and how it
far excels Italy in fertility and temperate air.

Of the first inhabitours of Hispaniola, and of the Islands of Canarie.

How thinhabitauntes of Hispaniola in their songues and rhymes had certain
prophesies that apparelled men should come to their country, and bring them
into servitude, and of their familiarity with spirits: also how those
spirits have no more appeared to them since they were baptized.

Of their expertenesse in swimming, and of their delicate Serpents, birds,
fowls, and Popingiays.

Of the form and situation of Hispaniola near the Equinoctial, and how
cold is in some place thereof accidental, and not by the situation of the
region.

Of the Oxen and Swyne of exceedyng bygnesse, and of ears of wheat as bygge as
a man's arm in the brawne: also how the Swyne are fed with Mirobalanes. etc.

Of plenty of gold, Brasyle, Mastix, Gossampyne, Electurum, and of
thincommodities of intemperate regions.

Of diverse languages in the Island, and how the provinces are divided into
regions.

How Andreas Moralis sailed into a dangerous and dark cave within the rock
of a mountain, and of, whole ryuers devoured of such caves: also of the
conflyct of the waters.

Of a standing poole in the top of an high mountain: and how fearne and
bramble bushes grow only in cold regions

The Contents of the.viii. book. Fol. 135.
OF a great lake or standing poole of sour and salt water, and of the sea
fyshes in the same in the myd land of the Island: also of deuouryng fyshes
called Tiburo^i.

Of the ryuers falling into the lakes, and of.CC. sprynges in the space of a
furlong.

A marvelous hystorye of a king stryken dumb and lame by a miracle, and of
the Indian language.

How such as are drowned in the lake, are never cast up again, and of the
Island Guarizacca in the myddest of a standing lake: also of a lake of fresh
water, and an other of salt and fresh water.

Of a large plain of two hundred miles in length, and an other of an hundred
and twenty.

Of the marvelous fyshe or monster of the sea, called Manati, or Matum, fed
with man's hands, and how she caryeth men over the lake.

Of the mountains, vales, hills, playnes, and ryuers of Hispaniola, and how
gold is found in all mountains, and gold and fyshe in all ryuers.

Of salt bays, and how the ryuers have their increase from the caves of the
mountains: also how there is no hurtefull beast in the Island.

Of the pleasures of Hispaniola, and of the region of Cotohi well inhabited, and
situate in a plain in the tops of mountains reachyng to the clouds.

Of moderate cold in the mountains, and of fearne of marvelous bygnesse.

How pure and massy gold is found in the region of Cotoy or Cotohi, and
that the vain of gold is a living tree: also of the roots, branches, and
flowers of the same, and how certain caves are sustained with pyllers of
gold.

What gold is brought yearly from Hispaniola into Spain, and of the salt of
the mountains, being as hard as stones, and clear as crystal: also sprynges
of salt, fresh, and sour water.

Of certain wild men, living in caves and dens without any certain
language, and of their marvelous swiftnes a foot.

Of pytche of the rock, and two kinds of trees, and of the leaf of a tree
used in the steed of paper: also how thinhabitants think that the Christians
can make those leaves speak and disclose all secrets.

Of a strong color made of the juice of a certain apple, and of the herb
whose smoke is poison.

The contents of the nienth book. Fol. 142.
OF the kinds of fruits wherewith the inhabitauntes of Hispaniola lived
first, and how they came to the knowledge of Iucca: also how Ceres first found
Wheat and Barley in Egypt.

Why their kings are called by diverse names, and by what names they salute the
kings children when they are borne.

How they make their testamentes, and how certain of the kings wives and
concubines are buried with them.

Of the variable motions of the elements in Hispaniola, and where it rayneth
but little, and where much.

Of the colonies and villages that the Spaniardes have builded in Hispaniola,
and of the other Islands about the same.

Of a spryng, which runnyng under the sea from Hispaniola, breaks forth in
the Island of Arethusa: also of the habitable regions under the Equinoctial,
and of the rich gold mines of the Island of Cuba.

Of the Gum called Animae Album, and of the Canibales, also whereby it was
thought that there were Islands of women.

Of honey found in trees and rocks, and of the generation of great Tortoyses,
and of their eggs.

The contents of the tenth book. Fol. 146.
OF the expedition against the king of the Island Dites, in the South sea, and
how after four conflictes, submitting him self, he gave our men an hundred
and ten pound weight of great pearls: also how he agreed to pay yearly a
hundred pound weight of pearls for a tribute.

How axes and hatchettes are more esteemed then gold, or pearls, and of
great plenty of Hearts and Cunnies: also how the king of Dites and his
family were baptized.

Of pearls of great pryse, and how Paul the Bishop of Rome bought a pearl
for four and forty thousand ducades.

Diverse opinions of the generation of pearls, and of a hundred pearls found
in one shel fyshe: also of the birth of pearls.

Of the regions of the East side of the gulf of Vraba, and of the original of
the Canibales.

Of certain circumcised people which have the knoweledge of letters and use of
books, and what chanced of the captains which Petrus Arias sent forth
diverse ways: also how John Solisius was slain of the Canibales, and of their
fierceness.

How John Pontius was repulsed of the Canibales, and of the lewd behavior of
John Aiora.

Of the variable fortune of Gonsalus Badaiocius, and how after he had
geathered great riches of gold, he had the overthrow, and was spoiled of all.

Of the golden region of Coiba Dites, and how their slaves are marked in the
face.

Of the Islands of the South sea, and of the regions from whence the
Portingales fetch their spyces.

Of a strange kind of fowlyng, and of the trees that bear Gourdes.

Of the later opinions as touching the swift course of the Ocean toward the
West, and of the continent or fyrme land: also of the viage from the new
lands to Spain.

Of the gold mines of Dariena, and of the manner of geatheryng of gold in the
same: also of the dropsy of covetousness which is not satisfied with riches.

For the contents of the book of the Islands of the West Indies seas, read
the margent notes of the same.

FINIS.
Gonzalus Ferdinandus Ouiedus, of the west Indies.
R. E. To the Reader.
ALthough among diverse which have written of the Ocean and West Indies, there
is none to be compared to Peter Martyr of Angleria, in declaryng by
philosophical discourses the secret causes of natural affectes, both as
touching the land, the sea, the stars, and other strange works of nature:
yet forasmuch as of later days those countries have been better known and
searched, and diverse such particular and notable things found, as are
contained in the histories of later writers, among the number of whom, Conzalus
Ferdinandus Ouiedus (whom learned Cardanus compares to the ancient writers) is
doubtless the chief, I have therefore thought good to join to the Decades of
Peter Martyr, certain notable things which I have geathered out of his book,
entitled the Summarie or abridgement of his general history of the west
Indies, written in the firm land of the same, in the city of Sancti Maria
Antiqua in Dariena (where he dwelt and was governor many years) and dedicated
to Themperours majesty, as may appear by the Epistle following.

To the most high and myghtie prince Charles, the fyft o^ that name, Emperor of
Rome, King of Spain, and of the two Cicilies, of both the sides of the
straight of Faro, King of Jerusalem and Hungary, Duke of Burgonie, and Earl
of Flaunders, Lord and inheritour of the firm land and Islands of the West
Ocean. etc. Gonzalus Ferdinandus Ouiedus, his most humble servant, wysheth
health and perpetual felicity.
THe things which principally preserve and maintain the works of nature in
the memories of men, are hystories and books composed of the same: among the
which certes those are esteemed most true and autentyke, which have been
written by wyttie and expert men, well traueyled in the world, as faithful
witnesses of such things as they have partly seen, and been partly informed
by credible persons. Of this mind and opinion was Pliny, who better then any
other aucthor has written in.xxxvii. books all that parteyneth to the
natural history, contained all in one volume, dedicated to Vespasian
The Emperor: Wherein, as a prudent historiographer, he declares such things as
he had heard, attributing the second authority to such as he had read in
aucthours that wrote before him: And thyrdly joined to the same history, such
things as he him self had seen, as most certain testimony. Whose example I
following, will in this my brief summarie, reduce and represent to your
majesty's memory such things as I have seen in your Empire of the West
Indies, as well in the Islands as in the firm land of the Ocean sea, where I
have served now more then twelve years in the place of surueyer of the gold
mines, by the commandment of the Catholyke king Don Fernando, the fyft of
that name, and graundfather unto your majesty, to whom God gave great fame and
glory: Since whose death also I have likewise served, and trust while the rest
of my life yet remains, to serve your majesty, as shall please you to
command. As touching which things, and such other like, I have more
largely written in an history begun as soon as my age was ripe to take such
matters in hand: Wherein furthermore I have made mention of such things as
have chanced in Spain, from the year.1494. unto this time: addyng also
thereunto such things worthy memory, as I have observed in other realms
and provinces where I have trauayled, and have likewise particulerly written
the lives and worthy acts of the catholyke Princes of famous memory Don
Ferdinando, and Lady Elizabeth his wife, to their last days. After whose
fruition of heavenly Paradyse, I have noted such things as have chanced in
your most fortunate succession: not omittyng particulerly to write a large
book of such things as have seemed most worthy to be noted, as touching
your majesty's Indies. But forasmuch as that volume remains in the city of
San. Dominico, in the Island of Hispaniola, where I dwell, and am placed in
household, with wife, children, and famylie, I have brought no more with me of
that my writing, then I bear in memory, determynyng (notwithstanding) for
your majesty's recreation, to make a brief rehearsal of certain notable
things, whereof I have more largely entreated in my said general history, and
such as may seem most worthy to be read of your majesty: Of the which,
although a great part have been written by other, who have also seen the
same, yet perhaps they are not so exactly and particulerly described as of
me, forasmuch as in manner all that travail into these Indies have greater
respect to luker and gaynes, then diligently to search the works of nature,
whereunto I have been ever naturally inclined, and have therefore with all
possible endeavor applied mine eyes and intelligence to find the same. And
this present Summarie shall not be contrary or diverse from my larger history,
wherein (as I have said) I have more amply declared these things: but shall
only more breefely express theffect thereof, until such time as God shall
restore me to mine own house, where I may accomplish and fynyshe my said
general history. Whereunto to give the first principle, I say, that Don
Christopher Colonus (as it is well known) being the first Admiral of this
India, discovered the same in the days of the Catholyke king Don Ferdinando,
and the lady Elizabeth his wife, graundfather and graundmother unto your
majesty, in the year.1491. and came to Barzalona in the year.1492. with the
first Indians, and other shows and proofs of the great riches and notice of
this west Empire: The which gift and benefit was such, that it is unto this
day one of the greatest that ever any subject or servant has done for his
prince or country, as is manifest to the whole world. And to say the truth,
this shall doubtless be so commodious and profitable unto the whole realm of
Spain, that I repute him no good Castilian or Spanyarde that does not
recognize the same. And (as I have said before) forasmuch as in my said
general history I have more largely entreated of these things, I intend at
this present only briefly to rehearse certain especial things, the which
surely are very few in respect of the thousands that might be said in this
behalf. First therefore I will speak somewhat of the navigations into these
parties, then of the generation of the nations which are found in the same,
with their rytes, customs* and ceremonies: also of beasts, fowls, birds,
woormes, fyshes, seas, ryuers, sprynges, trees, plants, herbs, and diverse
other things, which are engendered both on the land and in the water. And
forasmuch as I am one of thorder and company of them that are appointed to
return into these regions to serve your majesty, if therefore the things
contained in this book shall not be distinct in such order as I promised to
perform in my greater work, I desire your majesty to have no respect
hereunto, but rather to consider the novelty of such strange things as I
have herein declared, which is the chief end that moved me to write:
Protestyng, that in this Summarie I have written the truth of such things as
came to my remembrance, whereof not only I my self can testify, but also
diverse other worthy and credible men, which have been in those regions, and are
now present in your majesty's court. And thus it shall suffyse to have said
thus much unto your majesty, in manner of a proheme unto this present work,
which I most humbly desire your majesty as thankefully to accept, as I have
written it faithfully.

Of the ordinary navigations from Spain to the west Indies.
THe navigations which is commonly made from Spain to the west India, is from
Siuile, where your majesty have your house of contraction for those parts,
with also your officers thereunto parteynyng, of whom the captains take their
passeporte and license. The patrones of such ships as are appointed to these
viages, imbarke them selves at San Luca di Barameda, where the river
Cuadalchiber enters into the Ocean sea, and from hence they follow their course
toward the Islands of Canarie. Of these seven Islands, they commonly touch two,
that is, either Grancanaria or Gomera: and here the ships are furnyshed with
fresh water, fuel, cheese, beef, and such other things, which may seem
requisite to be added to such as they bring with them out of Spain. From
Spain to these Islands, is commonly eight days sailing, or little more or
less, and when they are arrived there, they have sailed two hundred and fyftie
leagues, which make a thousand miles, accompting four miles to a league, as
is their manner to reckon by sea. Departing from the said Islands to follow their
course, the ships tarry.xxv. days, or a little more or less, before they see
the first land of the Islands that lie before that which they call La
Spagnuola or Hispaniola, and the land that is commonly first seen, is one of
these Islands which they call Ogni sancti Marigalante (or Galanta) La Desseada
(otherwise called Desiderata) Matanino, Dominica, Guadalupea, San Christoual,
or some other of the Islands, whereof there are a great multitude lying about
these aforesaid. Yet it sometimes so chances, that the ships pass without
the sight of any of the said Islands, or any other that are within that course,
until they come to the Island of Sancti Iohannis, or Hispaniola, or Iamaica,
or Cuba, which are before the other. It may also chance that they ouerpasse
all these likewise, until they fall upon the coasts of the firm land. But
this chances when the pilot is not well practiced in this navigations, or not
perfect in the true card. But making this viage with expert maryners (whereof
there is now great plenty) one of the said first Islands shall ever be
known. And from the Islands of Canarie to one of the first of these, the
distaunce is niene hundred leagues by sailing, or more, and from hence to the
city of saint Dominike, which is in the Island of Hispaniola, is a hundred and
fyftie leagues: so that from Spain hitherto, is a thousand and three hundred
leagues. Yet forasmuch as sometimes the navigations proceeds not so directly,
but that it chances to wander ever on the one side or on the other, we may
well say that they have now sailed a thousand and five hundred leagues, and
more. And if the navigations be slow, by reason of some hynderaunce, it
commonly chances to be fynished in xxxv. or.xl. days: and this happens for
the most part, not accomptyng the extremes, that is, either of them that have
slow passage, or of them that arryue in very short time: for we ought to
consider that which chances most commonly. The return from those parts to
Spain, is not fynished without longer time, as in the space of fifty days,
or a little more or less. Nevertheless in this present year of.1525. there
came four ships from the Island of San Dominico, to saint Luca in Spain,
in.xxv. days: But (as I have said) we ought not to judge of that which
chances seldom, but of that which happens most ordinarily. This navigations
is very safe, and much used, even unto the said Island. And from this to the
firm land, the ships trauerse diverse ways for the space of five, six, or
seven days saylyng, or more, according to the parts or coasts whither they
direct their viages, forasmuch as the said fyrme land is very great and
large, and many nauigations and viages are directed to diverse parts of the
same: Yet to the firm land, which is nearest to this Island, and lies
directly against San Dominico, the passage is finished in the time aforesaid.
But it shall be much better to remit all this to the card of these nauigations,
and the new Cosmographie, of the which no part was known to Ptolome, or any
other of the old writers.

Of two notable things as touching the west Indies, and of the great richesse
brought from thence into Spain.
AFter my universal description of the history of the Indies, there comes
to my remembrance two things chiefly to be noted as touching Thempire of
these West Indies, pertaining to the dominion of your majesty: and these,
beside the other perticulars whereof I have sufficiently spoken, are to be
considered as things of great importance. Whereof, the one is the shortness
of the way, and with what expedition your majesty's ships may pass beyond
the main firm land of these Indies, into the new South sea, called Mare del
Sur, lying beyond the same, and this to the intent to come to the Islands where
the spices grow, beside the other innumerable richesse of ye kingdoms and
seigniories which confine with the said sea, where are so many people and
nations of diverse tongues and manners. The other thing, is to consider how
innumerable treasures are entered into Spain by these Indies, as well that which
comes daily from thence, as also that is continually to be looked for, both
of gold and pearl, and other marchaundies, which are first brought into this
your realm of Spain before they are seen of other nations, or traded into
other realms: Whereby not only this your realm is greatly enriched, but also
the benefit thereof redoundeth to the great profit of other countries which
are near thereunto. A testimony of this, are the double ducades which your
majesty have caused to be coined, and are dispearsed throughout the whole
world: But after they are once passed out of this your realm, they never
return again, because they are the best current money of the world. And
therefore, if after they have been in the hands of strangers, they chance to
be returned again into Spain, they come disguised in an other habit, and
are diminished of the goodness of their gold, with the stamp of your
majesty changed: So that if it were not for their such defacynges in other
realms for the cause aforesaid, there should not be found so great
quantity of fine gold of the coin of any prince in the world as of your
majesty's: and the cause of all this, are your Indies.

Of the mines of gold, and the manner of workyng in them.
THis particular of the mines of gold, is a thing greatly to be noted, and I
may much better speak hereof the^ any other man, forasmuch as there are
now.xii. years past since I served in the place of the surueier of ye melting
shops parteyning to the gold mines of ye firm land, and was the governor of
the mines of the Catholic king Don Ferdinando, after whose departure from this
life, I served long in the same room in the name of your majesty: By reason
whereof, I have had great occasion to know how gold is found and wrought out of
the mines, and do know right well yt this land is exceeding rych, having by my
account, and by the labor of my Indians and slaves, geathered and fined a
great portion of the same, and may therefore the better affirm this by
testimony of sight. For I am well assured, that in no part of Castilia del oro,
that is, golden Castile (otherwise called Beragua) no man could ask me of
the mines of gold, but that I durst have bound my self to have discovered
them in the space of ten leagues of the country where it should have been
demanded me, and the same to be very rych: for I was allowed all manner of
charges to make search for the same. And although gold be found in manner every
where in these regions of golden Castile, yet ought we not in every place to
bestow the travel and charge to geat it out, because it is of less quantity
and goodness in some place then in some. And the mine or vein which ought to
be followed, ought to be in a place which may stand to save much of ye charges
of the laborers, and for the administration of other necessary things, that
the charges may be recompensed with gaynes: for there is no doubt but that gold
shall be found more or less in every place. And the gold which is found in
golden Castile, is very good, and of.xxii. caractes or better in fynesse.
Furthermore, beside this great quantity of gold, which I have said to be found
in the mines, there is also from day to day found, or otherwise gotton, great
treasure of such wrought gold as has been in ye custody of the subdued Indians
and their kings, as well of such as they have given for their fine and ransom,
or otherwise, as friends to the Christians, beside that which has been
violently taken from the rebels: but the greatest part of the wrought gold
which the Indians have, is base, and holds somewhat of copper, of this they
make braslettes and chains, and in the same they close their jewels which
their women are accustomed to wear, and esteemed more then all the richesse of
the world. The manner how gold is geathered, is this, either of such as is
found in Zauana, that is to say in the playnes and ryuers of the champion
country being without trees, whether the earth be with grass or without, or
of such as is sometimes found on the land without the ryuers in places where
trees grow, so that to come by the same, it shall be requisite to cut down many
and great trees. But after which so ever of these two manners it be found,
either in the ryuers or breaches of waters, or else in the earth, I will show
how it is found in both these places, and how it is separate and pourged.
Therefore when the mine or vein is discovered, this chances by searchyng and
prouyng in such places as by certain signs and tokens do appear to skillful
men apt for the generation of gold, and to hold gold: and when they have
found it, they follow the mine, and labor it, whether it be in the river, or
in the plain, as I have said. And if it be found on the plain, first they
make the place very clean where they entende to dygge, then they dygge eight
or ten foot in length, and as much in breadth: but they go no deeper then
a spanne or two, or more, as shall seem best to the master of the mine,
dyggyng equally, then they wash all the earth which they have taken out of
the said space, and if herein they find any gold, they follow it, and if
not, they dygge a spanne deeper, and wash the earth as they did before: and if
then also they find nothing, they continue in diggyng and washyng ye earth as
before, until they come to the hard rock or stone: and if in fine they find
no gold there, they follow no further to seek gold in that place, but go to
an other part. And it is to be understood, that when they have found the
mine, they follow it in dyggyng, in the same measure in level and deapth,
until they have made an end of all the mine which that place conteyneth, if
it appear to be rich. This mine ought to consyst of certain feet or pases
in length or breadth, according to certain orders determined, and within that
compass of earth, it is not lawefull for any other to dig for gold: And
where as ends the mine of him that first found the gold, immediately it is
lawful for any other man that will, with a staff to assign him self a place
by the side of the same, enclosing it with stakes or pales as his own. These
mines of Zauana (that is, such as are found in the plains) ought ever to be
sought near to some river or brook, or spring of water, or dyke, or standing
poole, to the end that the gold may be washed, for the which purpose they use
the labor of certain Indians, as they do other in dyggyng of the mine. And
when they have dygged out the mine, they fill certain trayes with that earth,
which other Indians have the charge immediately to receive at their hands, and
to carry those trayes of earth to the water, where it may be washed: Yet do not
they that bring it, wash it, but deliver it to other, puttyng it out of their
own trayes into theyrs, which they have ready in their hands to receive it.
These washers for the most part are the Indian women, because this work is of
less pain and traueyle then any other. These women when they wash, are
accustomed to sit by the water side, with their legs in the water even up to
the knees, or less, as the place serves their purpose: and thus holdyng the
trayes with earth in their hands by ye handles thereof, and puttyng the same
into the water, they move them round about, after the manner of syftyng, with a
certain aptness, in such sort that there enters no more water into the
trays then serves their turn, and with the self same apt mouyng of their
trays in the water, they ever avoid the foul water with the earth out of the
one side of the vessel, and receive in clean water on the other side thereof,
so that by this means by little and little, the water washes the earth as the
lyghter substance of the trays, and the gold as the heauyer matter rests in
the bottom of the same, being round and holowe in the myddest like unto a
barbars basen: And when all the earth is avoided, and the gold geathered
together in the bottom of the tray, they put it a part, and return to take
more earth, which they wash contynually as before. And thus they that labor
in this work, do geather daily such portion of gold as shall please God to
grant to the Patrones of these Indians, and such other as travail in the
same. Furthermore it is to be noted, that for every two Indians that wash, it
is requisite that two other serve them to bring earth from the mine, and other
two to break the same small, and fyl their trayes therewith. Also beside these
laborers, it is necessary that there be other people in the place where they
work and rest in the night: these are such as make their bread, and provide
for victuals, and other necessaries. So that to conclude, there are in all, five
persons ordinarily assigned to every tray of washers. There is an other manner
of workyng the mines, in ryuers or brooks of runnyng waters: and this is, that
in auoydyng the water of his course, after that the beds of the ryuers are
dry and utterly emptied, they find gold among the breaches, clyftes, and
ryftes of stones, and among all that is in the bottom of the channel, and
where naturally the river runs of greatest force: So that it chances
sometime, that when the bed of the river is good and rich, they find in it
great quantity of gold. And therefore your Majesty ought to understand for a
general rule, as it appears in fact, that all gold is engendered in the
tops and highest places of the mountains, and in continuance of time is by
little and little brought down to the vales and playnes by shewres of rain, and
the falls of sprynges, ryuers, and brooks, having their original in the
mountains, and discending from the same, notwithstanding it is oftentimes
found in the playnes far from the mountains. But when it chances to be
found in great quantity, it is for the most part among the mountains, and in
the ryuers, or their branches, more then in any other part of the plain: and
in these two manners it is commoly found most abundantly. And for the better
proof that gold is engendered on high, and is brought down into the low
places, I have one great token thereof, which causes me to believe it for
certain: and this is, to consider that coals never putrify nor corrupt under
the ground, if they be made of strong woodde. Whereby it chances, that
dyggyng the earth by the fouldes or indented places of the mountains, or on
the sides, and breakyng a mine in the earth where it had been broken before,
and having now dygged one or two or three Poles in measure, the myners found
certain coals of wood under the same leuel where they found gold, and this I
say in the earth which was taken for a Uirgin, that is to say, such as had
not before been opened for any mine: the which coals could not naturally be
engendered there, or enter in by any means, but when the superfitiall part of
the earth was equal with the leuel where the coals were found, it is like that
the coals were left there by some occasion of fire, and that they fastened
there in time, and that afterward in long continuance of time, they were by
little and little covered with the earth, which the often shewres of rain
washed from the mountains, so that by the course of years the earth ouergrewe
the coals unto the said level and measure, which had before time been the
superfitial part of the earth, where the coals and gold were found together:
whereby it may appear that the gold was no more engendered there then were the
coals, but brought thither from the mountains by the falls of waters as we
have said, forasmuch as the mountains are the Matrices and bowels of all rich
metals. Further and beside this, I say that in how much more the gold is
gone far from the natural place of his generation to the place where it is
found, it is so much the more purified and fined, and of a better caract, and
the nearer that it is found to his proper mine or vein where it is engendered,
it is so much the baser, fouler, and more crude, and of a baser alay and
caract, and does wast so much the more in meltyng, and remains more brickle.
Sometimes there are found grains of gold of great quantity, and of great
weight above the earth, and sometimes also under the earth: And the greatest of
all other that was found to this day in the Indies, was that which was lost
in the sea about the Island Beata, which weighed three thousand and two
hundred Castellans of gold, which are in value four thousand a hundred thyrtie
and eight ducades of gold, which weigh one Arroua and seven pound, or
thyrtie and two pound, after twelve ounces to the pound, A mark, is a pound
of viii. ounces summa.xvi.li. weight.viii. ounces, after xii. ounces to the.li.
which make threescore and four marks of gold. And I saw in the
year.1515. in the hands of Mychel Passamonte treasurer to your majesty, two
grains, of the which one wayed seven pounds, which are.xiiii. marks, and
are in value about threescore and five ducades of gold every mark: the other
was of.x. marks, which are five pounds of like value, and of very good gold
of.xxii. caractes, and better: There are also found many other great graynes,
although not equal unto these in bygnesse. And forasmuch as I have spoken of
gold, I have thought good to declare somewhat how the Indians can very
excellently gylte such vessels of copper and base gold as they make: for
they can give them so fair and floryshyng a color, that all the mass which
they gylt, appears as though it were gold of.xxii. caractes, and better.
This color they give with a certain herb, as though it were wrought by ye
art of any goldsmith of Spain or Italy, and would of them be esteemed as a
thing of great riches, and a secret manner of gyldyng. And for as much as I
have spoken sufficiently of the mines of gold, I will now speak somewhat of
copper, because I have made mention thereof. This metal is found in many of
the Islands of the Indies, and also in the firm land, and is found daily in
great quantity, holdyng somewhat of gold. But for the desire that our men
have to gold, they nothing esteem the copper, although there might great
commodity and profyt be had thereby, and also by other metals, which they
nothing regard, except silver, which is found abundantly in that part of the
firm land which is called new Spain. But of this it shall suffice to have
said thus much, because I have more particulerly entreated of these things
in my general hystory of India.

Of the manner of fyshyng for pearls.
THe Indians exercise this kind of fyshyng for the most part in ye coasts of
the North in Cubagua and Cumana, and many of them which dwell in the houses of
certain particular lords in the Islands of San Dominico and Sancti Iohannis,
resort to the Island of Cubagua, for this purpose. Their custom is to go five,
six, or seven, or more in one of their Canoas or barks, early in the morning
to some place in the sea thereabout, where it appears unto them that there
should be great plenty of those shell fyshes (which some call Muscles, and
some Oysters) wherein pearls are engendered, and there they plunge them selves
under the water, even unto the bottom, saving one that remains in the Canoa
or boat, which he keeps still in one place as near as he can, lookyng for
their return out of the water: And when one of them has been a good while
under the water, he ryseth up, and comes swimming to the boat, entryng into
the same, and leauyng there all the Oysters which he has taken and brought with
him (for in these are the pearls found) and when he has there rested him
self a while, and eaten part of the Oysters, he returns again to the water,
where he remains as long as he can endure, and then ryseth again, and
swymmeth to the boat with his pray, where he rests him as before, and thus
continues course by course, as do all the other in like manner, being al most
expert swymmers and diverse: and when the night draws near, they return to
the Island to their houses, and present all the Oysters to the master or
steward of the house of their lord, who has the charge of the said Indians,
and when he has given them somewhat to eat, he lays up the Oysters in safe
custody, until he have a great quantity thereof, then he causes the same
fysher men to open them, and they find in every of them pearls, other great or
small, two, or three, or four, and sometimes five or six, and many small
grains, according to the liberality of nature. They save the pearls both
small and great which they have found, and either eat the Oysters if they
will, or cast them away, having so great quantity thereof, that they in manner
abhor them. These Oysters are of hard flesh, and not so pleasant in eating
as are ours of Spain. This Island of Cubagua where this manner of fyshing is
exercised, is in the North coaste, and is no bygger then the Island of Zeland.
Oftentimes the sea increases greatly, and much more then ye fishers for
pearls would, because where as the place is very deep, a man can not
naturally rest at the bottom, by reason of the abundaunce of ayry substance
which is in him. as I have oftentimes proved. For although he may by violence
and force discende to the bottom, yet are his feet lyfted up again, so that
he can continue no time there: and therefore where the sea is very deep, these
Indian fyshers use to tie two great stones about them with a cord, on every
side one, by the weight whereof they discende to the bottom, and remain there
until them lysteth to rise again, at which time they unloose the stones, and
rise up at their pleasure. But this their aptenesse and agilitie in swimming,
is not the thing that causes men most to marueyle: but rather to consider how
many of them can stand in the botome of the water for the space of one whole
hour, and some more or less, according as one is more apt heereunto then an
other. An other thing there is which seems to me very strange: and this is,
that where as I have oftentimes demanded of some of these Lords of the
Indians, if the place where they are accustomed to fyshe for pearls, being but
little and narrow, will not in short time be utterly without Oysters, if they
consume them so fast. They all answered me, that although they be consumed in
one part, yet if they go a fyshyng in an other part, or an other coaste of the
Island, or at an other contrary wind, and continue fyshyng there also until
the Oysters be likewise consumed, and then return again to the first place,
or any other place where they fished before, and emptied the same in like
manner, they find them again as full of Oysters as though they had never been
fyshed. Whereby we may judge, that these Oysters either remove from one place to
an other, as do other fishes, Of this read more largely in the decades.
or else that they are engendered and increase in certain ordinary places. This
Island of Cumana and Cubagua, where they fyshe for these pearls, is in the
twelfe degree of the part of the said coast which inclines toward the North.
Likewise pearls are found and geathered in the South sea, called Mare del
Sur, and the pearls of this sea are very big, yet not so big as they of the
Island of pearls, called de las perlas, or Margaritea, which the Indians call
Terarequi, lying in the gulf of Saint Michael, where greater pearls are
found* and of greater price, then in any other coast of the North sea* in
Cumana, or any other part. I speak this as a true testimony of sight, having
been long in that South sea, and making curious inquisition to be certaynely
enfourmed of all that parteyneth to the fyshyng of pearls. From this Island of
Terarequi, there was brought a pearl of the fashyon of a Pear, weighing
thyrtie and one Caractes, By the computation of Venice, four granes make a
Caract.
which Petrus Arias had among a thousand and so many pounds weight of other
pearls, which he had when captain Gaspar Morales (before Petrus Arias)
passed to the said Island in the year.1515. which pearl was of great price.
From the said Island also, came a great and very round pearl, which I
brought out of the sea, this was as bygge as a small pellet of a Stonebowe, and
of the weight of twenty and syx Caractes: I bought it in the city of Panama,
in the sea of Sur, and paid for it syx hundred and fyftie times the weight
thereof of good gold, and had it three years in my custody, and after my
return into Spain, sold it to the Earl of Nansao Marquess of Zenete, great
Chamberlayne to your Majesty, who gave it to the Marquess his wife, the Lady
Mentia of Mendozza. I think verily that this pearl was the greatest, fairest,
and roundest that has been seen in those parts. For your majesty ought to
understand, that in the coaste of the sea of Sur, there are found a hundred
great pearls round after the fashyon of a Pear, to one that is perfectly
round and great. This Island of Terarequi, which the Christians call the
Island of pearls, and other call it the Island of Flowers, is found in the
eight degree on the South side of the fyrme land, in the province of golden
Castyle, or Beragua, and these are the coasts of the fyrme land, where pearls
are found even unto this day: I understand also that there are pearls found
in the province and Islands of Cartagenia. And since your majesty appointed me
a governor and captain, I have made further search, and am aduertysed that
pearls are found in diverse other places, as about the Island of Codego,
which lies against the mouth of that port of the Island of Cartagenia, which
the Indians call Coro, the which Island and port are on the North side, in the
tenth degree of the coasts of the fyrme land.

Of the familiarity which certain of the Indians have with the devil, and
how they receive answer of him of things to come.
WHen the Indians begin their battle, or go to any combat, or attempt any
other great matter, they have certain elect men, whom they reuerendly esteem,
and call them Tequinas, which in their tongue is as much to say as masters:
notwithstanding that they call every man, that is cunnyng in any science, by
the same name, as fyshers, foulers, hunters, or makers of nets. These
Tequinas therefore, they call the masters of their aunsweres, because they
speak with Tuyra, that is, the devil, and bring them answer what he says,
either as touching such things as they have to do, or shall chance to them
the day following, or many days to come. For the devil, being so ancient an
Astronomer, knows the times of things, and sees how they are naturally
directed and inclyned, and makes them believe that they come so to pass by
his ordinance, as though he were the Lord and mouer of all that is and
shall be, and that he gives the day light, and rain, causes tempest, and
rules the stations of times, gyuyng life, or taking away life, at his
pleasure: By reason whereof, the Indians being deceived of him, and seeing also
such effects to come certaynely to pass as he has told them before,
believe him in all other things, and honor him in many places with sacrifyces
of the blood and lives of men, and odoriferous spices: And when God disposes
the contrary to that which the devil has spoken in oracle, whereby he is
proved a liar, he causes the Tequinas to persuade the people that he has
changed his mind and sentence for some of their sins, or deuiseth some such
lie as lyketh him best, being a skillful master in such subtle and crafty
devises, to deceive the simple and ignorant people, which has small defense
against so mighty and crafty an adversary. And as they call the devil
Tuyra, so do they in many places call the Christians by the same name,
thynkyng that they greatly honor them thereby, as in deed it is a name very
fit and agreeable to many of them, having laid aparte all honesty and
virtue, living more like Dragons then men, among these simple people.

Before thinhabitauntes of the Island of Hispaniola had received the Christian
faith, there was among them a sect of men, which lived solitarily in the
desartes and woods, and led their life in silence and abstinence, more
straightly then ever did the philosophers of Pithagoras sect, absteinyng in
like manner from the eating of all things that live by blood, contented only
with such fruits, herbs, and roots, as the desartes and woods mynistred
unto them to eat: The professors of this sect were called Piaces. They gave
them selves to the knowledge of natural things, and used certain secret
magical operations and superstitions, whereby they had familiarity with
spirits, which they allured into their own bodies at such times as they would
take upon them to tell of things to come, which they did in manner as
follows. When any of the kings had occasion to call any of them out of the
desartes for this purpose, their custom was to send them a portion of their
fine bread of Cazabbi or Maizium, and with humble request and suite to desire
them to tell them of such things as they would demand. After the request
granted, and the place and day appointed, the Piaces comes, with two of his
disciples waytyng on him, whereof the one brings with him a vessel of a
secret water, and the other a little silver bell. When he comes to the place,
he sits down on a round seat made for him of purpose, where having his
disciples, the one standing on the one hand, and the other on the other, even
in the presence of the king and certain of his nobles (for the common people
are not admitted to these mysteries) and turnyng his face toward the desarte,
he begins his inchauntment, and calls the spirit with loud voice by
certain names, which no man understands but he and his disciples. After he
has done thus a while, if the spirit yet defer his coming, he drynketh of
the said water, and therewith waxes hot and furious, and inuerteth and
turns his inchauntment, and lets him self blood with a thorn,
marueilously turmoylyng him self, as we read of the furious Sybilles, not
ceassyng until the spirit be come: who at his coming enters into him, and
overthrows him, as it were a greyhound should ouerturne a Squerell, then for
a space, he seems to lie as though he were in great pain, or in a rapte,
woonderfully tormentyng him self, during which agony, the other disciple
shakes the silver bell continually. Thus when the agony is past, and he lies
quietly (yet without any sense or feelyng) the king, or some other in his
stead, demands of him what he desires to know: and the spirit answers by
the mouth of the rapte Piaces, with a direct and perfect answer to all
points: Insomuche that on a time certain Spanyardes being present at these
mysteries with one of the kings, and in the Spanyshe tongue demaundyng the
Piaces of their ships which they looked for out of Spain, the spirit
answered in the Indian tongue, and told them what day and hour the ships
departed from Spain, how many they were, and what they brought, without
failing in any point. If he be also demanded of the eclypse of the Sun or
Moon (which they greatly fear and abhor) he gives a perfect answer, and
the like of tempests, famine, plenty, war or peace, and such other things.
When all the demaundes are finished, his disciples call him aloude, ryngyng the
silver bell at his ear, and blowyng a certain powder into his nosethrilles,
whereby he is raised as it were from a dead s^eape, being yet somewhat heavy
headed and faynte a good while after. Thus being again rewarded of the king
with more bread, he departs again to the desartes with his disciples. But
since the Christian faith has been dispearsed throughout the Island, these
deuyllyshe practices have ceased, and they of the members of the devil, are
made the members of Christ by baptism, forsakyng the devil and his works,
with the vain curiosity of desire of knowledge of things to come, whereof
for the most part it is better to be ignorant, then with vexation to know that
which can not be avoided.

Furthermore, in many places of the firm land, when any of the kings dye,
all his householde servants, as well women as men which have continually
served him, kill them selves, beleeuyng as they are taught by the devil Tuyra,
that they which kill them selves when the king dies, go with him to heaven,
and serve him in the same place and office as they did before on the earth
while he lived: and that all that refuse so to do, when after they dye by
their natural death or otherwise, their souls to dye with their bodies, and
to be dissolved into air, and become nothing, as do the souls of Hogs,
Birds, Fyshes, or other brute beasts: and that only the other may enjoy the
privilege of immortality for ever, to serve the king in heaven. And of this
false opinion comes it, that they which sow corn, or set roots for the
kings bread, and geather the same, are accustomed to kill them selves, that
they may enjoy this privilege in heaven, and for the same purpose, cause a
portion of the grain of Maizium, and a bundle of Iucca (whereof their bread is
made) to be buried with them in their graves, that the same may serve them in
heaven, if perhaps there should lack seeds to sow, and therefore they take
this with them, to begin withal, until Tuyra (who makes them all these fair
promises) provide them of greater quantity. This have I my self seen in the
top of the mountains of Guaturo, where having in prison the king of that
province (who rebelled from th^bedience of your majesty) and demaundyng of him
to whom parteyned those sepultures or graves which I saw in his house: he
answered, that they were of certain Indians which slew them selves at the
death of his father. And because they are oftentimes accustomed to bury great
quantities of wrought gold with them, I caused two graves to be opened,
wherein was nothing found but a vessel full of the grain of Maizium, and a
bundle of Iucca, as I have said. And demaundyng the cause hereof, of the king
and the other Indians: they answered, that they that were buried there, were
the laborers of the ground, and men skylfull in sowyng of seeds, and making
of bread, and servants to the kings father, and to the end that their
souls should not dye with their bodies, they slew them selves at the death of
the king their master, to live with him in heaven, and to the intent that they
might serve him there in the same office, they reserved that Maizium and Iucca,
to sow it in heaven. Whereunto I answered them in this manner, Behold how
your Tuyra deceyueth you, and how all that he teaches you is false. You see
how in so long a time since they are dead, they have not yet taken away this
Maizium and Iucca, which is now putrified and worth nothing, and not like to
be sown in heaven. To this the king replied, saying, in that they have not
taken it away, nor sown it in heaven, the cause is, that they chanced to
find enough there, by reason whereof they had no need of this. To this error
many things were said, which seemed of little force to remove him from his
false opinion, and especially any such as at that age are occupied of the
devil, whom they paynt of the self same form and color, as he appears
unto them in diverse shapes and fourmes. They make also Images of gold, copper,
and wood, to the same similitudes, in terrible shapes, and so variable, as the
paynters are accustomed to paynt them at the feet of saint Michaell
tharchangell, or in any other place, where they paynte them of most horrible
portiture. Likewise when the devil greatly intends to fear them, he
threatens to send them great tempests, which they call Furacanas, or
Haurachanas, and are so vehement, that they overthrow many houses, and great
trees. And I have seen in mountains, full of many and great trees, that for
the space of three quarters of a league the mountain has been subverted, and
the trees overthrown, and plucked out of the earth with the roots: a thing
doubtless so fearful and terrible to behold, that it may verily appear to
be done by the hand of the devil. And in this case the Christian men ought
to consider with good reason, Doctrine not worthy for a christian man.
that in all places where the holy sacrament is reserved, the said tempests
are no more so outrageous, or so perilous as they were wont to be.

Of the temperature of the regions under or near to the burnt line, called
Torrida Zona, or the Equinoctial, and of the diverse seasons of the year.
THe lands and regions that are near about the clymes of the Equinoctial
line, are naturally hot, although they be otherwise temperate by the divine
providence: and therefore such flesh or fyshe as is taken and killed in these
regions, can not be preserved from putrefaction, except it be roasted, sodden,
or perboyld, the same day that it is kyld. And whereas I have said, that such
regions are naturally hot, and yet temperate by the providence of God, it is
so in deed: and therefore not without cause the ancient aucthours were of
opinion, that the burnt line, or Torrida zona, where passes the line of the
Equinoctial, should be uninhabitable, by reason the Sun has greater dominion
in that place, then in any other of the sphere, remaynyng continually between
the two tropykes of Cancer and Capricorn: For when in these regions the earth
is opened or dygged from the superficial part thereof to the deapth of a man's
heyght, it is found temperate, and within this space the trees and plants
fasten and spread their roots, and no deeper, extendyng the same as far in
breadth in the ground as do their branches in the air, and enter no deeper
into the ground then I have said, because that beneath the deapth of the
said space of a man's heyght the earth is very hot, the upper part being
temperate and very moist, as well by reason of the abundaunce of water which
falls from heaven upon that earth at certain ordinary seasons of the year,
as also for the multitude of great ryuers, brooks, sprynges, and maryshes,
whereby the myghtie and supreme Lord which made these lands, has most
prudently provided for the preservation of the same.

There are also many rough and high mountains, with temperate air, and
pleasant, clear, and moderate nyghtes: of the which particularitie the
ancient writers having no certain knowledge, affirmed the said burnt line or
Torrida zona, or Equinoctial, to be naturally uninhabitable. As touching which
thing I am able to witness the contrary by testimony of sight and feelyng, as
by most certain senses, having lived many years in these regions, by reason
whereof better credit ought to be given to me, then to such as have grounded
their opininion only upon conjectures. And to speak further of the situation
of these regions, you shall understand that the coaste of the North sea, being
in the gulf of Vraba, and in the port of Dariena, where the shyps arryue
which come out of Spain, is in the sixte degree and a half, and in the
seventh, and from six and a half, unto eight, except a small point which
enters into the sea toward the North. That point which of this land and new
part of the world lies most toward the East, is the cape of saint
Augustine, which is in the eight degree: So that the said gulf of Vraba, is
distant from the Equinoctial line, from a hundred and twenty, to a hundred
and thirty leagues, and three quarters of a league, after that account
of.xvii. leagues and a half for every degree from pole to pole: and thus for a
little more or less, goes all the coast. By reason whereof, in the city of
Sancta Maria Antiqua in Dariena, and in all that course of the foresaid gulf
of Vraba, at all times of the year the days and nyghtes are in manner of
equal length: and if there be any difference between them by reason of this
small distance from the Equinoctial, it is so little, that in.xxiiii. hours,
making a natural day, it can not be perceived but by the judgment of
speculatiue men, and such as understand the sphere: From hence the North
star is seen very low. And when the stars, which are called the guardens
of the North star, are under the Chariot, it can not be seen, because it is
under the horizontall. And whereas I have said before that it rayneth in these
regions at certain ordinary times, it is so in deed: For it is winter and
summer there at contrary times to that which is in Spain, where the greatest
cold of frost and rain is in December and January, and the greatest heat of
summer about saint John's day at Mydsommer, or in the month of July: But in
golden Castile or Beragua, it is contrary, for the summer and time of greatest
drought and without rain, is at Christmas, and a month before, and a month
after, and the time when it rayneth most, is about Mydsommer, and a month
before, and a month after. And this season which they call winter, is not for
that it is any colder then, then at any other time of the year, or hotter at
Christmas then at other seasons, the time in these regions being ever after one
manner: but for that, that, in this time which they call winter, the Sun is
hid from their sightes, by reason of clouds and rain, more then at other
times. Yet forasmuch as for the most part of the year they live in a clear,
open, and temperate air, they somewhat shrynke and feel a little cold during
the time of the said moist and cloudy air, although it be not cold in deed,
or at the least such cold as has any sensible sharpness.

Of diverse particular things, as woormes, serpents, beasts, fowls, trees.
etc.
MAny other things might be said, and much differyng from these whereof I have
spoken. But to let pass the multitude of things which are as variable as
the power of nature is infinite, and to speak of such things as come chiefly
to my remembrance, as most worthy to be noted, I will first speak of
certain little and troublous beasts, which may seem to be engendered of
nature to molest and vex men, to show them and give them to understand, how
small and vile a thing may offend and disquiet them, to the end that they may
remember the principal end for the which they were created, that is, to know
their maker and procurer of their salvation by the way which is open to all
Christian men, and all other which will open the eyes of their understanding.
And although the things whereof we entende now to speak, may seem vile and
little to be esteemed, yet are they worthy to be noted and considered, to
understand the difference and variable works of nature. So it is therefore,
that whereas in many parts of the firm land, by the which as well the
Christians as Indians do travail, there are such maryshes and waters in the
way, that they are feign to go without breeches among the herbs and weeds,
by reason whereof, certain small beasts or worms (which they call Garapates)
much like unto tykes, cleave fast to their legs. These worms are as little as
the powder of beaten salt, and cleave so fast, that they can by no means be
taken away, except the place be noynted with oil: and after that the legs
be noynted a while with oil, or the other parts where these little tykes are
fastened, they scrape the place with a knyfe, and so take them away. But the
Indians which have no oil, smoke them, and burn them with fire, and abide
great pains in taking them away by this means. Of other little beasts which
trouble men, and are engendered in their heads or other parts of their bodies,
I say that the Christian men which travail into these parts, have them but
seldom times, and that not past one or two, and this also very seldom: For
passing by the line of the Diameter where the compass makes difference of
saylyng by the wind called Greco, (that is, Northeast) and Magistral (that is,
southwest) which is in the course of the Islands of Azori, they sail but a
little way following our viage by the west, but that all the lyse which the
Christians carry with them, or are engendered in their heads, or other places of
their bodies, dye and utterly consume by little and little, and are not engendered
in India, except in the heads of little children in those parts, as well among
the children of the Christians which are borne there, as also among the
natural Indians, who have them commonly in their heads, and sometimes in
other parts of their bodies, and especially they of the province of Cueua,
which is a region contaynyng more then a hundred leagues in length, and
embraseth the one and the other coast of the North sea, and of the East. When
these Indians are infected with this fylthynesse, they dress and cleanse one
an other: And they that exercise this, are for the most part women, who eat
all that they take, and have herein such dexterity by reason of their
exercise, that our men can not lightly attain thereunto. There is also another
thing greatly to be considered: and this is, how the Christian men, being
there clean from this fylthynesse of India, as well in their heads as the rest
of their bodies, yet when they return to come again into Europe, and begin to
arryue in that place of the Ocean sea where we said before that these lyse
dyed and forsook them, suddenly in their repassyng by the same clyme (as though
these lyse had tarried for them in that place) they can by no means avoid them
for the space of certain days, although they change their shertes two or
three times in a day: These lise are at ye first as little as nittes, and grow
by little and little, until they be of the byggenesse that they are in Spain.
This have I oftentimes proved, having now four times passed the Ocean sea by
this viage. Beside these worms and vermyn whereof we have spoken, there is
another little mysch^uous worm, which we may number among the kinds of (...),
this pestilence the Indians call Nigua, and is much less then a flea: it
pearseth the flesh of a man, and so laun^eth or cutteth the same (while in the
mean time it can neither be seen nor taken) that from some it has cut of
their hands, and from other their feet, until the remedy was found to
annoint the place with oil, and scrape it with a rasor. In the firm land in
golden Castyle or Beragua, Vipers.
there are many vipers like unto them of Spain: they that are bytten of them,
dye in short space, for few live to the fourth day, except present remedy. Of
these, some are of less kind then other, and have their tail somewhat
round, and leap in the air to assail men, and for this cause, some call
this kind of vipers Tyro: their bytyng is most venomous, and for the most
part incurable. One of them chanced to byte an Indian maid which served me
in my house, to whom I caused the Surgians to mynister their ordinary cure, but
they could do her no good, nor yet geat one drop of blood out of her, but
only a yelowe water, so that she dyed the third day for lack of remedy, as
the like has chanced to diverse other: This maid was of the age of.xiiii.
years, and spoke the Spanyshe tongue as if she had been borne in Castyle: she
said that the viper which byt her on the foot, was two spannes long, or
little less, and that to byte her, she lept in the air for the space of more
then six pases, as I have heard the like of other credible persons. I have
also seen in the firm land a kind of adders, Adders.
very small, and of seven or eight foot long: these are so read, that in the
night they appear like burning cooles, and in the day seem as red as
bloodde, these are also venomous, but not so much as the vipers. There are
other much less, and shorter, and blacker: these come out of the ryuers, and
wander sometimes far on the land, and are likewise venomous. There are also
other adders of a russet color: these are somewhat bygger then the viper, and
are hurtful and venomous. There are likewise an other sort of many colors, and
very long: of these I saw one in the year of Christ.1515. in the Island of
Hispaniola, near unto the sea coasts, at the foot of the mountains called
Pedernales, when this adder was slain, I measure her, and found her to be
more then.xx. foot long, and somewhat more then a man's fyst in byggnesse: and
although she had three or four deadly wounds with a swoorde, yet dyed she
not, nor stonke the same day, insomuche that her blood continued warm all
that time. There are also in the Maryshes and desartes of the fyrme land many
other kinds of Lysartes, Dragons, Dragons.
and other diverse kinds of Serpents, whereof I entende not here to speak
much, because I have more particulerly entreated of these things in my
general history of the West Indies. There are also Spyders of marvelous
byggenesse, Spiders
and I have seen some with the body and legs bygger then a man's hand
extended every way, and I once saw one of such byggenesse, that only her
body was as bygge as a Sparrowe, and full of that Laune whereof they make
their webbes: this was of a dark russet color, with eyes greater then the
eyes of a Sparowe, they are venomous, and of terrible shape to heholde. There
are also Scorpions, and diverse other such venomous worms. Whereby we may see,
that where as natural causes and influence of the planettes are of strongest
actiuitie, they cease not to engender and bring forth both good and badde,
according to the dispotion of the matter, which they also do partly dispose,
as the philosophers affirm. Furthermore in the fyrme land, there are many
Toades, being very noyous and hurtful by reason of their great multitude, they
are not venomous, they are seen in great abundaunce in Dariena, where they are
so bygge that when they dye in the time of drouth, the bones of some of them
(and especialy the rybbes) are of such greatness, that they appear to be the
bones of Cattes, or of some other beasts of the same byggenesse. But as the
waters diminishe, and the moisture consumes in the time of drouth (as I have
said) they also consume therewith, until the year next following when the
rain and moisture increase, at which time they are seen again.
Nevertheless, at this present there is no such quantity of them, as was wont
to be, by reason that as the land is better cultured by the Christians, as well
by the fellyng of wooddes and shrubbes, as also by the pasture of Kyne, Horses,
and other beasts, so is it apparent that this poison diminishes daily,
whereby that region becomes more wholesome and pleasant: these Toades sing
after three or four sorts, for some of them sing pleasauntly, other like ours
of Spain, some also whystle, and other some make an other manner of noise: they
are likewise of diverse colors, as some green, some russet or gray, and some
almost black, but of all sorts they are great and fylthy, and noyous by
reason of their great multitude, yet are they not venomous as I have said.
There are also a strange kind of Crabbes, which come forth of certain
holes of the earth, Crabbes.
that they them selves make: the head and body of these make one round thing,
much like unto the hood of a Faulkon, having four feet coming out of the
one side, and as many out of the other: they have also two mouths, like unto a
pair of small Pinsers, the one bygger then the other, wherewith they byte, but
do no great hurt, because they are not venomous: their skin and body is
smooth, and thynne, as is the skin of a man, saving that it is somewhat
harder, their color is russet, or white, or blewe, and walk sydelong, they
are very good to be eaten, insomuche that the Christians trauaylyng by the
fyrme land, have been greatly nouryshed by them, because they are found in
manner every where: in shape and form they are much like unto the Crabbe
which we paynt for the sign Cancer, and like unto those which are found in
Spain in Andalusia in the river Guadalchiber, where it enters into the sea,
and in the sea coasts there about, saving that these are of the water, and the
other of the land: they are sometimes hurtful, so that they that eat of them
dye, but this chances only when they have eaten any venomous thing, or of the
venomous apples wherewith the Canible archers poison their arrows, whereof I
will speak hereafter, and for this cause the Christians take heed how they
eat of these Crabbes, if they find them near unto the said apple trees.
Furthermore in these Indies, as well in the fyrme land, as in the Islands, there
is found a kind of Serpents, which they call.Y. V. anas, which some call
Iuannas, Serpents called Iuanni.
these are terrible and fearful to sight, and yet not hurtful, they are very
delicate to be eaten, and it is not yet known whether they be beasts of the
land, or fyshes, because they live in the water, and wander in the wooddes,
and on the land: they have four feet, and are commonly bygger then Connies,
and in some places bygger then Otters, with tails like Lysartes or Eutes:
their skin is spotted, and of the same kind of smothnesse or bareness,
although of diverse colors: upon the rydge of their backs, they have many long
pricks, their teeth are very sharp, and especially their fanges or dog
teeth, their throtes are long and large, reachyng from their beardes to their
breasts, of the like skin to the resydue of their bodies: they are dumb,
and have no voice, or make any noise, or cry, although they be kept tied to
the foot of a cheste, or any other thing, for the space of.xx. or.xxv. days,
without any thing to eat or drink, except they give them now and then a
little of the bread of Cazabbi, or some such other thing: they have four
feet, and their fore feet as long as a man's finger, with claws like the
claws of a bird, but weaker, and such as can not grasple or take hold of
any thing: they are much better to be eaten then to behold, for few that
see them, will have desire to eat of them, by reason of their horrible shape,
except such as have been accustomed to the beasts of these regions, which are
more horrible and fearful, as this is not, but only in appearance: their
flesh is of much better taste then the flesh of Connies, and more wholesome,
for it hurts none but only such as have had the french pox, insomuche
that if they have been touched of that infirmity, although they have been whole
of long time, nevertheless they feel hurt, and complain of the earyng of
these Iuannas, as has been oftentimes proved by experience. There are found
in the fyrme land certain birds, so little, that the whole body of one of
them is no bygger then the top of the byggest finger of a man's hand, and yet
is the bare body without the feathers not half so bygge: This bird, beside
her litlenesse, is of such velocitie and swyftnesse in fleeyng, that who so
sees her fleeyng in the air, can not see her flap or beat her wings after
any other sort then do the Dorres, or humble bees, or Beetels: so that there is
no man that sees her flee, that would think her to be any other then a Dorre:
they make their nestes according to the proportion of their bygnes, and I have
seen that one of these birds with her nest put in a pair of gold weights,
altogether has waide no more then.2. Tomini, which are in poise.24. grains,
with the feathers, with out the which she should have wayed somewhat less. And
doubtless when I consider the fynenesse of the claws and feet of these
birds, I know not whereunto I may better lyken them, then to the little birds
which the lymners of books are accustomed to paynte on the margent of church
books, and other books of divine service. Their feathers are of many fair
colors, as golden, yelowe, and green, beside other variable colors, their
beak is very long for the proportion of their bodies, and as fine and subtle
as a sowyng nedle: they are very hardy, so that when they see a man clime ye
tree where they have their nests, they flee at his face, and stryke him in the
eyes, coming, going, and returnyng with such swyftnes, that no man would
lightly believe it, that has not seen it: and certainly these birds are so
little, that I durst not have made mention hereof, if it were not that diverse
other which have seen them as well as I can bear witness of my saying: they
make their nestes of flocks and hear of cotton, whereof there is great plenty
in these regions, and serves well for their purpose. But as touching the
birds, fowls, and beasts of these Indies, because they are innumerable, both
little and great, I intend not to speak much here, because I have spoken
more largely hereof in my general hystorye of the Indies. There is an other
kind of beasts seen in the firm land, which seems very strange and
marvelous to the Christian men to behold, and much differyng from al other
beasts which have been seen in other parts of the world: these beasts are
called Bardati, and are four footed, having their tail and all the rest of
their bodies covered only with a skin like the coperture of a barbed horse,
or the checkered skin of a Lisarte or Crocodile, of color between white and
russet, inclynyng somewhat more to white. This beast is of form and shape
much like to a barbed horse, with his barbes and flankets in all points, and
from under that which is the barbe and coperture, the tail comes forth, and
the feet in their place, the neck also and the ears in their parts, and in
fine al things in like sort as in a barbed courser: they are of the bygnesse
of one of these common dogs, they are not hurtful, they are fylthy, and have
their habitation in certain hillockes of earth, where dygging with their
feet, they make their dens very deep, and the ho^es thereof, in like manner as
do Connies, they are very excellent to be eaten, and are taken with nets, and
some also killed with Crosbowes: they are likewise taken oftentimes when the
husbandmen burn the stubble in sowyng time, or to renew the herbage for Kyne
and other beasts. I have oftentimes eaten of their flesh, which seems to me
of better taste then Kyddes flesh, and wholesome to be eaten. And if these
beasts had ever been seen in these parts of the world, where the first
barbed horses had their original, no man would judge but that the form and
fashyon of the coperture of horses furnyshed for the wars, was first devised
by the sight of these beasts. There is also in the fyrme land an other beast,
called Orso Formigaro, that is, the Ante bear. This beast in hear and
color, is much like to the Bear of Spain, Be^res.
and in manner of the same making, save that he has a much longer snout, and
is of evil sight: they are oftentimes taken only with staves, without any
other weapon, and are not hurtful, they are also taken with dogs, because
they are not naturally armed, although they byte somewhat, they are found for
the most part about and near to the hyllockes where are great abundaunce of
Antes. For in these regions is engendered a certain kind of Antes, very little
and black, in the feeldes and playnes where as grow no trees, Antes*
where by the instinct of nature these Antes separate them selves to engender
far from the wooddes for fear of these Bears, the which because they are
fearful, vile, and unarmed (as I have said) they keep ever in places full
of trees, until very famine and necessity, or the great desire that they have
to feed on these Antes, cause them to come out of the woods to hunt for them:
these Antes make a hillocke of earth to the heyght of a man, or somewhat more
or less, and as byg as a great chest, and sometimes as byg as a Butte or a
Hogshead, and as hard as a stone, so that they seem as though they were
stones, set up to limit the ends and confines of certain lands. Within these
hillocks, made of most hard earth, are innumerable and infinite little Antes,
the which may be geathered by bushelles when the hyllocke is broken: the
which when it is sometimes moysted by rain, and then dried again by the
heat of the Son, it breaks, and has certain small ryftes, as little and
subtyle as the edge of a knyfe, and it seems that nature has given sense to
these Antes to find such a matter of earth, wherewith they may make the said
hyllocke of such hardness, that it may seem a strong pauement made of lyme
and stone: and whereas I have proved and caused some of them to be broken, I
have found them of such hardness, as if I had not seen I could not have
believed, insomuch that they could scarcely be broken with pykes of Iron, so
strong fortresses do these little beasts make for their sauegard against their
adversary the Bear, who is chiefly nouryshed by them, and given them as an
enemy, according to the common proverb which says, Non e alcuna persona si
libera, a chimanchi il suo Bargello, that is, there is no man so free, that
has not his persecutor or privy enemy. And here when I consider the
marvelous providence which nature has given to these little bodies, I call to
remembrance the witty sentence of Pliny, where speaking of such little
beasts, he says thus, Why do we marvel at the Towrebearyng shoulders of
Elephantes, and not rather where nature has placed so many senses and such
industrye in such little bodies? Where is hearing, smelling, seeing, and
feelyng, yea, where are the veins and arteries (without which no beast can
live or move) in these so little bodies, whereof some are so small that their
whole bodies can scarsly be seen of our eyes: What shall we then say of the
parts of the same? Yet even among these there are many of such sagasitie and
industry, as the like is not seen in beasts of greater quantity, no nor yet
in man. etc. But to return to the history. This enemy which nature has
given to these little beasts, uses this manner to assail them: When he
resorteth to the hyllocke where the Antes lie hid as in their fortress, he
puts his tongue to one of the ryftes whereof we have spoken, being as
subtle as the edge of a sword, and therewith contynuall lickyng, makes the
place moist, the foam and froth of his mouth being of such property, that by
contynuall lickyng the place, it enlarges the ryft in such sort by little and
little, that at the length he easily puts in his tongue, which he has very
long and thynne, and much disproportionate to his body, and when he has thus
made free passage for his tongue into the hyllocke, to put it easily in and out
at his pleasure, then he thrusts it into the hole as far as he can reach,
and so lets it rest a good space, until a great quantity of the Antes
(whose nature rejoices in heat and moyster) have laden his tongue, and as
many as he can conteyne in the holownesse thereof, at which time he suddenly
draws it into his mouth, and eats them, and returns again to the same
practice immediately, until he have eaten as many as him lysteth, or as long as
he can reach any with his tongue. The flesh of this beast, is filthy and
unsavory, but by reason of the extreme shyftes and necessity that the
Christian men were put to at their first coming into these parts, they were
enforced to prove all things, and so fell to the eating of these beasts: but
when they had found more delycate meats, they fell into hatred with this. These
Antes have thappearance of the place of their entrance into the hyllocke,
under the ground, and this at so little a hole, that it could hardely be
found, if certain of them were not seen to pass in and out: but by this way
the Bears could have no such power to hurt them as above at the said
ryftes, as I have said. There is an other strange beast, which by a name of
contrary effect, the Spanyardes call Cagnuolo leggiero, A strange beast which
seems a kind of Cameleon.
that is, the light dog, whereas it is one of the slowest beasts in the
world, and so heavy and dull in mouyng, that it can scarsety go fyftie pases
in a whole day: these beasts are in the firm land, and are very strange to
behold for the disproportion that they have to all other beasts, they are
about two spannes in length when they are grown to their full byggenesse, but
when they are very young, they are somewhat more gross then long: they have
four subtle feet, and in every of them four claws like unto birds, and
joined together, yet are another their claws or their feet able to sustain
their bodies from the ground, by reason whereof, and by the heaviness of
their bodies, they draw their bellyes on the ground: their necks are high
and straight, and all equal like the pestle of a mortar, which is altogether
equal even unto the top, without making any proportion or similitude of a
head, or any dyfference except in the noddle, and in the tops of their
necks: they have very round faces much like unto Owls, and have a mark of
their own hear after the manner of a cyrcle, which makes their faces seem
somewhat more long then large: they have small eyes and round, and nostrylles
like unto Munkeys: they have little mouths, and move their ^eckes from one side
to an other, as though they were astonyshed: their chief desire and delyghte
is to cleave and stick fast unto trees, or some other thing whereby they may
clyme aloft, and therefore for the most part, these beasts are found upon
trees, whereunto cleauyng fast, they mount up by little and little, staying them
selves by their long claws: the color of their hear, is between russet and
white, and of the proper color of the hear of a Wesell: they have no tails,
and their voice is much differyng from other beasts, for they sing only in
the night, and that continually from time to time, syngyng ever six notes one
higher then an other, so falling with the same, that the first note is the
highest, and the other in a baser tune, as if a man should say La, sol, fa,
mi, re, vt, so this beast says, Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha. And doubtless, it
seems unto me, that as I have said in the Chapter of the beast called
Bardati, that those beasts might be the original and document to imbarbe
horses: even so, the first invention of musycke might seem by the hearing of
this beast, to have the first principles of that science, rather then by any
other thing in the world. But now to return to the history. I say that in a
short space after this beast has song, and has paused a while, she
returns again to the self same song, and does this only in the night, and
not in the day: By reason whereof, and also because of her evil sight, I
think her to be a night beast, and the friend of darkness. Sometimes the
Christian men find these beasts, and bring them home to their houses, where
also they creep all about with their natural slownesse, insomuch that another
for threatnyng or pryckyng they will move any faster then their natural and
accustomed pase. And if they find any trees, they creep thither immediately,
and mount to the top of the highest branch thereof, where they remain
continually for the space of eight, or ten, or twenty days, without eating
of any thing, as far as any man can judge. And whereas I my self have kept
them in my house, I could never perceive other but that they live only of
air, and of the same opinion are in manner all men of those regions, because
they have never seen them eat any thing, but ever turn their heads and
mouths toward that part where the wind blows most, whereby may be
considered that they take most pleasure in the air. They byte not, nor yet can
byte, having very little mouths: they are not venomous or noyous any way, but
altogether brutyshe, and utterly unprofitable, and without commodity yet
known to men, saving only to move their minds to contemplate the infynite
power of God, who delyghteth in the variety of creatures, whereby appears the
power of his incomprehensible wisdom and majesty, so far to exceed the
capacity of man's understanding. In these regions there are likewise found
certain fowls or birds, which the Indians call Alcatraz: Fowls, and birds.
these are much bygger then Geese, Alcatraz.
the greatest part of their feathers are of russet color, and in some parts
yelowe, their bylles or beakes are of two spannes in length, and very large
near to the head, and growyng small toward the point, they have great and
large throtes, and are much like to a foul which I saw in Flaunders in
Brusselles in your majesty's palace, which the Flemynges call Haina: And I
remember that when your majesty dyned one day in your great hall, there was
brought to your majesty's presence a Cauderne of water with certain fyshes
alive, which the said foul did eat up whole, and I think verily that that
foul was a foul of the sea, because she had feet like fowls of the water,
as have also these Alcatrazi, which are likewise fowls of the sea, and of
such greatness, that I have seen a whole coat of a man put into the
throats of one of them in Panama, in the year.1521. And forasmuch as in that
coast of Panama, Panama,
there passes and flees a great multitude of these Alcatrazi, being a thing
very notable, I will declare the manner hereof, as not only I, but also diverse
other now present in your majesty's court have often times seen. Your
majesty shall therefore understand, that in this place (as I have said
before) the sea of Sur ryseth and falls two leagues and more from six hours
to six hours: so that when it increases, the water of the sea arryueth so
near to the houses of Panama, as does our sea (called Mare Mediteraneum) in
Barzalona, or in Naples: and when the said increasing of the sea comes, there
comes also therewith such a multitude of the small fishes called Sardines,
that it is so marvelous a thing to behold, that no man would believe it that
has not seen it. Insomuch that the Cacique (that is) the king of that land,
at such time as I dwelt there, was bound daily, as he was commanded by your
majesty's governor, to bring ordinarily three canoas or barks full of the
said Sardynes, and to unlade the same in the market place, which were
afterward by the ruler of the city divided among the Christian men, without
any cost or charge to any of them: Insomuche that if the people had been a
much greater multitude then they were, and as many as are at this present in
Toledo, or more, and had none other thing to live by, they might have been
sufficiently sustained by these Sardynes, beside the overplus which should have
remained. But to return to the fowls, whereof we have spoken. As the sea
comes, and the Sardynes with the same, even so likewise come the said
Alcatrazzi therewith, and flee continually over it, in such a multitude, that
they appear to cover the upper part or floor of the water, and thus continue
in mountyng and falling from the air to the water, and from the water to the
air, during all the time of their fishing: and as soon as they have taken any
of these Sardines, they flee above the waters, and eat them incontinently, and
suddenly return again to the water for more, continuing thus course by course
without ceassyng* in like manner when the sea falls, they follow their fyshyng
as I have said. There goes also in the company of these fowls, an other
kind of fowls, called Coda inforcata, (that is) the forked tail, whereof I
have made mention before, and as soon as the Alcatraz mounteth from the water
with her pray of the Sardynes, suddenly this Coda inforcata gives her so many
strokes, and so persecuteth her, that she causes her to let fall the Sardynes
which she has in her mouth: the which as soon as they are fallen, and before
they yet touch the water, the Coda inforcata catches them even in the fall,
in such sort, that it is a great pleasure to behold the combat between them
all the day long. The number of these Alcatrazzi is such, that the Christian
men are accustomed to send to certain Islands and rocks which are near
about Panama, with their boats or barks to take these Alcatrazzi, while they
are yet young, and can not flee, and kill as many of them with staves as they
will, until they have therewith laden their Barks or Canoas: these young ones
are so fat and well fed, that they can not be eaten, and are taken for none
other intent, but only to make grease for candles to burn in the night, for
the which purpose it serves very well, and gives a clear light, and burns
easily. After this manner, and for this purpose, innumerable of them are kyld:
and yet it seems that the number of them that fyshe for Sardynes do daily
increase. There are other fowls called Passere sempie, that is, simple
sparowes: Passere sempie.
these are somewhat less then Seamewes, and have their feet like unto great
Malardes, and stand in the water sometimes, and when the ships sail fyftie
or a hundred leagues about the Islands, these fowls beholding the ships
coming toward them, break their flight, and fall down upon the sail
yardes, mastes, and cables thereof, and are so simple and folyshe, that they
tarry until they may easily be taken with men's hands, and were therefore
called of the maryners simple sparowes: they are black, and upon their
black, have their head and shoulders of feathers of a dark russet color:
they are not good to be eaten, although the maryners have sometimes been
enforced to eat them. There is an other kind of birds in the firm land,
which the Christians call Picuti, because they have very great beakes, in
respect of the litlenesse of their bodies, Picuti.
for their beakes are very heavy, and way more then their whole bodies beside:
these birds are no bygger then Quayles, but have a much greater bushement of
feathers, insomuche that their feathers are more then their bodies: their
feathers are very fair, and of many variable colors, their beakes are a
quarter of a yard in length or more, and bendyng down toward the earth, and
three fyngers broad near unto the head: their tongues are very quylles,
wherewith they make a great hyssyng: they make holes in trees with their
beakes, in the which they make their neastes. And surely these birds are
marvelous to behold, for the great dyfference which they have from all other
birds that I have seen, as well for their tongues (which are quylles as I have
said) as also for the strangeness of their sight, and disproportion of their
great beaste^, in respect of the rest of their bodies. There are no birds
found that provide better for the safeguard of their young in the time of their
breedyng, to be without danger of wild cattes, that they enter not into their
neastes to destroy their eggs or young, and this as well by the strange manner
of buyldyng their nestes, as also by their own defense: and therefore when they
perceive that the cattes approach toward them, they enter into their nestes,
and holdyng their beakes toward the entrance of the same, stand at their
defense, and so vex the cattes, that they cause them to leave their
enterprise. There are also other birds or sparowes, which the Christians by
contrary effect call Matti, Folyshe sparowes.
that is fools: Whereas nevertheless there is no bird that shows more wit
and craft in defendyng her young from peril. These birds are little, and in
manner black, and somewhat bygger then our Thrushes, they have certain white
feathers in their necks, and the like sagasitie or sharpness of sense as
have the birds or Pyes called Gazzuole, they sildome times light upon the
earth: they make their nestes in trees separated from other, because the wild
cattes (called Mammoni) are accustomed to leap from tree to tree, not
discendyng to the ground for fear of other beasts, except when they are
enforced by thirst to come down to drink, at such times as they are sure not
to be molested, and for this cause do not these birds make their nestes but
in trees far divided from other, they make them of a cubite in length, or
more, after the manner of bags or little sackes, large at the bottom, and
growyng narower and narower toward the mouth, whereby they are fastened,
having the hole whereat they enter into the sack, of such byggenesse as may
only suffyce to receive them. And to the end that the cattes may not devour
their young, if they chance to mount upon the trees where they have their
nestes, they use an other craft, which is, to make their nestes in thick
branches of trees, and to defend the same with sharp and strong thorns,
implicate and set in such order, that no man is able to make the like, so that
the cattes can by no means put their legs into the hole of the neaste to
take out the young birds, as well for the sharpness of the thorns, as also
for the deapth of the nestes, in the bottom whereof, the young birds rest
without danger of their enemy: for some of their nestes being three or four
spannes in length, the leg of the catte can not reach to the bottom
thereof. They use also an other policy, which is, to make many of their
neastes in one tree, the which they do for one of these two causes: that is,
that either of their own natural disposition they are accustomed to go in
great multitudes, and rejoice in the company of their own generation, as do
the birds which we call Stares, or else to the intent that if it should so
chance that the cattes should clyme the trees where they make their neastes,
they might be a greater company to resyst and molest the cattes, at whose
approach they make a fearful and terrible cry, whereby the cattes are put to
flight. Furthermore, in the fyrme land, and in the Islands, there are certain
birds called Piche, or Gazzuole, Cazzuole.
somewhat like unto those which we call Woodwalles, or Woodpeckes, being less
then ours of Spain: these are altogether black, and go hoppyng and leapyng,
their beakes are also black, and of the same fashion as are the Popingiays
beakes, they have long tails, and are somewhat bygger then Stares. There are
other birds called Pintadelli, Pintadelli.
which are like unto certain green birds, which the Italyans call
Fringuelli, and are of seven colors: these birds for fear of the cattes, are
ever wont to make their neastes over the banks of ryuers, or the sea, where
the branches of trees so reach over the water that with a little weight they
may bow down to the water: their neastes are made so near the tops of the
branches, that when the cattes come thereon, the branches bend toward the
water, and the cattes turn back again for fear of falling: For although no
beast in the world be more malicious then this, yet whereas the most part of
beasts are naturally inclyned to swymme, this catte has no manner of aptenesse
thereunto, and is therefore soon drowned or strangeled in the water, and by a
privy sense of nature fears the danger which he can not escape. These birds
make their nestes in such sort, that although they be went and filled with
water, yet do they so suddenly rise up again, that the young birds are not
thereby hurt or drowned. There are also many Nyghtyngales, and other birds
which sing marueylouslye with great melody and dyfference in syngyng: these
birds are of marvelous diverse colors the one from the other, some are
altogether yelow, and some other of so excellent, delectable, and high a
color, as it were a Rubye, other are also of diverse and variable colors,
some of few colors, and other some all of one color, being all so fair and
beautiful, that in bryghtnesse and shynyng they excel all that are seen in
Spain, or Italy, or other provinces of Europe? Many of these are taken with
nets, lyme twigs, and sprynges of diverse sorts. Great fowls.
Diverse other sorts of great fowls like unto Eagles, and such other as live
of pray, are found in the firm land, of such diversity, that it is in
manner impossible to describe them all particulerly: and forasmuch as I have
more largely entreated hereof in my general history of the Indies, I think
it not requysite here to make any further mention of the same.

Of trees, fruits, and plants.
THere is both in the firm land and the Islands, Cocus.
a certain tree called Cocus, being a kind of Date trees, and having their
leaves of the self same greatness as have the date trees which bear dates,
but dyffer much in their growing, for the leaves of this Cocus grow out of the
trunkes of the tree, as do the fingers out of the hand, wreathing them selves
one within an other, and so spreading abroad: these trees are high, and are
found in great plenty in the coast of the sea of Sur, in the province of
Cacique Chiman. These date trees bring forth a fruit after this sort: being
altogether unite as it grows on the tree, it is of greater circumference
then the head of a man, and from the superficial part to ye midst, which is
the fruit, it is inuolued and covered with many webs much like unto those hirds
of tow which they use in Andalusia. Of this towe or web, the East Indians make
a certain kind of cloth, of three or four sorts, and cords for the sails
of ships: but in these Indies of your majesty, they pass not for these
cords, or this cloth that may be made of the fruit of Cocus, by reason of the
great plenty that they have of the bombage or cotton of the gossampine trees.
The fruit which is in the myddest of the said towe, is (as I have said) as
bygge as a man's fyst, and sometimes twyse as bygge, and more: It is in form
like unto a walnutte, or some other round thing, somewhat more long then
large, and very hard, the rynde or bark hereof, is as thycke as the cyrcle of
letters of a ryall of plate, and within, there cleaves fast to the rynde of
the nutte a carnositie or substance of coornel, of the thyckenesse of half a
finger, or of the least finger of the hand, and is very white, like unto a
fair Almonde, and of better taste and more pleasant. When this fruit is
chewed, there remain certain crummes, as do the like of Almondes: Yet if it
be swalowed down, it is not unpleasant. For although that after the juice or
moisture be gone down the throat before the said crummes be swalowed, the
rest which is eaten, seem somewhat sharp or sower, yet does it not so greatly
offend ye taste, as to be cast away. While this Cocus is yet fresh and newly
taken from the tree, they use not to eat of the said carnositie and fruit,
but first beating it very much, and then straynyng it, they draw a milk
thereof, much better and sweeter then is the milk of beasts, and of much
substance, the which the Christian men of those regions put in the tortes or
cakes which they make of the grain of Maizium whereof they make their bread, or
in other bread as we put bread in porrage: so that by reason of the said milk
of Cocus, the tortes are more excellent to be eaten without offense to the
stomach: they are so pleasant to the taste, and leave it as well satisfied as
though it had been delyted with many delycate dyshes. But to proceed further,
your majesty shall understand, I have seen one of these fruits opened, the
which when it was whole, if it were shaken the water was hard shogge therein
as it were in a bottle, but in time it consumed and was partly congeled into a
sa^te substance.
that in the place of the stone or coornell, there is in the myddest of the
said carnositie a void place, which nevertheless is full of a most clear
and excellent water, in such quantity as may fill a great egg shell, or
more, or less, according to the byggenesse of the Cacus, the which water
suerly, is the most substantial, excellent, and precious to be drunk, that
may be found in the world: insomuch that in the moment when it passes the
palate of the mouth, and begins to go down the throat, it seems that from
the sole of the foot, to the crown of the head, there is no part of the
body but that feels great comfort thereby: as it is doutlesse one of the
most excellent things that may be tasted upon the earth, and such as I am
not able by writing or tongue to express. And to proceed yet further, I say
that when the meat of this fruit is taken from the vessel thereof, the
vessel remains as fair and neat as though it were pullyshed, and is
without of color inclynyng toward black, and shyneth or glystereth very
fair, and is within of no less dilicatenesse. Such as have accustomed to
drink in these vessels, and have been troubled with the disease called the
frettyng of the guts, say that they have by experience found it a marvelous
remedy against that disease, and that it breaks the stone, and provoke
urine. This fruit was called Cocus, for this cause, that when it is taken from
the place where it cleaves fast to the tree, there are seen two holes, and
above them two other natural holes, which altogether do represent the gesture
and figure of the cattes called Mammoni, that is, Munkeys, when they cry,
which cry the Indians call Coca, but in very deed, this tree is a kind of
Date trees, and has the same effect to heal frettyng of the guts, that
Pliny descrybeth all kynds of Date trees to have. There are furthermore in the
firm land, trees of such byggenesse that I dare not speak thereof, Great
trees.
but in place where I have so many witnesses which have seen the same as well
as I. I say therefore, that a league from Dariena or the city of Sancta Maria
Antiqua, there passes a river very large and deep, which is called Cuti, over
the which the Indians had laid a great tree, so traversing the same, that it
was in the stead of a bridge, the which I my self with diverse other that are
at this present in your majesty's court, have oftentimes passed over. And
forasmuch as the said tree had line long there, and by ye great weight thereof
was so shronke downewarde, and partly covered with water, that none could
pass over it, but were wette to the knee, I being then in the year.1522. the
official or Justice in that city at your majesty's appointment, caused an
other great tree to be laid in that place, which in like manner trauersed the
river, and reached more then fyftie foot over the further side: This tree was
exceeding great, and rested above the water more then two cubytes, in the fall,
it cast down all such other trees as were within the reach thereof, and
discovered certain vynes, which were so laden with black grapes of pleasant
taste, that they satysfied more then fyftye persons which ate their fyl
thereof. This tree in the thyckest part thereof, was more then syxteene spannes
thycke, and was nevertheless but little in respect of many other trees which
are found in this province. For the Indians of the coaste and province of
Cartagenia, make barks or boats thereof (which they call Canoas,) of such
byggenesse, being all one whole tree, that some conteyne a hundred men, some a
hundred and thirty, and some more, having nevertheless such void space
within the same, that there is left sufficient room to pass to and fro
throughout all the Canoas. Some of these are so large, beside the length, that
they conteyne more then ten or twelve spannes in breadth, and sail with two
sails, as with the master sail and the tryncket, which they make of very
good cotton. The greatest trees that I have seen in these parts, or in any
other regions, was in the province of Guaturo, the king whereof rebellyng from
the obedience of your majesty, was pursued by me, and taken prisoner: at
which time I with my company, passed over a very high mountain, full of
great trees, in the top whereof, we found one tree, which had three roots,
or rather divisions of the root above the earth, in form of a tryangle, or
treuet, A marvelous tree.
so that between every foot of this triangle or three feet, there was a
space of twenty foot between every foot, and this of such heyght above the
earth, that a laden Car^ of those wherewith they are accustomed to bring home
corn in the time of harvest in the kingdom of Toledo in Spain* might easily
have passed through every of those partitions or wyndowes which were between
the three feet of the said tree. From the earth upward to the trunk of the
tree, the open places of the divisions between these three feet, were of
such ^eyght from the ground, that a footeman with a Iauelin was not able to
reach the place where the said feet joined together in the trunk or body
of the tree, which grew of great heyght in one piece, and one whole body, or
ever it spread in branches, which it did not before it exceeded in heyght the
Tower of Saint Roman in the city of Toledo: from which heyght and upward,
it spread very great and strong branches. Among certain Spaniardes which
clymed this tree, I my self was one, and when I was ascended to the place
where it begun to spread the branches, it was a marvelous thing to behold
a great country of such trees toward the province of Abrayme. This tree was
easy to clyme, by reason of certain Besuchi, (whereof I have spoken before)
which grew wreathed about the tree, in such sort that they seemed to make a
scalyng Ladder. Every of the foresaid three feet which bore the body of the
tree, was twenty spannes in thickenesse, and where they joined all together
about the Trunk or body of the tree, the principal Trunk was more then
forty and five spannes in circuit. I named the mountain where these trees
grow, the mountain of three footed trees. And this which I have now
declared, was seen of all the company that was there with me when (as I have
said before) I took king Guaturo prisoner in the year.1522. Many things
more might here be spoken as touching this matter, as also how there are many
other excellent trees found of diverse sorts and dyfference, as sweet Cedar
trees, black Date trees, and many other, of the which some are so heavy that
they cannot floote above the water, but syncke immediately to the bottom, and
other again as light as a Cork. As touching all which things I have written
more largely in my general history of the Indies. And forasmuch as at this
present I have entered to entreat of trees, before I pass any further to other
things, I will declare the manner how the Indians kindle fire, only with wood
and without fire, Kyndlyng of fire without fire.
the manner whereof is this. They take a piece of wood, of two spannes in length,
as bygge as the least finger of a man's hand, or as an arrowe well pullyshed,
and of a strong kind of wood which they keep only for this purpose: and where
they entend to kyndle any fire, they take two other pieces of wood, of the
dryest and lyghtest that they can find, and bind them fast together one with
an other, as close as two fyngers joined: in the myddest or between these,
they put the point of the first little staff made of hard and strong woodde,
which they hold in their hands by the top thereof, and turn or rub it
round about contynually in one place between the two pieces of woodde which
lie bound together upon the earth, which by that incessant rubbyng and
chafyng, are in short space kyndeled, and take fire. Putrified woodde shynyng
in the night.
I have also thought good hear to speak somewhat of such things as come to
my remembrance of certain trees which are found in this land, and sometime
also the like have been seen in Spain. These are certain putrifyed trunkes,
which have line so long rottyng on the earth, that they are very white, and
shine in the night like burning fyrebrandes, and when the Spanyardes find any
of this woodde, and intend privily in the night to make war and invade any
province, when case so requires that it shall be necessary to go in the night,
in such places where they know not the way, the foremost Christian man which
guydeth the way, associate with an Indian to direct him therein, takes a
little star of the said woodde, which he puts in his cappe, hangyng
behind on his shoulders, by the light whereof he that follows next to him,
directs his journey, who also in like manner bears an other star behind
him, by the shynyng whereof the third follows the same way, and in like manner
do all the rest, so that by this means none are lost or stragle out of the
way. And forasmuch as this light is not seen very far, it is the better
policy for the Christians, because they are not thereby disclosed before they
invade their enemies. Furthermore as touching the natures of trees, one
particular thing seems worthy to be noted, Pliny.
whereof Pliny makes mention in his natural hystorye, where he says that
there are certain trees which continue ever green, and never lose their
leaves, as the Bay tree, the Cedar, the Orange tree, and the Olive tree, with
such other, of the which in altogether he names not past five or six. Trees
which continue ever green.
To this purpose, I say, that in the Islands of these Indies, and also in the
fyrme land, it is a thing of much difficulty to find two trees that lose or
cast their leaves at any time: For although I have diligently searched to know
the truth hereof, yet have I not seen any that lose their leaves, either of
them which we have brought out of Spain into these regions, as Orange trees,
Limons, Cedars, Palms, or Date trees, and Pomegranate trees, or of any other
in these regions, except only Cassia, which loses his leaves, Cassia.
and has a greater thing appropriate to it self only: which is, that
whereas all other trees and plants of India spread their roots no deeper in
the earth then the deapth of a man's heyght, or somewhat more, not descendyng
any further into the ground, by reason of the great heat which is found
beneath that deapth, yet does Cassia pearl further into the ground, A secret
thing.
until it find water: which by the Philosophers opinion should be the cause
of a thynne and watery radical moisture to such things as draw their
nouryshement thereof, Radycall moisture.
as fat and unctuous grounds with temperate heat, yield a fast and firm
moisture to such things as grow in them, which is the cause that such
trees lose not their leaves, as the said thynne and wateryshe moisture is
cause of the contrary, as appears by the said effect which is seen only
in Cassia, and none other tree or plant in all these parties.

Of Reeds or Canes.
I Have not thought it convenient in the chapiture before, to speak of that
whereof I intend now to entreat, of reeds or canes, to the intent that I would
not myngle them with plants or trees, being things of them selves worthy to
be particulerly observed. So it is therefore, that in the firm land there are
many sorts of reeds, so that in many places they make their houses thereof,
coueryng them with the tops of the same, and making their walls of them in
like manner, as I have said before: and among these kinds of reeds, there is
one so great, that the canes thereof are as big as a man's leg in ye knee,
and three spanns in length from joint to joint, or more, insomuch that every of
them is of capacity to contain a little bucket of water. In this kind, there
are found some greater, and some less, of the which some they use to make
quyuers for arrows. There is found an other kind, which suerly is
marvelous, being little bygger then a Iauelyn, the canes whereof are longer
then two spannes: these reeds grow one far from an other, as some times
twenty or thirty pases, and sometimes also two or three leagues: they grow
in manner in all prouynces in the Indies, and grow near to very high trees,
whereunto they lean, and creep up to the tops of their branches, which
they imbrase, and discende again down to the earth. Their canes are full of
most clear water, without any manner of taste or savor, either of the canes, or
of any other thing, and such as if it were taken out of the freshest spryng in
the world, nor yet is it known that ever it hurt any that drunk thereof. For
it has oftentimes so chanced, that as the Christian men have trauayled in
these regions in desolate ways, where for lack of water they have been in
great danger to die for thirst, they have escaped that peril by reason that
they found the said reeds, of the water of whose canes they have drunk a
great quantity, without any hurt thereof ensuing. Therefore when they find
these in any place, they make water vessels of the canes thereof, and carry as
many of them full of water as may suffice for one days journey: and sometime
they carry so many, that they take for every man two or three quartes of water,
which may serve them for many days, because it does not corrupt, but remains
still fresh and good.

There are also certain plants, which the Christians call Platani. These are
as high as trees, and become as byg in the trunk as the knee of a man, or
more. Platani.
From the foot to the top, they bear certain long and large leaves, being
more then three spannes in largeness, and about ten or twelve in length: the
which when they are broken of the wind, the stalk remains whole in the
myddest. In the myddest of this plant, in the highest part thereof, there
grows a cluster with forty or fyftie platans about it, every of them being
a spanne and a half in length, and as byg as a man's arm in the small, or
more, or less, according to the goodness of the soil where they grow: they
have a rynde not very thycke, and easy to be broken, being within altogether
full of a substance like unto the mary of the bone of an Ox, as it appears
when ye rind or bark is taken from the same. This cluster ought to be taken
from the plant, when any one of the platans begin to appear yelowe, at which
time they take it, and hang it in their houses, where all the cluster waxes
ripe, with all his platans. This cluster is a very good fruit, and when it is
opened, and the rynde taken of, there are found within it many good dry
Fygges, which being roasted, Fygges.
or stewed in an Oven, in a close pot, or some such other thing, are of
pleasant taste, much like to the conserve of Honey: they putrify not on the sea
so soon as some other fruits do, but continue fyfteene days and more, if
they be geathered somewhat green: they seem more delicate on the sea then on
the land, not for that they any thing increase in goodness on the sea, but
because that whereas on the sea other things are lackyng, whereof is plenty
on the land, those meats seem of best taste, which satisfy present
necessity. This trunk or spryg which brings forth the said cluster, is a
whole year in growing and brynging forth fruit, in which time it has put
forth round about it ten or twelve sprygges, as bygge as the first or
principal, and multiplieth no less then the principal in bringing forth of
clusters, with fruits likewise at their time, and also in bryngyng forth
other and many sprygges, as is said before. From the which sprygges or
trunkes, as soon as the cluster of the fruit is taken away, the plant
begins to dry and wyther, which then they take out of the ground, because
it does none other then occupy it in vain, and without profit. They are so
many, and do so marvelously increase and multiply, that it is a thing in
manner encredible. They are exceeding moist, insomuch that when they are plucked
up from the place where they grow, there ishueth forth a great quantity of
water, as well out of the plant, as out of the place where it grew, in such
sort, that all the moisture of the earth far about, might seem to be
geathered together about the truncke or block of the said plant, with the
fruits whereof, the Antes are so far in love, that they are seen in great
multitudes in the branches of the plants: so that for the multitude thereof,
it sometime so chances, that men are enforced to take away the plants from
their possession: these fruits are found at al times of the year. There is
also an other kind of wild plants that grows in the feeldes, which I have
not seen but in the Island of Hispaniola, although they be found in other
Islands of the Indies: Tunas.
these they call Tunas. They grow of a Thistle full of thorns, and bring
forth a fruit much like unto great Figs, which have a crown like
Medlers, and are within of a high color, with graynes and the rynde like unto
a fygge: they are of good taste, and grow abundantly in the fields in many
places: They work a strange effect in such as eat them, for if a man eat
two, or three, or more, they cause his urine to be of the very color of
blood, which thing chanced once to my self. For on a time as I made water,
and saw the color of my urine, I entered into a great suspicion of my life,
being so astonyshed for fear, that I thought the same had chanced to me upon
some other cause, insomuche that surely my imagination might have done me
hurt, but that they which were with me did comfort me immediately, declaryng
the cause thereof, as they knew by experience, being ancient inhabitours in
those regions. There grows also an other plant, which the people of the
country call Bihaos: this puts forth certain straight branches, and very
broad leaves, Bihaos.
which the Indians use for diverse purposes: For in some places they cover their
houses with the leaves thereof, couched and laid after the manner of thetche,
whereunto it serves very well: Sometimes also when it rayneth, they cast these
over their heads, to defend them from the water. They make also certain
chestes, which they call Hauas, weaued after a strange sort, Hauas.
and intermyxt with the leaves of this Bihaos. These chestes are wrought in
such sort, that although it rain upon them, or they chance to fall into the
water, yet are not such things wet as are within them: they are made of the
branches of the said Bihaos, with the leaves weaued together therewith: In
these they keep salt, and other subtle things. They use them also for an
other purpose, which is this: that fyndyng them in the fields at such time as
they have scarsenesse of vittayles, they dyg up the roots of these plants
while they are yet young, or eat the plant it self, in that part where it is
most tender, which is from a foot under the ground, where it is as tender and
white as a reed or bulrushe. And forasmuch as we are now come to the end
of this narration, it comes to my remembrance to make mention of an other
thing, which is not far from my purpose: and this is, how the Indians do
slain or dye cloth of bombage cotton, or any other thing which they in^ende
to dye, of diverse colors, as black, tawny, Dying of cotton.
green, blewe, yelow, and read, which they do with the barks, or ryndes,
and leaves of certain trees, which they know by experience to be good for this
practice: and by this art they make colors in such perfection and
excellency, that no better can be devised. A strange thing.
But this seems a strange thing, that they do all this in one self same
vessel: So that when they have caused the said ryndes and leaves to boil
together, they make in the same vessel without any change (as I have said)
as many colors as them lysteth: Which thing I suppose to come to pass, by
the disposition of the color which they have first given to the thing that
they intend to dye or color, whether it be thread, web, or cloth, or any
thing that they intend to color.

Of venomous Apples, wherewith they poison their arrows.
THe Apples wherewith the Indian Caniballes inuenome their arrows, grow on
certain trees covered with many branches and leaves, being very green, and
growing thick. They are laden with abundance of these evil fruits, and have
their leaves like the leaves of a pear tree, but that they are less and
rounder: the fruit is much like the muscadel pears of the Island of Sicilie or
Naples in form and bygnesse, and are in some parts steyned with read
spots, and of very sweet savor: these trees for the most part, grow ever
by the sea coasts, and near unto the water, and are so fair and of pleasant
savor, that there is no man that sees them, but will desire to eat thereof,
Note.
insomuche that if it may be spoken of any fruit yet growyng on the earth, I
would say that this was the unhappy fruit whereof our first parents Adam and
Eve tasted, whereby they both lost their felicity, and procured death to them
and their posterity. Of these fruits, and of the great Antes whose biting
causes swellyng, (whereof I have spoken elsewhere) and of the Eutes, or
Lysartes, and vypers, and such other venomous things, Caniballes archers.
the Canibals which are the chief archers among the Indians, Wherewith they
inuenome their arrows.
are accustomed to poison their arrows, wherewith they kill all that they
wound: These venomes they mingle together, and make thereof a black mass or
composition, which appears like unto very black pytch. Of this poison I
caused a great quantity to be burnt, in Sancta Maria Antiqua, in a place two
leagues and more within the land, with a great multitude of their inuenomed
arrows and other munition, with also the house wherein they were reserved:
This was in the year.1514. at such time as the army arrived there with
captain Pedrarias da villa, at the commandment of the Catholyke king Don
Ferdinando. Petrus Arias.
But to return to the hystory. These Apples (as I have said) grow near unto
the sea. And whereas the Christians which serve your majesty in these
parties, suppose that there is no remedy so profitable for such as are wounded
with these arrows, as is the water of the sea, if the wound be much washed
therewith, by which means some have escaped, although but few: yet to say the
truth, albeit the water of the sea have a certain caustike quality against
poison, it is not a sufficient remedy in this case, The water of the sea.
nor yet to this day have the Christians perceived that of fyftie that have
been wounded, three have recovered. But that your majesty may the better
consider the force of the venom of these trees, you shall further understand,
that if a man do but repose him self to sleep a little while under the shadow
of the same, he has his head and eyes so swollen when he ryseth, that the eye
lyddes are joined with the cheeks, and if it chance one drop or more of the
deawe of the said tree to fall into the eye, it utterly destroys the sight.
The pestilent nature of this tree is such, that it can not be declared in few
words. Of these, there grows great plenty in the gulf of Vraba, toward
the North coast, on the West and East side. The gulf of Uraba.
The wood of these trees when it burns, makes so great a stynke, that no man
is able to abide it, by reason it causes so great a pain in the head.

Among other trees which are in these Indies, as well in the Islands, as in the
firm land, there is an other kind which they call Xagua, whereof there is
great plenty: Xagua.
they are very high, and straight, and fair to behold. Of these they use to
make ^ykes, and Iauelyns of diverse lengthes and bygnesse: they are of a fair
color, between russet and white: this tree brings forth a great fruit as
bygge as Papauer or Poppie, and much like thereunto, it is very good to be
eaten when it is ripe. Out of this they get a very clear water, wherewith they
wash their legs, and sometimes all their bodies, when they feel their
flesh weery, faint, or loose: the which water, beside that it has a byndyng
quality, it has also this property, that whatsoever it touches, it steyneth
it black by little and little, until it be as black as get, which color can
not be taken away in less space then ten or twelve days: And if the nail
be but touched therewith, it is so steyned that it can by no means be taken
away, until it either fall of, or grow out, and be clypped away by little and
little, as I my self have oftentimes seen by experience.

There is an other kind of trees which they call Hohi: these are very great
and fair, Hohi.
Some think these to be mirobalanes.
and cause wholesome air where they grow, and a pleasant shadow, and are
found in great abundance: their fruit is very good, and of good taste and
savor, and much like unto certain damsons or prunes being little and yelowe,
but their stone is very great, by reason whereof they have but little meat:
their bark or rynde boiled in water, makes a wholesome bathe for the legs,
because it byndeth and stays the looseness of the flesh, so sensibly that
it is a marueyle to consider. It is surely a wholesome and excellent bathe
against such faintness, and is the best tree that may be found in those
parties to sleep under: For it causes no heaviness of the head, as do
diverse other trees, which thing I speak, because the Christians are much
accustomed in those regions to lie in the fields. It is therefore a common
practice among them, that wheresoever they find these trees, there they
spread their mattresses and beds wherein they sleep.

Date trees.
There are also a kind of high Date trees, and full of thorns: the woodde of
these is most excellent, being very black, and shynyng, and so heavy that no
part thereof can swymme above the water, but synketh immediately to the
bottom. Of this woodde they make their arrows and darts, Thinhabitauntes of
the sea of Sur.
also Iauelyns, spears, and pykes: and I say pykes, because that in the
coasts of the sea of Sur, beyond Esquegua and Vracha, the Indians use great
and long pykes, made of the wood of these Date trees. Of the same likewise they
make clubbes, and swoordes, and diverse other weapons: Also vessels and
household stuff of diverse sorts, very fair and commodious. Furthermore of
this wood the Christians use to make diverse musical instruments, as
Claricymballes, Lutes, Gitterns, and such other, the which beside their fair
shynyng color like unto get, are also of a good sound, and very durable, by
reason of the hardness of the wood.

After that I have said thus much of trees and plants, I have thought good
also to speak somewhat of herbs. An herb that bears cords.
You shall therefore understand, that in these Indies there is an herb much
like unto a yelow Lilie, about whose leaves there grow and creep certain
cords or lases, as the like is partly seen in the herb which we call lased
sauery, but these of the Indies are much bigger, and longer, and so strong that
they tie their hangyng beds thereby, which they call Hamacas, whereof we have
spoken elsewhere: these cords they call Cabuia, and Henequen, which are all
one thing, Cabuia and Henequen.
saving that Henequen is less and of a fyner substance, as it were line, and
the other is grosser, like the week or twyst of hemp, and is imperfect in
comparison to the other: they are of color between white and yelow, like unto
abarne, and some also white. With Henequen, which is the most subtyle and fine
threede, the Indians saw in sunder fetters, cheynes, A strange thing.
or bars of Iron, in this manner: They move the thread of Henequen upon the
Iron which they intend to saw or cut, drawyng the one hand after the other
as do they that saw, puttyng ever now and then a portion of fine sand upon
the threede, or on the place or part of the Iron, where they continue rubbyng
the said thread, so that if the thread be worn, they take an other, and
continue in their work as before, until they have cut in sunder the Iron,
although it be never so bygge, and cut it as if it were a tender thing, and
easy to be sawne.

And forasmuch as the leaves of trees may be counted among herbs, Leaves.
I will here speak somewhat of the quality of the leaves of certain trees
which are found in the Island of Hispaniola. These trees are so full of
thorns, that there is no tree or plant that seems more wild and deformed:
so that I can not well determyne whether they be trees, or plants: they have
certain branches full of large and deformed leaves, which branches were first
leaves like unto the other. As the branches made of these leaves grow forth in
length, there comes other leaves of them: so that in fine it is a difficult
thing to describe the form of these trees, except the same should be done by
a paynter, whereby the eye might conceive that wherein the tongue fails in
this behalf. The leaves of this tree are of such virtue, that being well
beaten and spread upon a cloth, A leaf of great virtue.
after the manner of a plaster, and so laid to a leg or arm that is broken
in many pieces, it heals it in fyftiene days, and makes it as whole as
though it had never been broken: During the time of this operation, it cleaves
so fast to the flesh, that it can not without much difficulty be taken away,
but as soon as it has healed the sore, and wrought his operation, it loses
it self from the place where it was laid, as I my self, and diverse other
which have proved it, know by experience.

Of fyshes, and of the manner of fyshyng.
IN the sea coasts of the firm land, there are diverse and sundry kinds of
fishes, much differing in shape and form. And although it be impossible to
speak of all, yet will I make mention of some. And first to begin at Sardines,
you shall understand that there is found a kind of these fishes very large and
with red tails, being a very delicate fyshe. The best kinds of other fishes
are these, Moxarre, Diahace, Brettes, Dahaos, Thornebackes, and Salmons: All
these, and diverse other which I do not now remember, are taken in great
quantity in ryuers. There are likewise taken very good Creuyshes. There are
also found in the sea, certain other fishes, as Soles, Mackerels, Turbuts,
Palamite, Lizze, Polpi, Chieppe, Xaibas, Locustes, Oysters, exceedyng great
Tortoyses, Tiburons. Manates.
and Tiburoni of marvelous bygnesse: also Manates, and Murene, and many other
fyshes, which have no n^mes in our language, and these of such diversity and
quantity, as can not be expressed without large writing and long time. But to
let pass to entreat particulerly of the multitude of fyshes, I intend to
speak chiefly, and somewhat largely, of three sorts of most notable fyshes:
whereof the first is, the great Tortoyses, the second is called Tiburon, and
the third Manate. And to begin at the first, I say that in the Island of Cuba,
Great Tortoyses.
are found great Tortoyses (which are certain shell fyshes) of such
byggenesse that ten or fyfteene men are scarsely able to lift one of them
out of the water, as I have been infourmed of credible persons dwelling in the
same Island. But of that which I my self have seen, I can testify, that in
the fyrme land, in the village of Acla, there are of this sort some taken and
killed of such byggenesse, that six men with much difficulty could
scarsely draw them out of the water, and commonly the least sort of them are
as much as two men may carry at a burden: that which I saw lyfted up by six
men, had her shell a yard and a quarter in length, and in breadth more then
five yardes. The manner of taking them, is this: It sometimes chances that in
their great nets (which they call shoot nets) there are found certain
Tortoyses of the common sort, in great quantities, and when they come out of
the sea, and bring forth their eggs, and go together by companyes from the
sea, to feed on the land, the Christians or Indians follow their steps
which they find in the sand, and soon overtake them, because they are very
heavy and slow in going, although they make all the have they can to return
to the sea, as soon as they epsy any body. When they that pursue them have
overtaken them, they put a stake or staff under their legs, and ouerturne
them on their backs as they are yet runnyng, so that they can go no further,
nor yet rise again or turn, and thus they suffer them to lie still while they
follow after the rest, which they ouerturne in like manner: and by this means
take very many, at such times as they come forth of the sea as I have said:
This fyshe is very excellent and wholesome to be eaten, and of good taste. The
second of the three fyshes whereof I have spoken, is the Tiburon: this is a
very great fyshe, and very quycke and swyft in the water, Tiburons.
and a cruel deuourer: these are oftentimes taken, as well when the ships are
under sail in the Ocean, as also when they lie at anchor, or at any other time,
and especially the least kind of these fyshes. When the ships are under
sail, the byggest sort are taken after this manner. When the Tiburon sees the
ship saylyng, he follows it swimming behind, the which things the
mariners seeing, cast forth all the fylth of the ship into the sea for the
fyshe to eat, who nevertheless follows them with equal pase, although they
make never such haste with full wind and sails, and waloweth on every side
and about the ship, and thus follows it sometime for the space of a hundred
and fyftie leagues, and more, and when the mariners are disposed to take them,
they cast down by the stern of the ship a hook of Iron, as bygge as the
byggest finger of a man's hand, of three spannes in length, and crooked like a
fyshehooke, with beardes according to the bygnesse thereof, and fastened to an
Iron cheyne of five or six lynkes near unto the end, and from thence tied
with a great rope, fastnyng also on the hook for a bayte, a piece of some
fyshe, or hogs flesh, or some other flesh, or the bowels and intralles of an
other Tiburon which they have taken before, which may easily be done, for I
have seen niene taken in one day, and if they would have taken more, they
might also. Thus when the Tiburon has pleasauntly followed the ship a long
viage, at the length he swaloweth the bayte with the hook, and as well by his
stryuyng to flee or escape, as also by the swyft passage of the ship, the
hook ouerthwarteth and catches hold of his chappes: the which fyshe when it
is taken, it is of such huge byggenesse, that twelve or fyfteene men are
scarsely able to draw it out of the water, and lift it into the ship, where
one of the mariners gives it many knockes on the head with a club or beetle,
until he have slain it: they are sometimes found of ten or twelve foot
long, and of five, six, or seven spannes in breadth, where they are brodest:
they have very great and wide mouths, to the proportion of the rest of their
bodies, and have two rows of teeth, the one somewhat separate from the other,
of cruel shape, and standing very thycke. When they have slain this fyshe,
they cut the body thereof in small pieces, and put it to dry, hangyng it three
or four days at the cords of the sail clothes to dry in the wind, and
then eat it: It is doubtless a good fyshe, and of great commodity to serve
the ships for vitalles for many days: the least of these fyshes are most
wholesome and tender, it has a skin much like to the skin of a Sole
whereunto the said Tiburon is like in shape: Which I say, because Pliny has
made mention of none of these three fyshes, among the number of them whereof he
writes in his natural history. Pliny.
These Tiburons come forth of the sea, and enter into the ryuers, where they
are no less perylous then great Lisartes or Crocodiles, whereof I have spoken
largely before: For they devour men, kyne, and horses, even as do the
Crocodiles: Crocodiles.
they are very dangerous in certain washyng places or pooles by the ryuers
sides, and where they have devoured at other times. Diverse other fyshes both
great and small, of sundry sorts and kinds, are accustomed to follow the
ships going under sail, of the which I will speak somewhat when I have
written of Manate, which is the third of the three whereof I have promised to
entreat. Manates.
Manate therefore, is a fyshe of the sea, of the byggest sort, and much
greater then the Tiburon in length and breadth, and is very bruityshe and vile,
so that it appears in form like unto one of those great vessels made of
goats skynnes, wherein they use to carry new wine in Medina de Campo, or in
Areualo: the head of this beast is like the head of an Ox, with also like
eyes, and has in the place of arms, two great stumpes wherewith he swymmeth:
It is a very gentle and tame beast, and comes oftentimes out of the water to
the next shore, where if he find any herbs or grass, he feeds thereof. Our
men are accustomed to kyl many of these, and diverse other good fyshes, with
their crosbowes, pursuing them in barks or Canoas, because they swim in manner
above the water: the which thing when they see, they draw them with a hook
tide at a small cord, but somewhat strong: As the fyshe flees away, the
archer lets go, and prolongeth the cord by little and little, until he have
let it go many fathams: at the end of the cord, there is tide a cork, or a
piece of light woodde, and when the fyshe is gone a little way, and has
colored the water with his blood, and feels him self to faint and draw
toward the end of his life, he resorteth to the shore, and the archer
follows, geatheryng up his cord, whereof while there yet remain six or eight
fathams, or somewhat more or less, he draws it toward the land, and
draws the fyshe therewith by little and little, as the waves of the sea help
him to do it the more easly: then, with the help of the rest of his company,
he lyfteth this great beast out of the water to the land, being of such
byggenesse, that to convey it from thence to the city, it shall be requisite to
have a carte with a good yoke of Oxen, and sometimes more, according as these
fyshes are of byggenesse, some being much greater then other some in the same
kind, as is seen of other beasts: Somtymes they lift these fyshes into the
Canoa or bark, without drawyng them to the land as before, for as soon as
they are slain, they flote above the water: And I believe verily that this
fyshe is one of the best in the world to the taste, and the lykeest unto
flesh, especially so like unto beef, that who so has not seen it whole, can
judge it to be none other when he sees it in pieces then very beef or veale,
and is certainly so like unto flesh, that all the men in the world may herein
be deceived: the taste likewise, is like unto the taste of very good veale, and
lasts long, if it be powdered: so that in fine, the Base of these parts, is by
no means like unto this. The fyshe Manate.
This Manate has a certain stone, or rather bone in his head within the
brain, which is of quality greatly appropriate against the disease of the
stone, if it be burnt and ground into small powder, and taken fasting in the
morning when the pain is felt, A remedy against the stone.
in such quantity as may lie upon a penny, with a draught of good white wine:
For being thus taken three or four mornings, it acquieteth the grief, as
diverse have told me which have proved it true, and I my self by testimony
of sight, do witness that I have seen this stone sought of diverse for this
effect.

There are also diverse other fyshes as bygge as this Manate, among the which
there is one called Vihuella. This fyshe bears in the top of his head a
swoorde, The swoorde fyshe.
being on every side full of many sharp teeth, this swoorde is naturally very
hard and strong, of four or five spannes in length, and of proportion
according to the same byggenesse: and for this cause is this fyshe called
Spada, that is, the swoorde fyshe. Of this kind some are found as little as
Sardines, and other so great, that two yokes of Oxen are scarsely able to draw
them on a Cart. But whereas before I have promised to speak of other fyshes,
which are taken in these seas while the ships are under sail, I will not
forgeat to speak of the Tunnye, which is a great and good fyshe, Tunnye.
and is oftentimes taken and kylde with trout spears, and hooks, cast in the
water, when they play and swym about the ships. In like manner also are taken
many Turbuts, which are very good fyshes as are lightly in all the sea. And
here is to be noted, Turbut.
that in the great Ocean sea, there is a strange thing to be considered, which
all that have been in the Indies affirm to be true: Note.
And this is, that like as on the land there are some provinces fertyle and
fruitful, and some barren, even so does the like chance in the sea: So that
at some wyndes the ships sail fyftie, or a hundred, or two hundred leagues
and more, without taking or seeing of one fyshe: and again, in the self same
Ocean in some places, all the water is seen tremble by the mouyng of the
fyshes, where they are taken abundantly. It comes further to my remembrance
to speak somewhat of the fleeyng of fyshes, which is doubtless a strange
thing to behold, Fleeyng fyshes.
and is after this manner. When the ships sail by the great Ocean, following
their viage, there ryseth sometimes on the one side or on the other, many
companies of certain little fyshes, of the which the byggest is no greater
then a Sardyne, and so diminishe less and less from that quantity, that ^ome
of them are very little: these are called Volatori, that is, fleeyng fyshes:
they rise by great companies and flocks, in such multitudes that it is an
astonyshment to behold them: Sometimes they rise but little from the water, and
(as it chances) continue one flight for the space of an hundred paces, and
sometimes more, or less, before they fall again into the sea, sometimes also
they fall into the ships. And I remember, that on an euenyng when all the
company in the ship were on their knees, syngyng Salve regina in the highest
part of the Castle of the poupe, and sailed with a full wind, there passed by
us a flock of these fleeyng fyshes, and came so near us, that many of them
fell into the ship, among the which, two or three fell hard by me, which I
took alive in my hand, so that I might well perceive that they were as bygge
as Sardines, and of the same quantity, having two wings or quilles growing
out of their sins, like unto those wherewith all fyshes swym in ryuers: these
wings are as long as the fyshes them selves. As long as their wings are
moist, they bear them up in the air, but as soon as they are dry, they can
continue their flight no further then as I have said before, but fall
immediatlye into the sea, and so rise again, and flee as before from place to
place. In the year a thousand, five hundred, and fyfteene, when I came first
to enfourme your Majesty of the state of the things in India, and was the
year following in Flaunders in the time of your most fortunate success in
these your kingdoms of Aragonie and Castyle, whereas at that viage I sailed
above the Island Bermuda, otherwise called Garza, being the furthest of all the
Islands that are found at this day in the world, The Island of Bermuda
and arryuyng there at the deapth of eight yardes of water, and distaunt from
the land as far as the shot of a piece of Ordinance, I determined to
send some of the ship to land, as well to make search of such things as
were there, as also to leave in the Island certain Hogs for increase. But the
time not serving my purpose by reason of contrary wind, I could bring my
ships no nearer the Island, being twelve leagues in length, and six in
breadth, and about thyrtie in circuit, lying in the three and thyrtieth degree
of the North side. While I remained here, I saw a strife and combat between
these fleeing fyshes, and the fyshes named Gylt heads, and the fowls called
Seamewes, and Cormorantes, which surely seemed unto me a thing of as great
pleasure and solace as could be devised, while the Gylt heads swam on the
brymme of the water, and sometimes lyfted their shoulders above the same, to
raise the fleeyng fyshes out of the water to drive them to flight, and follow
them swimming to the place where they fall, to take and eat them suddenly.
Again on the other side, the Seamewes and Cormorantes, take many of these
fleeyng fyshes, Not to hie for the Pie, nor to low for the Crow.
so that by this means they are neither safe in the air, nor in the water. In
the self same peril and danger do men live in this mortal life, wherein is
no certain security, neither in high estate, nor in low. Which thing surely
ought to put us in remembrance of that blessed and safe restyng place which
God has prepared for such as love him, who shall acquiete and fynishe the
travails of this troublous world, wherein are so many dangers, and bring them
to that eternal life where they shall find eternal security and rest. But
to return to the hystorye: these birds and fowls which I saw, were of the
Island of Bermuda, near unto the which I saw these fleeyng fyshes: for they
could be of no other land, forasmuch as they are not accustomed to wander
far from the coasts where they are bredde.

Of thincrease and decrease (that is) rysyng and falling of our Ocean sea, and
South sea, called the sea of Sur.
I Will now speak of certain things which are seen in the Province, or at
the least in the city of golden Castyle, otherwise called Beragua, and in the
coasts of the North sea, and of the South sea, Beragua.
called the sea of Sur, not omitting to note one synguler and marvelous thing
which I have considered of the Ocean sea, whereof hitherto no Cosmographer,
Pilot, or Maryner, or any other, have satisfied me. I say therefore, as it is
well known to your majesty, and all such as have knowledge of the Ocean sea,
that this great Ocean casts from it self the sea Mediterraneum by the mouth
of the straight of Gibilterra, in the which the water, The west Ocean.

The sea Mediterraneum.


from thend and furthest part of that sea, even unto the mouth of the said
straight, either in the East toward the coaste commonly called Leuante, or in
any other part of the said sea Mediterraneum, the sea does not so fall nor
increase, as reason would judge for so great a sea, but increases very lit^e,
and a small space: Nevertheless, without the mouth of the ^trayght in the
main Ocean, it increases and falls very much, and a great space of
ground, from six hours to six hours, as in all the coasts of Spain,
Britan^^, Flaunders, Garmanie, and England. The self same O^ean s^a in the
firm land newly found, in the coasts of the same lying toward the North,
does neither rise nor fall, Hispaniola. Cuba.
nor likewise in the Islands of Hispaniola and Cuba, and all the other Islands
of the same lying toward the north, for the space of three thousand leagues,
but only in like manner as does the sea Mediterraneum in Italy, which is in
manner nothing, in respect to that increase and decrease which the said Ocean
has in the coasts of Spain and Flaunders. But this is yet a greater thing,
that also the self same Ocean in the coasts of the said fyrme land lying
toward the South, in the city of Panama, and also in the coast of that land
which lies toward the East and West from that city, as in the Island of
pearls or Margaritea, which the Indians call Tarrarequi, and also in Taboga
and Otoque, and in all other Islands of the south sea of Sur, the water ryseth
and falls so much, that when it falls, it goes in manner out of sight,
which thing I my self have seen oftentimes. And here your majesty may note
an other thing, that from the north sea to the south sea, being of such
difference the one from the other in rysyng and falling, The South sea.
yet is the land that deuideth them not past eyghteene or twenty leagues in
breadth from coaste to coaste: So that both the said seas, being all one
Ocean, this strange effect is a thing worthy greatly to be considered of all
such as have inclination and desire to know the secret works of nature,
wherein the infinite power and wisdom of God is seen to be such, as may
allure al good natures to reverence and love so divine a majesty. And whereas
by ye demonstrations of learned men I am not satisfied of the natural cause
hereof, The power and wisdom of God is seen in his creatures.
I content my self to know and believe, that he which has made these
things, does know this and many other, which he has not granted to the
reason of man to comprehend, much less to so base a wit as mine is. They
therefore that are of greater understanding, shall search the cause hereof for
them and for me, forasmuch as I have only put the matter in question, as a
witness that have seen thexperience of the thing.

Of the straight or narrow passage of the land lying between the North and
South sea, by the which spyces may much sooner and easlyer be brought from the
Islands of Molucca into Spain by the West Ocean, then by that way whereby the
Portugales sail into the East India.
IT has been an opinion among the Cosmographers and Pilottes of late time, and
other which have had practyse in things touching the sea, that there should
be a straight of water passing from the North sea of the fyrme, into the South
sea of Sur, which nevertheless has not been seen nor found to this day. And
surely if there be any such straight, we that inhabit those parts do think
the same should be rather of land then of water. For the fyrme land in some
parts thereof is so straight and narrow, that the Indians say that from the
mountains of the province of Esquegua or Vrraca (which are between the one
sea and the other) if a man ascend to the top of the mountains, and look
toward the North, Esquegua and Vrraca.
he may see the water of the North sea of the province of Beragua: and again
looking the contrary way, may on the other side (toward the South) see the sea
of Sur, and the provinces which confine with it, as do the territories of the
two Lords or kings of the said provinces of Vrraca and Esquegua. And I
believe, that if it be as the Indians say, of all that is hitherto known, this
is the narrowest straight of the fyrme land, which some affirm to be full of
rough mountains. Yet do I take it for a better way, or so short as is that
which is made from the port called Nomen Dei (which is in the North sea) unto
the new city of Panama, Nomen Dei.
Panama.
being in the coast and on the bancke of the sea of Sur, which way is likewise
very rough, full of thycke wooddes, mountains, ryuers, valleys, and very
difficult to pass through, and can not be done without great labor and
travail. Some measure this way in this part, to be from sea to sea eighteen
leagues, which I suppose to be rather twenty, not for that it is any more by
measure, but because it is rough and difficult, as I have said, and as I have
found it by experience, having now twice passed that way by foot, countyng
from the port and village of Nomen Dei, unto the dominion of the Cacique of
Iuanaga, otherwise called Capira, eight leagues, and from thence to the river
of Chagre, other eight leagues. So that at this river, being sixteen leagues
from the said port, The river of Chagre.
ends the roughness of the way: then from hence to the marvelous bridge are
two leagues, and beyond that, other two, unto the port of Panama: So that
altogether, in my judgment, make twenty leagues. And if therefore this
navigations may be found in the South sea for the trade of spyces (as we trust
in God) to be brought from thence to the said port of Panama (as is possible
enough) they may afterward easily pass to the North sea, notwithstanding the
difficulty of the way of the twenty leagues aforesaid. Which thing I
affirm, as a man well trauayled in these regions, having twyse on my feet
passed over this straight in the year 1521. as I have said. It is furthermore
to be understood, that it is a marvelous facility to bring spices by this
way which I will now declare. From Panama to the river of Chagre, are four
leagues of good and fair way, by the which carts may pass at pleasure, by
reason that the mountains are but few and little, and that the greatest part of
these four leagues is a plain ground void of trees: and when the carts are
come to the said river* the spyces may be carried in Barks and pynnesses. For
this river enters into the North sea five or six leagues lower then the port
of Nomen Dei, and emptieth it self in the sea near unto an Island called
Bastimento, where is a very good and safe port. Your majesty may now therefore
consider, The Island Bastimento.
how great a thing* and what commodity it may be to convey spices this way,
forasmuch as ye river of Chagre, having his original only two leagues from the
South sea, continues his course, and emptieth it self into the other North
sea. This river runs fast, and is very great, and so commodious for this
purpose as may be thought or desired: The marvelous bridge.
the marvelous bridge made by the work of nature, being two leagues beyond
the said river, and other two leagues on this side the port of Panama, so
lying in the mydde way between them both, as framed naturally in such sort,
that none which pass by this viage does see any such bridge, or think that
there is any such buyldyng in that place, until they be in the top thereof, in
the way toward Panama: But as soon as they are on the bridge, lookyng toward
the right hand, they see a little river under them, which has his channel
distant from the feet of them that walk over it, the space of two spears
length or more. The water of this river is very shalowe, not passing the deapth
of a man's leg to the knee, and is in breadth between thyrtie and forty
pases, and falls into the river of Chagre. Toward the right hand, standing
on this bridge, there is nothing seen but great trees. The largeness of the
bridge conteyneth fyfteene pases, and the length thereof about threescore or
fourscore pases: The arche is so made of most hard stone, that no man can
behold it without admiration, being made by the high and omnipotent creator
of all things. But to return to speak somewhat more of the conueying of
spices, I say, that when it shall please almyghtie God that this navigations
aforesaid shall be found by the good fortune of your majesty, and that the
spyces of the Islands of the South sea (which may also be otherwise called the
Ocean of the East India, in the which are the Islands of Molucca) shall be
brought to the said coast and the port of Panama, The Islands of Molucca.
and be conveyed from thence (as we have said) by the fyrme land with carts
unto the river of Chagre, and from thence into this our other sea of the North,
from whence they may afterward be brought into Spain, The commodity of this
viage.
I say that by this means the viage shall be shortened more then seven thousand
leagues, with much less danger then is by the viage now used by the way of
Commendator of Aysa, captain under your majesty, who this present year
attempted a viage to the place of the said spyces: and not only the way is thus
much shortened, but also a third part of the time is abbreuiate. To conclude
therefore, if any had hitherto attempted this viage by the sea of Sur, to seek
the Islands of spyces, I am of firm opinion, that they should have been
found long since, as doubtless they may be by the reasons of Cosmographie.

How things that are of one kind, dyffer in form and quality, according
to the nature of the place where they are engendered or grow, and of the beasts
called Tigers.
IN the firm land are found many terrible beasts, Tigers.
which some think to be Tigers. Which thing nevertheless I dare not
affirm, considering what aucthours do write of the lyghtnesse and agilitie of
the Tiger, whereas this beast, being otherwise in shape very like unto a Tiger,
is notwithstanding very slow. Yet true it is, that according to the marueiles
of the world, and differences which natural things have in diverse regions
under heaven, and diverse constellations of the same, under the which they are
created, Plants and herbs.
we see that some such plants and herbs as are hurtful in one country,
are harmless and wholesome in other regions. Birds.
And birds which in one province are of good taste, are in other so unsavory
that they may not be eaten. Men.
Men likewise which in some countries are black, are in other places white:
and yet are both these and they men. Even so may it be, that Tigers are light
in some region, as they write, and may nevertheless be slow and heavy in these
Indies of your majesty, Sheep.
whereof we speak. The sheep of Arabie draw their tails long and big on
the ground, Bulls.
and the Bulls of Egypt have their hear growyng toward their heads: yet are
those sheep, and these bulls. Men in some countries are hardy and of good
courage, and in other naturally fearful and bruityshe. All these things, and
many more, which may be said to this purpose, are easy to be proved, and
worthy to be believed, of such as have read of the like in aucthours, or
traueyled the world, whereby their own sight may teach them the experience
of these things whereof I speak. It is also manifest that Iucca, Iucca.
whereof they make their bread in the Island of Hispaniola, is deadly poison if
it be eaten green with the iu^se: and yet has it no such property in the
firm land, where I have eaten it many times, and found it to be a good fruit.
The Bats of Spain, Battes.
although they bite, yet are they not venomous: but in the firm land, many dye
that are bytten of them. And in this form may so many things be said, that
time shall not suffice to write, whereas my intent is only to prove that this
beast may be a Tiger, or of ye kind of Tigers, although it be not of such
lightness and swiftness as are they whereof Pliny and other aucthours speak,
Pliny.
discrybyng it to be one of the swyftest beasts of the land, and that the
river of Tigris for the swyft course thereof was called by that name. The first
Spanyardes which saw this Tiger in the firm land, did so name it. The Tiger.
Of the kind of these was that which Don Diego Columbo the Admiral sent your
majesty out of new Spain to Toledo. Their heads are like to the heads of
Lions, or Lionesses, but greater: the rest of all their bodies, and their
legs, are full of black spots one near unto an other, and divided with a
circumference or fryndge of read color, showing as it were a fair work and
correspondent picture, about their croopes or hinder parts, they have these
spots byggest, and less and less toward their bellies, legs, and heads.
That which was brought to Toledo, was young, and but little, and by my
estimation of the age of three years: but in the firm land there are many
found of greater quantity, for I have seen some of three spans in height,
and more then five in length. They are beasts of great force, with strong
legs, and well armed with nails and fanges, which we call dog teeth: they
are so fierce, that in my judgment no real Lion of the byggest sort is so
strong or fierce. Of these, there are many found in the firm land, which
devour many of the Indians, and do much hurt otherwise: but since the coming
of the Christians, many have been kyld with Crossebowes after this manner.
As Soon as the archer has knowledge of the haunt of any of these Tigers, he
goes searching their trase, The huntyng of Tigers.
with his crossebow and with a little hound or begle, and not with a greyhounde,
because this beast would soon kill any dog that would venture on him: When the
hounde has found the Tiger, he runs about him baying continually, and
approaches so near him, snappyng and grynnyng, with so quycke fleeyng and
returnyng, that he hereby so molesteth this fierce beast, that he drives him
to take the next tree, at the foot whereof he remains still baying, and the
Tiger grynnyng and showing his teethe, while in the mean time the archer
comes near, and.xii. or xiiii. pases of, stryketh him with the querell of
his crossebowe in the breast, and flees incontinent, leauyng the Tiger in his
travail for life and death, bytyng the tree and eating earth for fierceness:
then within the space of two or three hours, or the day following, the archer
returns thither, and with his dog fyndeth the place where he lies dead. In
the year.1522. I with the other rulers and magistrates of the city of Sancta
Maria Antiqua in Dariena, took order in our counsel, a reward of four or
five pieces of gold to be given to every man that killed any of these Tigers:
A reward for kyllyng of Tigers.
by reason whereof many were kyld in short space, both with crossebowes, and
also with diverse snares and ingens. But to conclude, I will not obstinately
stand in opinion whether these beasts be Tigers or Panthers, or of the number
of any other such beasts of spotted hear, or also peradventure some other
new beast unknown to the old writers, as were many other whereof I have
spoken in this book: Of which thing I do not greatly marueyle, forasmuch as
unto our time this great part of the world was unknown to the antiquity,
insomuche that none of the writers of that age, nor yet Pcolome in his
Cosmographie, or any other since him, have made any mention hereof, until the
first Admyrall Don Christopher Colonus discovered the same: A thing doubtless
without comparyson much greater then that which is said of Hercules, Colonus
compared to Hercules.
that he first gave the entrance of the sea Mediterraneum into the Ocean,
which the Greeks could never do before him. The pyllers of Hercules.

The strayghtes of Gibilterra.


And hereof ryseth the fable that the mountains of Calpe and Abila (which
are directly one against an other in the straight of Gibilterra, the one being
in Spain, and the other in Affryke) were joined together before they were
opened by Hercules, Note.
who erected those his pillars which your majesty give in token of
prehemynence and like enterpryses, with likewise these his words Plus Vltra,
words doubtless worthy for so great and universal an Emperor, Plus Vltra.
and not convenient for any other Prince: How far the Emperors majesty
excels Hercules.
forasmuch as your holy Catholyke majesty have spredde them in so strange and
remote regions, so many thousand leagues further then ever did Hercules. And
certeynly sir, if there had been an Image of gold made in the praise and fame
of Colonus, he had as well deserved it, as any of those men to whom for their
noble enterprise the antiquity gave divine honor, if he had been in their
time. But to return to the matter whereof I began to speak: I need say no
more of the form of this beast, forasmuch as your Majesty have seen that
which is yet alive in Toledo. And surely the keeper of your majesty's Lions,
who has taken upon him the charge to tame this beast, might better have
bestowed his pains in an other thing that might have been more profitable for
the safegarde of his life, because this Tiger being yet but young, will daily
be stronger and fiercer, and increase in malice. The Indians (and especially
they of the firm land in the province which the Catholyke King Don
Ferdinando commanded to be called golden Castyle) call this beast Ochi. This
thing is strange that chanced of late: A Tiger made tame.
that whereas the Tiger whereof we have made mention before, would have kylde
his keeper that then kept him in a cage, was in few days after made so tame,
that he led her tied only with a small cord, and playde with her so
familyarly, that I marueyled greatly to see it, yet not without certain
belief that this friendship will not last long, without danger of life to the
keeper, forasmuch as surely these beasts are not meet to be among men, for
their fierceness and cruel nature that can not be tamed.

Of the manners and customs of the Indians of the firm land, and of their
women.
THe manners and customs of these Indians, are diverse in diverse provinces. Some
of them take as many wives as them list, and other live with one wife, whom
they forsake not without consent of both parties, which chances especially
when they have no children. The Indian women.
The nobility as well men as women, repute it infamous to join with any of
base pare^tage or strangers, except Christians, whom they count noble men, by
reason of their valiantness, although they put a difference between the
common sort and the other to whom they show obedience, counting it for a great
matter and an honorable thing, if they be beloved of any of them: insomuche
that if they know any Christian man carnally, they keep their faith to him,
so that he be not long absent far from them, for their intent is not to be
widows, or to live chaste like religious women. Many of them have this custom,
that when they perceive that they are with child, they take an herb wherewith
they destroy that is conceived: for they say that only well aged women should
bear children, and that they will not forbear their pleasures, and defourme
their bodies with bearyng of children, whereby their teates become loose and
hanging, which thing they greatly dispraise. When they are delivered of their
children, they go to the river and wash them, which done, their blood and
purgation ceasseth immediately: And when after this they have a few days
absteyned from the company of men, they become so straight, as they say which
have had carnal familiarity with them, that such as use them, can not without
much difficulty satisfy their appetite: They also which never had children,
The men of India.
are ever as virgins. In some parts they wear certain little aperues round
about them before and behind, as low as to their knees and hammes, wherewith
they cover their privy parts, and are naked all their body beside. The
principal men bear their priuities in a holow pype of gold, but the common
sort have them enclosed in the shelles of certain great welkes, and are
beside utterly naked: For they think it no more shame to have their coddes
seen, then any other part of their bodies: and in many provinces both the men
and women go utterly naked, without any such couerture at all. In the province
of Cueua they call a man Chuy, and a woman Ira, which name is not greatly
disagreeable to many both of their women and of ours. These Indians give great
honor and reverence to their Cacique (that is) their kings and rulers. The
principal Cacique, has twelve of his most strong Indians appointed to bear
him, The king is borne on men's backs.
when he remoueth to any place, or goes abroad for his pleasure. Two of them
carry him sitting upon a long piece of wood, which is naturally as light as
they can find, the other ten follow next unto him as footmen: they keep
continually a trottyng pase with him on their shoulders. When the two that carry
him are weery, other two come in their places, without any disturbance or
stay. And thus if the way be plain, they carry him in this manner for the
space of.xv or.xx. leagues in one day. The Indians that are assigned to this
office, are for the most part slaves, or Naboriti, that is, such as are
bound to continual service. I have also noted that when the Indians perceive
them selves to be troubled with to much blood, Lettyng of blood.
they let them selves blood in the calfes of their legs, and brawnes of their
arms: this do they with a very sharp stone, and sometimes with the small
tooth of a Uiper, or with a sharp reed or thorn. All the Indians are
commonly without beardes, They have no beardes.
insomuch that it is in manner a marvel to see any of them either men or women
to have any down or hear on their faces, or other parts of their bodies:
Albeit I saw the Cacique of the province of Catarapa, who had hear on his
face and other parts of his body, as had also his wife in such places as
women are accustomed to have. This Cacique had a great part of his body painted
with a black color, which never fades, They paynte their bodies.
and is much like unto that wherewith the Mores paynt them selves in Barbary
in token of nobility. But the Moors are painted specially on their visage and
throat, and certain other parts. Likewise the principal Indians use these
payntynges on their arms and breasts, but not on their visages, because among
them the slaves are so marked. When the Indians of certain provinces go to
the battle (especially the Caniball archers) they carry certain shelles of
great welkes of the sea, which they blow, and make therewith great sound, The
Canibals.
much like the noise of horns: they carry also certain Tymbrels, which they
use in the stead of Drums: also very fair plumes of feathers, and certain
armure of gold, Armure of gold.
especially great and round pieces on their breasts, and splintes on their
arms. Likewise other pieces, which they put on their heads and other parts
of their bodies: Their galantnesse in the Wars.
For they esteem nothing so much as to appear galant in the wars, and to
go in most comely order that they can deuyse, glysteryng with precious stones,
Jewels, gold, Their Iuelles.
and feathers. Of the least of these welkes or perewincles, they make certain
little beads, of diverse sorts and colors: they make also little bracelets,
which they myngle with gaudies of gold, these they roll about their arms
from the elbowe to the wrest of the hand. The like also do they on their
legs from the knee to the soles of their feet, in token of nobility,
especially their noble women in diverse provinces are accustomed to wear such
Iewelles, and have their necks in manner laden therewith: these beads and
Iewelles, and such other trynkets, they call Caquiras. Beside these also, they
wear certain rings of gold at their ears and nostrelles, which they bore
full of holes on both sides, so that the rings hang upon their lyppes. Some
of these Indians are poulde and rounded: albeit commonly both the men and women
take it for a decent thing to wear long hear, which the women wear to the
myddest of their shoulders, and cut it equally, especially above their brows:
this do they with certain hard stones, which they keep for the same
purpose. The pryncipall women, when their teates fall, How the women bear up
their teates, with bars of gold.
or become loose, bear them up with bars of gold, of the length of a spanne
and a half, well wrought, and of such byggenesse that some of them weygh more
then two hundred Castelans or Ducades of gold: these bars have holes at
both the ends, whereat they tie two small cords made of cotton at every end
of the bars: One of these cords goes over the shoulder, and the other under
the arm holes, where they tie both together, so that by this means the bar
bears up their teates. Some of these chief women go to the battle with
their husbands, or when they them selves are regentes in any provinces, in the
which they have all things at commandment, and execute the office of
general captains, and cause them selves to be carried on men's backs, in like
manner as do the Caciques of whom I have spoken before. These Indians of the
firm land are much of the same stature and color as are they of the Islands:
The stature and color of the Indians.

The Indians called Coronati.


they are for the most part of the color of an olyue, if there be any other
difference, it is more in bigness then otherwise, and especially they that are
called Coronati, are stronger and bygger then any other that I have seen in
these parties, The Island of Giantes.
except those of the Island of Giantes, which are on the South side of the
Island of Hispaniola, near unto the coasts of the firm land, and likewise
certain other which they call Iucatos, which are on the North side. All which
chiefly, although they be no Giantes, Iucatos.
yet are they doubtless the byggest of the Indians that are known to this
day, and commonly bygger then the Flemynges: and especially many of them,
as well women as men, are of very high stature, and are all archers both men and
women. These Coronati inhabit thyrtie leagues in length by these coasts, from
the point of Canoa to the great river which they call Guadalchiber, near unto
Sancta Maria de gratia. As I trauersed by those coasts, I filled a butte of
fresh water of that river, six leagues in the sea from the mouth thereof
where it falls into the sea. They are called Coronati (that is crowned)
because their hear is cut round by their ears, and poulde lower a great
compase about the crown, much like the friars of saint Augustines order. And
because I have spoken of their manner of wearyng their hear, here comes to
my remembrance a thing which I have oftentimes noted in these Indians: and
this is, that they have the bones of the sculles of their heads four times
thycker, The sculles of the Indians heads.
and much stronger then ours, so that in coming to handstrokes with them, it
shall be requisite not to strike them on the heads with swoords, for so have many
swoordes been broken on their heads, with little hurt done. And to have said
thus much of their customs and manners, it shall suffice for this time, because
I have more largly entreated hereof in my general history of the Indies: Yet
have I neither there nor here spoken much of that part of the firm land
which is called Noua Hispania (that is, new Spain, New Spain.
whereof the Island of Iucatana is part) forasmuch as Ferdinando Cortesie has
written a large book thereof. Of the houses of these Indies, I have spoken
sufficiently else where: Yet have I thought good to infourme your majesty of ye
building and houses which the Christians have made in diverse places in the
firm land. The houses of the Christians in India.
They build them now therefore with two solars or loftes, and with loopes and
wyndowes to open and shut: also with strong timber, and very fair boordes,
in such sort, that any noble man may well and pleasauntly be lodged in some
of them. And among other, I my self caused one to be builded in the city of
Sancta Maria Antiqua in Dariena, Dariena.
which cost me more then a thousand and five hundred Castelans, being of such
sort that I may well entertayne and commodiously lodge any Lord or noble man,
reserving also part for my self and my famylie: for in this may many
householdes be kept, both above and beneath. It has also a fair garden, with
many Orange trees, both sweet and sour: Cedars also, and Limons, of the which
there is now great plenty in the houses of the Christians. Gardens.
On one side of the garden, there runs a fair river. The situation is very
pleasant, with a good and wholesome air, and a fair prospecte about the river.
In fine, our trust is that in few years al things in these regions shall
grow to a better state, according to the holy intention of your majesty.

Of the chief Islands Hispaniola and Cuba.
THe Indians which at this present inhabit the Island of Hispaniola, are but
few in number, and the Christians not so many as they ought to be, forasmuch
as many of them that were in this Island, are gone to other Islands, and to the
fyrme land. For being for the most part young men unmarried, Men are desirous
of new things.
and desirous daily to see new things, wherein man's nature deliteth, they were
not willing to continue long in one place, especially seeing daily other new
lands discovered, where they thought they might sooner fill their purses, by
being present at the first spoil: Wherein nevertheless their hope deceived
many of them, and especially such as had houses and habitations in this Island:
For I certainly believe, confyrming my self herein with the judgment of many
other, The commodities of Hispaniola, England, and Sicilie.
that if any one Prince had no more seignories then only this Island, it
should in short time be such, as not to give place either to Sicilie or
England, whereas even at this present there is nothing wherefore it should
malice their prosperity, not being inferior to them in any felicity, that in
manner the heavens can grant to any land: being furthermore such as may
inryche many provinces and kingdoms, by reason of many rich gold mines that
are in it, of the best gold that is found to this day in the world, Gold
mines.
and in greatest quantity. In this Island, nature of her self brings forth
such abundance of cotton, Cotton.
that if it were wrought and mayntayned, there should be more and better then
in any part of the world. There is so great plenty of excellent Cassia, that a
great quantity is brought from thence into Spain, Cassia.
from whence it is carried to diverse parts of the world. It increases so
much, that it is a marvelous thing to consider. In this are many rich
shoppes where Sugar is wrought, and that of such perfectness and goodness,
and in such quantity, Sugar.
that shyps come laden therewith yearly into Spain. All such seeds, settes,
or plants, Plants and herbs.
as are brought out of Spain and planted in this Island, become much better,
bygger, and of greater increase then they are in any part of our Europe. And if
it chance otherwise that sometimes they prosper not so well, the cause is that
they which should till and husband the ground, and sow and plant in due
seasons, have no respect heereunto, being impatient while the wheat and vines
wax ripe, being given to wanderyng and other affairs of present gaynes (as I
have said) as searchyng the gold mines, fyshyng for pearls, Great things
hyndred by respect of present gaynes.
and occupying marchaundies, with such other trades, for the greedy following
whereof, they neglect and contempne both sowyng and plantyng. Such fruits as
are brought out of Spain, into this Island, prosper marvelously, and wax ripe
all times of the year, as herbs of al sorts very good and pleasant to be
eaten. Also many Pomgranates of the best kind, Oranges. Pomegranats.
and Oranges both sweet and sour: Likewise many fair Limons and Cedars, and
a great quantity of all such as are of sharp, sour, and bitter taste. There
are also many Fygge trees, Fygges all the year. Dates.
which bring forth their fruit all the whole year. Likewise those kind of
Date trees that bear Dates, and diverse other trees and plants, which were
brought out of Spain thither. Beasts do also increase in like abundaunce,
Beasts.
and especially the heardes of Ryne are so augmented both in quantity and
number, that there are now many patrons of cattaile that have more then two
thousand heads of Neat, and some three or four thousand, Great heardes of
cattayle.
and some more. Beside these, there are very many that have heardes of four or
five hundred. And truth it is, that this Island has better pasture for such
cattayle then any other country in the world: also wholesome and clear water,
and temperate air, Good pasture.
by reason whereof the heardes of such beasts are much bygger, fatter, and
also of better taste then ours in Spain, The effect of continual and moderate
heat.
because of the rank pasture, whose moisture is better digested in the herb
or grass by the continual and temperate heat of the Son, whereby being made
more fat and unctuous, it is of better and more steadfast nouryshment. For
contynuall and temperate heat, does not only draw much moisture out of the
earth, The cause of fat nouryshment.
to the nouryshment of such things as grow and are engendered in that clime,
but does also by moderation preserve the same from resolution and putrefaction,
digesting also and condensatyng or thycknyng the said moist nouryshment into a
gummie and unctuous substance, Beasts of long life in regions about the
Equinoctial line. Trees whose leaves do not wyther.
as is seen in all such things as grow in those regions: and this is the
only natural cause as well that certain great beasts and of long life (as the
Elephant and Rhinoceros, with such other) are engendered only in the regions
near unto the Equinoctial, as also that the leaves of such trees as grow
there, do not wyther or fall, until they be thrust out by other, according to
the verse of the poet which says, Et nata pira piris, et ficus in ficubus
extant, this is in effect, Pears growing upon Pears, and Fygges upon Fygges.
Pliny also writes, that such trees are never infected with the disease of
trees that the Latins call Caries, which we may call the worm or canker, The
canker of the tree.
being but a certain putrefaction, by reason of a watrishe nouryshment not
well consolidate. The same thing has been the cause that certain
Philosophers, considering as well that man is the hottest and moystest beast
that is (which is the best complexion) as also that men live longest in
certain parts of India near the Equinoctial (where yet to this day some
live to the age of an hundred and fyftie years) were of opinion that if
mankind had any beginning on the earth, Long lived men in India.
that place ought by good reason to be under or not far from ye Equinoctial
line, for the causes aforesaid. Some of the Divines also upon like
consideration, Paradise near the Equinoctial line.
have thought it agreeable that their Paradise should be about the same, within
ye precinct of those rivers which are named in the book of Genesis. But to let
pass these things, and to return to the history. Sheep and Hogs.
In this Island furthermore are many Sheep, and a great number of Hogs, of
the which (as also of the Ryne) many are become wild, and likewise many
Dogs and Cattes, Dogs and Cattes become wild.
of those which were brought out of Spain: These (and especially the Dogs)
do much hurt among the cattayle, by reason of the negligence of the heardmen.

There are also many Horses, Mares, and Mules, and such other beasts as serve
the use of men in Spain, and are much greater then they of the first brood
brought thither out of Spain. Some places of the Island are inhabited, The
situation of Hispaniola.
although not so many as were requisite: Of the which I will say no more, but
that all the regions of the Island are so well situate, that in the course of
time all things shall come to greater perfection, by reason of the rychnesse
and pleasantness of the country, and fertility of the soil. But now to
speak somewhat of the principal and chief place of the Island, which is the
city of San Domenico: I say, that as touching the buildinges, there is no
city in Spain, so much for so much (no not Barsalona, which I have oftentimes
seen) that is to be preferred before this, The citi of San Domenico.
generally: For the houses of San Domenico, are for the most part of stone, as
are they of Barsalona, or of so strong and well wrought earth, that it makes a
singular and strong bynding. The situation is much better then that of
Barsalona, by reason that the streates are much larger and plainer, and
(without comparison) more direct and straight forth: For being builded now
in our time, beside the commodity of the place of the fundation, the streets
were also directed with cord, compase, and measure, wherein it excels all the
cities that I have seen. It has the sea so near, that of one side there is
no more space between the sea and the city then the walls, and this is about
fifty pases, where it is furthest of. On this side, the waters of the sea
beat upon the natural stones and fair coast: On the other part, hard by the
side and at the foot of the houses, passes the river Ozama, which is a
marvelous port, The river Ozama.
wherein laden ships rise very near to the land, and in manner under the house
windows, and no further from the mouth of the river where it enters into ye
sea, then is from the foot of the hill of Monyuia, to the monastery of saint
Fraunces, or to the lodge of Barsalona. In the myddest of this space in the
city, is the fortress and castle, under the which, and twenty pases distant
from the same, pass the ships to arise somewhat further in the same river.
From the entrance of the ships until they cast anchor, they sail no further
from the houses of the city then thyrtie or forty pases, because of this
side of the city the habitation is nere to the river. The Haven.
The port or haven also is so fair and commodious to defraight or unlade
ships, as the like is found but in few places of the world. The chymneis
that are in this city, are about six hundred in number, and such houses as I
have spoken of before: Of the which some are so fair and large, that they may
well receive and lodge any lord or noble man of Spain with his train and
family, and especially that which Don Diego Colon, viceroy under your
majesty, has in this city, is such that I know no man in Spain that has
the like by a quarter in goodness, consydering all the commodities of the
same. Likewise the situation thereof, as being above the said port, and
altogether of stone, and having many fair and large rooms, with as goodly a
prospect of the land and sea as may be devised, seems unto me so magnificall
and princelyke, that your majesty may be as well lodged therein, as in any of
the most exquisite builded houses of Spain. There is also a Cathedral church
builded of late, where as well ye Bishop according to his dignity, A cathadrall
church and monasteris in Hispaniola.
as also the Canons are well endewed. This church is well builded of stone and
lime, and of good woorkmanshyp. There are furthermore three monasteries,
bearyng the name of saint Dominike, saint Fraunces, and saint Marie of
Mercedes, the which are all well builded, although not so curiously as they of
Spain. But speaking without prejudice of any other religious monastery, your
majesty may be well assured, that in these three monasteries god is as well
served, as in any other religious house, with men of holy living and virtuous
example. There is also a very good hospital for the aid and succor of poor
people, An Hospital
which was found by Michael Passamont, treasurer to your majesty. To
conclude, this city from day to day increases in wealth and good order, as well
for that the said Admiral and viceroy, with the lord Chauncelour and
counsel appointed there by your majesty, have their continual abydyng
here, as also that the rychest men of the Island resort hither for their most
commodious habitation, and trade of such marchaundies as are either brought
out of Spain, or sent thither from this Island, which now so abounds in
many things, that it serves Spain with many commodities, as it were with
usury requityng such benefytes as it first received from thence. The people of
this Island are commonly of somewhat less stature then are the Spaniardes, and
of a shynyng or clear brown color: they have wives of their own, and
absteyne from their daughters, systers, and mothers: they have large
foreheades, long black hear, and no beardes or hear in any other parts of
their bodies, as well men as women, The people.
except very few, as perhaps scarsly one among a thousand. They go as naked
as they were borne, except that on the parts which may not with honesty be
seen, they wear a certain leaf as broad as a man's hand, which
nevertheless is not kept close with such diligence, but that sometimes a man
may see that they think sufficiently hyd. In this Island are certain
Glowormes, that shine in the night as do ours, but are much bygger, Glowormes.
and give a greater light: Insomuch that when the men of the Island goo any
journeys in the night, they bear some of these worms made fast about their
feet and head, in such sort that he that should see them a far, and ignorant
of the thing, would be greatly astonished thereat. By the light of these also,
the women work in their houses in the night. These worms they call Cieuas.
Their light lasts for the space of three days, and diminishes as they begin
to dry up. There is also a kind of Crows, whose breath stynketh in the
morning, and is sweet in the after noone: Crows stinkyng and sweet.
the excrement which they avoid, is a living worm. As touching other things
of this Island, whereof Peter Martyr has more largely entreated in his Decades,
I have thought it superfluous to repeat the same again out of this history
of Gonzalus Ferdinandus, but have here g^athered only such things as either
are not touched of Peter Martyr, or not so largely declared, as I have done the
like in all other notable things, which I have collected out of this Summarie
of Gonzalus.

Of the Island of Cuba, and other.
OF the Island of Cuba, and other, Saint John his Island*
as the Islands of Sancti Iohannis, and Iamaica, the same way be said in manner
in all things as before of Hispaniola, Iamaica.
although not so largely. Yet in less quantity do they bring forth the like
things, as gold, copper, cattayle, trees, plants, fyshes, and such other,
of the which we have spoken there.

In Cuba, is a certain kind of Partriches, being very little, with their
feathers much of the color of Turtle Dooues, Partriches.
but are of much better taste to be eaten: they are taken in great number, and
being brought wild into the houses, they become as tame within the space of
three or four days as though they had been hatched there: they become
exceedyng fat in short space, and are doubtless the most delicate and
pleasant meat that ever I have eaten. But to let pass many other things
that might be here said, and to speak of two marvelous things which are in
this Island of Cuba: whereof the on is, that a valleye conteynyng two or three
leagues in length between two mountains, is full of a kind of very hard
stones, Pellettes for Gunnes wrought by nature.
of such perfect roundenesse, and like unto Pellettes of Gunnes, that no art
can make better or more exactly pullished. Of these, some are as small as
Pellettes for Handgunnes, and other so encreasyng bygger and bygger from that
quantity, that they may serve for all sorts of Artyllarie, although they be
of byggenesse to receive one or two or more Quintales of powder, every Quyntale
conteynyng one hundred weight, or of what other quantity so ever they be.
These Pellettes are found throughout all the valley within the earth, as in a
mine, which they dygge, and take out such as they need of al sorts. The
other marvelous thing of this Island is this: That far from the sea, A
fountain of the pytche of Bitumen
there ishueth out of a mountain a certain lycour, much like the Cley of
Babylon, called Bitumen, or like unto pytche, in great quantity, and such as
is very commodious for the calkyng of ships: this falls continually from
the rock, and runs into sea, in such abundance that it is seen flotyng
above the water on every side of the sea there about, as it is driven from
place to place by the wind or course of the water. Quintus Cursius.
Quintus Cursius writes in his history, that great Alexander came to the
city of Memi, where is a great Cave or Den, in the which is a spryng or
fountain that contynually auoydeth a great quantity of Bitumen, in such
sort, that it is an easy thing to believe that the stones of the walls of
Babylon might be laid therewith, Bitumen of Babylon.
according as the said auctour writes. I have seen this mine of Bitumen, not
only in the Island of Cuba, but also such an other in new Spain, which was
found of late in the province of Panuco, where it is much better then the
other of Cuba, Panuco.
as I have seen by experience in calkyng of ships.

Of the land of Baccalaos, called Terra Baccalearum, situate on the North side
of the firm land.
SHortly after that your majesty came to the city of Toledo, there arrived in
the month of November, Steven Gomes the pilot, who the year before of.1524.
by the commandment of your majesty, sailed to ye North parts, and found a
great part of land continuate from that which is called Baccalaos, Baccalaos.
discoursyng toward the West to the.xl. and.xli. degree, from whence he brought
certain Indians (for so call we all the nations of the new found lands) of
the which he brought some with him from thence, who are yet in Toledo at this
present, Indians.
and of greater stature then other of the firm land, as they are commonly:
their color is much like the other of the firm land: they are great
archers, and go covered with the skins of diverse beasts, both wild and
tame. In this land are many excellent furs, as Marterns, Sables, and such
other rich furs, Rich furs and silver,
of the which the said pilot brought some with him into Spain: they have
silver, and copper, and certain other metals: they are Idolaters, and honor
the Son and Moon, Idolaters.
and are seduced with such superstition and errors as are they of the firm.
And to have written thus much it may suffice, of such things as have seemed to
me most worthy to be noted in the Summarie of Gonzalus Ferdinandus, written to
Themperours majesty.

Particularly of new Spain, called Noua Hispania, or Mexico.
New Spain, is that part of the continent or firm land that lies West and
South from the land of Florida: this was subdued to thempire of Castile by the
right noble gentelman Ferdinando Cortese ye marquess of the vale of Quaraca.
In this land are many provinces, conteynyng in them in manner innumerable
cities, among which, that is the chief which the Indians call Mexico, or
Temixtitan, consystyng of more then five hundred thousand inhabitauntes: The
city of Mexico, or Temixtitan.
It stands in the midst of a lake of salt water, as does Uenece in the
sea, the lake conteyneth forty Persian miles, called Parasange, every one
consysting of.xxx. furlonges, and more, as some say. In these regions is found
great plenty of gold, Gold and silver.
silver, and precious stones, with innumerable other things, both necessary
for the life of man, and pleasant, as Silk, Bombasine cotton, Alame, Safferne,
Woad, Sylke. Cotton. Alame. Woade. Sugar.
with diverse other things, wherewith cloth and Silk is dyed. There is also
such abundaunce of sugar, that certain Spanishe ships are yearly fraighted
therewith, and bring the same into Smile, from whence it is carried in manner to
al parts of Christendom. Thinhabitantes of Mexico are subtle people, and use
much craft in their bargaining: they have not the use of gold and silver money,
but use in the stead thereof the half shelles of Almonds, Shelles for money.
which kind of Barbarous money they call Cacoa, or Cacanguate. In manner al kinds
of corn are there very good cheap, especially barley and wheat. They have
great plenty of Hearts, wild Bores, Corn. Beasts.
Lions, Leopardes, and Tigers, which beasts wander in manner in every place.
The region is most commodious for haukyng and huntyng, for the great abundaunce
it has of beasts and fowls: Haukyng and huntyng.
But the people exercise al their cunnyng in making the images of their
idolatry, and in painting. Their women are valiant, Payntyng.
and sumptuous in their apparel, and other tyrementes: Women sumptuously
appareled.
for they so rychely frynge and beset the same with pearls, precious stones,
and gold, that nothing can be more excellent: they have a kind of paper
greatly differyng from ours, in this they express their minds by certain
figures, for they have not otherwise thuse of letters. The nation is desirous
of war, and does not long keep the conditions of peace unviolated: A warlyke
nation.
but delyteth rather in civil and most cruel battle among them selves, then
to live in peace and quietness. Such as in the wars fall by any means into
the hands of their enemies, either by submission or otherwise, are partly
sacryfised to the Idols, and the resydue given to the soldiers to be eaten,
in like manner as we reward dogs and hawks with part of their pray. Captives
sacrificed to Idols.
They have innumerable Idols, which every one makes for his particular god,
after the fantasy of his own brain, and gives thereto divine honor, albeit
at this day they do by little and little leave of their barbarous fyercenesse,
and with our religion embrace better manners: For they now profess the faith
of Christ, and in his name pray unto God the Father.

Of Peru.
THe province called Peru, was also named Noua Castilia, by them that first
found it. This region is the West part of America, and is situate in the
longitude of.290. degrees, proceeding from the West to the East, and Southward
begins five degrees beyond the Equinoctial line, and is extended very
far into the South. This is taken to be the rychest land in gold, silver,
pearls, precious stones, and spices, Peru is the rychest land that is known.
that ever was found yet to this day. For gold is there in such plenty that
they make pyspots thereof, and other vessels applied to fylthy uses. But this is
more to be marueyled at, that in a city called Coll^o was found a house al
covered with massy plates of gold. In their wars also their harness is of
gold and silver. A house covered with gold.
Their weapons are bows, arrows, slyngs, darts, and pykes. Harness of gold.
The inhabitauntes are warrelyke people, and of great agilitie. They have
cities defended with laws and arms. The region is exceeding fruitful, and
yeldeth corn twyse in the year. It is so floryshyng with many fair woods,
mountains, ryuers, A fruitful region.
and other both pleasant and necessary commodities, that it seems in a
manner an earthly Paradise: it has diverse kynds of beasts, and yet none
hurtful, or of rauenyng kind. Their sheep are of such heyght, that they use
them in steed of Horses: Great sheep.
some write that they are as bygge as the young Foles of Camelles, and that
their wool is very soft and fine: also that the Ewes bring forth Lambs
twyse a year. The people are wyttie, and of gentle behavior, cunnyng also in
arts, The duty of Christian Princes.
faithful of promise, and of manners not greatly to be discommended, save only
that they are ignorant of Christ, who nevertheless is now known unto them in
many places, as our hope is he shall be daily more and more, if all Princes will
herein put their helpyng hands to the plowe of our Lord, and send laborers
into his vineyarde.

Of the great river called Rio de la Plata (that is) the river of silver.
THis river reaches very far in length and breadth, and is called Vruai, in
the Indian tongue. Paraue.
Into this falls an other river named Paraue. The first that sailed into the
river of Plata, was John Dias Solis, whom the right noble king of Spain
Ferdinandus made Admiral of these seas. John Dias Solis. The Island Martinus
Gratias.
In the river lies an Island which John Dias named Martinus Gratias, because
a pilot of his, so called, was buried there. This Island is situate in the
myddest of the river, and is distant from the mouth of the same about forty
leagues. As the said Admyrall attempted to expugne the Island, he was suddenly
oppressed and slain of the Indians that priuylye assailed him. Wherewith
nevertheless their barbarous cruelty was not satisfied until they had torn
him in pieces, and devoured him: But many years after, the Emperors Majesty,
and King of Spain Charles the fyfte, sent forth Sebastian Cabot (a man of
great courage and skillful in Cosmographie, The viage of Sebastian Cabot to the
river of Plata. Charlis. Ophir. Cipango. Cathay.
and of no less experience as concerning the Stars of the sea) with
commandment to discover and subdue the Indians of Tharsis, Ophir, Cipango,
and Coi Cathai, Receyuyng therefore his commission, and proceedyng forwards on
his viage, he arrived by chance at this Island: the cause whereof was, that
the principal vessel was lost by shypwracke, and the men that saved their
lives by swimming were received into our ships. Perceyuyng therefore that by
reason of this chance he could by no means perform his viage attempted, he
intended to expugne the said Island, and thereupon to conueygh his victuals to
land, to prepare his soldiers to the invasion, to plant colonies, and to erect
fortresses by the rivers side, whereby the Spaniards might be defended from the
violence of the Barbarians. But before he attempted this, he was advertised
that the Island was rich in gold and silver. Which thing did so encorage him,
that without respect of peril he thought best to expugne it by one means or
other, wherein his boldness took good effect, as often times chances in
great affairs. Furthermore as touching the river, Sebastian Cabote made
relation, that he never saw any comparable unto this in breadth and deapth:
For whereas it falls into the sea, The river of Plata.
it conteyneth.xxv. leagues in breadth. From the mouth of the river, Cabote
sailed up the same into the land for the space of three hundred and fifty
leagues, as he writes in his own card. That it is of great deapth, may
hereby be considered, that many great ryuers fall into it, so that the channel
can not be shalowe that conteyneth such abundance of water, and such plenty
of good and great fyshes: For there is in manner no fyshe in the sea, that is
not found in this river. As Soon as the Spanyardes were set alande, they made
a proof if the soil were fruitful to bear corn. Marvelous fruitefulnes.
Taking therefore fyftie graynes of wheat, and committyng the same to the
earth in the month of September, they geathered thereof two thousand and
fifty at December next following: (wherein some being deceived and mistakyng the
thing, have written in the stead of two thousand and fifty, fifty thousand
and two: Mountains conteynyng gold and silver.
) the like fertility is there of all other grain and pulse. Furthermore
thinhabitauntes declared, that not far from that place, there are great and
high mountains, in the which is found great plenty of gold: and no great
distance from the same, to be other mountains no less fruitful of silver,
and many other things, long to rehearse. Thinhabitauntes are paynefull men,
and till the ground diligently, wherein they take great pleasure, and have
therefore great plenty of bread of Maizium. There are sheep of such
byggenesse, that they compare them to young Camels or Asses, as some say: their
wool is very fine, Great sheep.
and nearest unto the fynenesse of sylke. There are also beasts of diverse
kinds. Among men there is this difference, that such as live in the
mountains, are white, and for the most part like unto the men of our regions:
but they that dwell above the river (as though they took their color thereof)
are blackyshe, or purple, Their color.
of the color of fine Iron or Steel. This also chances to many of them,
Men with deformed legs.
that their feet and legs are like the legs and feet of the foul called
the Oystreche.

Of the lands of Laborador and Baccalaos, lying west and northwest from
England, and being part of the firm land of the West Indies.
MAny have traueyled to search the coaste of the land of Laborador, as well to
the intent to know how far or whyther it reaches, as also whether there be
any passage by sea through the same into the sea of Sur and the Islands of
Molucca, which are under the Equinoctial line, The way to the Islands of
Molucca by the north sea.
thynkyng that the way thither should greatly be shortened by this viage. The
Spanyardes, as to whose right the said Islands of spices parteyne, did first
seek to find the same by this way. The Portugales also having the trade of
spices in their hands, The Spanyardes.
did travail to find the same, although hitherto neither any such passage is
found, or the end of that land. In the year a thousand and five hundredth,
Gasper Cortesreales, made a viage thither with two Carauelles, Gasper
Cortesreales.
but found not the straight or passage he sought. At his being there, he named
the Islands that lie in the mouth of ye gulf Quadrado, after his name
Cortesreales, lying in the fyftie degree, and more, and brought from that land
about threescore men for slaves: Insula Cortesreales.
He greatly marueyled to behold the huge quantity of snow and Ise, for the
sea is there frosen exceedingly. Thinhabitantes are men of good corporature,
Snow and Ise.
although tawny like the Indies, and laborious: They paynt their bodies, and
wear braselettes and hoopes of silver and copper: their apparel is made of
the skynnes of Marternes, and diverse other beasts, which they wear with the
hear inward in winter, Furs.
and outward in summer. This apparel they gyrde to their bodies with gyrdels
made of cotton, or the fynewes of fyshes and beasts. They eat fyshe more then
any other thing, and especially Salmons, Fyshe.
although they have fowls and fruit. They make their houses of timber,
whereof they have great plenty: and in the stead of tiles, cover them with
the skins of fishes and beasts. It is said also that there are Gryfes in
this land, and that the Bears and many other beasts and fowls are white.
Gryfes. Bears.
To this and the Islands about the same, the Britons are accustomed to resort,
as men of nature agreeable unto them, The Britons.
and borne under the same altitude and temperature. The Norwayes also sailed
thither with the pilot called John Scoluo, Sebebastian Cabot.
and the English men with Sebastian Cabot.

The coaste of the land of Baccallaos, is a great tract, and the greatest
altitude thereof is.xlviii. degrees and a half. Sebastian Cabot was the first
that brought any knowledge of this land. The land of Baccallaos.
For being in England in the days of king Henrye the seventh, he furnyshed two
shyps at his own charges, The viage of Cabot in the days of king Henry the
seventh.
or (as some say) at the kings, whom he persuaded that a passage might be
found to Cathay by the North seas, and that spyces might be brought from
thence sooner by that way then by the viage the Portugales use by the sea of
Sur. He went also to know what manner of lands those Indies were to inhabit.
He had with him three hundred men, and directed his course by the tract of
Islande, upon the Cape of Laborador at fyftie and eight degrees, affirming that
in the month of July there was such cold, and heaps of Ise, Ise in July.
that he durst pass no further: also that the days were very long, and in
manner without night, and the nyghtes very clear. Certain it is, that at the
threescore degrees, the longest day is of eighteen hours. But considering the
cold, and the strangeness of the unknown land, he turned his course from
thence to the West, following the coast of the land of Baccallaos unto the
thirty and eight degrees, from whence he returned to England. Baccallaos.
To conclude, the Britons and Danes, have sailed to the Baccallaos, and Jacques
Cartier a french man was there twice with three Galeons: Brytons. Danes. Jacques
Cartyre.
as one in the year.xxxiiii. and the other in the.xxxv. and chose the land to
inhabit from the.xlv. degrees to the.li. being as good a land as France, and
all things therein commune to such as first possess the same. Of these
lands, Iacobus Gastaldus writes thus. The new land of Baccallaos, is a cold
region, The people of Baccallaos.
whose inhabitauntes are Idolatours, and pray to the Son and Moon, and
diverse Idols: they are white people, and very rusticall, for they eat flesh
and fyshe and all other things raw. Sometimes also they eat man's flesh
privily, so that their Cacique have no knoweledge thereof. The apparel of
both the men and women, is made of Bears skynnes, although they have Sables
and Marternes, not greatly esteemed, because they are little. Some of them go
naked in summer, and wear apparel only in winter. The Britons and Frenchmen
are accustomed to take fyshe in the coasts of these lands, where is found
great plenty of Tunnies, which thinhabitantes call Baccallaos, Fyshing for
Tunnies. Laborador,
whereof the land was so named. Northward from the region of Baccallaos, is the
land of Laborador, all full of mountains and great woods, in which are many
Bears and wild Bores. The inhabitants are Idolatours, and warlyke people,
apparelled as are they of Baccallaos. In all this new land, is neither city or
castle, but they live in companies like heardes of beasts.

The discovering of the land of Florida.
THe governor of the Island of Boriouena* John Ponce of Leon, John Ponce.
Water of great virtue, of this read in the Decades.
being discharged of his office, and very rich, furnished and sent forth two
Carauels to seek the Islands of Boiuca, in the which the Indians affirmed to be
a fountain or spryng whose water is of virtue to make old men young. While he
trauayled six months, with outrageous desire among many Islands to find
that he sought, and could find no token of any such fountain, Bemini,
he entered into Bemini, and discovered the land of Florida, in the year 1512.
on Easter day, which the Spaniards call the floryshing day of Pascba, whereby
they named that land Florida. And supposyng that great riches might be brought
from thence, he returned into Spain, and couenanted with king Ferdinando, as
touching the trade: and by the intercession of Nicolas de Ouando, and Peter
Nunnez de Gusman, the king did not only make him governor of Bemini and
Florida, but also sent forth with him three ships from Sciuile toward his
second viage, in the year 1515. He touched in the Island of Guaccana,
otherwise called Guadalupea, and sent to land certain of his men with the
Laundresses of the ships: Guaccana.
whom the Canibales (lying in ambushe) assailed with their inuenomed arrows,
The Canibales.
and slaying the most part, carried away the women. With this evil beginning,
John Ponce departed from hence to Boriquen, Boriquen.
and from thence to Florida, where he went alande with his souldyers, to epsy
a place most commodious to inhabit and plant a colonie: But the Indians
coming forth against him to defend the entrance, assailed the Spanyardes
fiercely, and slew and wounded many of them. At which conflicte also he him
self, being wounded with an arrowe, dyed shortly after in the Island of Cuba:
and so endyng his life, consumed a great part of the richesse he had before
gotten at saint Iohans of Boriquen. This John Ponce had before sailed with
Christopher Colon to the Island of Hispaniola in the year 1493. The death of
John Ponce.
He was a gentle souldyer in the wars of this Island, and captain of the
province of Higuei for Nicolas de Ouando that conquested the same. The land of
Florida.
The region of Florida is a point or cape of land reachyng into the sea like
unto a tongue, being a famous and notorious place among the Indians, by reason
of many Spanyardes that have been slain there. But whereas by fame this
Florida was esteemed a rich land, many valiant and noble men desired the
conquest thereof, among whom Ferdinando de Soto (who had before been a captain
in Peru, Ferdinando de Soto.
and greatly inryched by the imprisonment of king Atabaliba) attempted a viage
thither with a good band of men, and spent five years in seeking of gold
mines, supposyng that this land had been like unto Peru. In fine, he dyed
there, and was the destruction and undoing of all that went with him, The
valiant minds of the Spanyardes.
without inhabytyng that land, in the which the conquestours had hitherto
never good success, forasmuch as these Indians are valiant archers, and
strong and hardy men. The third attempt of the conquest of Florida.
But the valiant minds of the Spanyardes not discouraged by these
misaduentures, after the death of Ferdinando Soto, many worthy gentlemen
desired this conquest in the year.1544. among whom was Julian Samano, and
Peter de Abumada, being brethren, and men of sufficient ability for such an
enterprise. But neither the Emperor being then in Germany, neither the prince
Don Philip his son, who governed all the kingdoms of Castile and Aragonie,
neither yet the counsel of the Indies, would in any case agree to the
conquest. Nevertheless, not utterly contemnyng the matter, Certain Friars
attempt the conquest only with words, but with evil success.
which they were partly persuaded might otherwise be brought to pass, they
sent thither Friar Luys, Cancel of Baluasiro, with other Friars of the order
of saint Dominike, who offered them selves to convert the nations of that land
from their gentilitie to the faith of Christ, and obedience to the Emperor,
only with words* The Friar therefore going forward on his viage at the
kings charges, in the year.1549. went aland with four other Friars which he
took with him, and certain maryners, without harness or weapons: unto whom
as he began his preaching, The Friars are slain and eaten.
many of the Indians of the said Florida resorted to the sea side, where
without gyuyng audience to his words, they carried him away, with three other
of his companyons, and did eat them, whereby they suffered martyrdom for the
faith of Christ: the residue that escaped, made have to the ship, and kept
them selves for confessors, as some say. Many that favor the intent of the
Friars, do now consider that by that means the Indians could not be brought
to our friendshyp and religion: nevertheless, that if it could so have been
brought to pass, it had been better. There came of late from that ship, one
that had been the page of Ferdinando de Soto, A new kind of disgradyng.
who declared that the Indians hanged up the skynnes, with the heads and
crowns of the said Friars in one of their Temples.

FOR.M. CAP. FVRBYSHERS PASSAGE BY THE NORTHVVEST.

OF CHINA IN CATHAYO, SITVATED IN THE EAST SIDE OF GREAT ASY.

OF THE ISLAND GIAPAN, AND OTHER LITTLE ISLES IN TTE EAST OCEAN, BY THE WAY FROM
CATHAYO TO THE MOLVCCAES.

BY RICHARD WILLS.

For.M. Captain Furbishers passage by the Northwest. To the right honorable
and virtuous Lady, the Lady Anne, Countess of VVarwyke.
Four famous ways there be spoken of to those fruitful and wealthy Islands,
we do usually call Moluccaes, continually haunted for gain, and daily
traueyled for riches therein growyng. These Islands although they stand East
from our Meridian, distant almost half the length of the world, in extreme
heat, under the Equinoctial line, possessed of Infidelles and Barbares: yet by
our neighbors great abundance of wealth there is paynefully sought, in
respect of the voyage dearly bought, and from thence daungerously brought home
unto us. Our neighbors I call the Portugalles in comparison of the Molucchians
for neerenesse unto us, for like situation westwarde as we have, for their
usual trade with us, for that the far South asterlynges do know this part
of Europe by no other name then Portugal, not greatly acquaynted as yet with
the other nations thereof. Their voyage is well understood of all men, 1. By
the southeast.
and the Southeasterne way round about Affrike by the cape of Good hope, more
spoken of, better known and traueyled than that it may seem needful to
discourse thereof any further.

The second way lies Southwest, betwyxt the West Indie or South America, 2.
By the southwest.
and the South continent, through that narrow streicte where Magellanus first
of all men that ever we do read of, passed these later years, leauyng
thereunto therefore his name. This way no doubt the Spanyardes would
commodio^sly take, for that it lies near unto their dominions there, could
the Eastern current and leuant wyndes as easily suffer them to return, as
speedily therewith they may be carried thither: for the which difficulty or
rather impossibility of striving against the force both of wind and stream,
this passage is little or nothing used, although it be very well known.

The third way by the Northeast, beyond all Europe and Asie, 3. By the
northeast.
that worthy and renowned knight sir Hugh Willoughby sought to his peril,
enforced there to end his life for cold, congealed and frosen to death. And
truly this way consists rather in the imagination of Geographers, than
allowable either in reason, or approved by experience, as well it may appear by
the dangerous trending of the Scythish Cape set by Ortelius under the eight
degree North, Ortel. tab. Asiae. 3.
by the unlikely saylyng in that Northern sea always cladde with Yse and
Snow, or at the least continually pestred therewith, if happily it be at any
time dissolved: besides bays and shelfes, the water waxyng more shallow
toward the East, that we say nothing of the foul mystes and dark fogs in
the cold clime, of the little power of the Sun to clear the air, of the
uncomfortable nyghtes, so near the Pole, five months long.

A fourth way to go unto these aforesaid happy Islands Moluccae, Sir Humfrey
Gilberte, a learned and valiant Knight, 4. By the Northwest.
discourses of at large in his new passage to Cathayo, and was attempted the
last year by your Ho. servant. M Cap. Furbisher, presently taking upon him
with his company fully to discover the same, and is now, if I be not deceived,
ready for his voyage. The enterprise of it self being virtuous, the fact must
doubtless deserve high praise, and whansoeuer it shall be finished, the
fruits thereof can not be small: where virtue is guide, there is fame a
follower, and fortune a Companion. But the way is dangerous, the passage
doubtful, the voyage not thoroughly known, and therefore gaynesayde by many,
after this manner.

First, Ob. 1.
who can assure us of any passage rather by the Northwest, than by the
Northeast? do not both ways lie in equal distance from the North pole?
stand not the North capes of either continent under like elevation? Is not the
Ocean sea beyond America farther distant from our Meridian by.30. or.40.
degrees West, than the extreme points of Cathayo Eastward, if Ortelius
general Card of the world be true? In Theatro.
In the Northeast that noble Knight sir Hugh Willoughby perished for cold: and
can you than promise a passenger any better hap by the Northwest? who has gone
for trial sake, at any time, this way out of Europe to Cathayo?

If you seek the advise herein of such as make profession in Cosmographie,
Ptolome, the father of Geographie, Ob. 2.
and his eldest children, will answer by their Mappes with a negative,
concludyng most of the sea within the land, and making an end of the world
northward, near the.36. degree. The same opinion, when learning chiefly
flourished, was received in the Romans time, as by their Poets wrytynges it
may appear: Et te colet vltima Thule, said Virgile, being of opinion, that
Iseland was the extreme part of the world habitable toward the North. Joseph
Moletius an Italian, and Mercator a Germane, for knowledge men able to be
compared with the best Geographers of our time, the one in his half Spheres
of the whole world, the other in some of his great Globes, have continued the
West Indishe land, even to the North Pole, and consequently, cut of all
passage by sea that way.

The same Doctors, Mercator in other of his Globes and Mappes, Moletius in his
sea card, nevertheless doubting of so great continuance of the former
continent, have opened a goulph betwixt the West Indies and the extreme
northern land: but such a one, that either is not to be traueyled for the
causes in the first Objection alleged, or clean shut up from us in Europe by
Groenland: the South end whereof Moletius makes firm land with America, the
north part continent with Lapponlande and Norway.

Thyrdly, the greatest favorers of this voyage, can not deny but that if any
such passage be, Ob. 3.
it lies subject unto Yse and snow for the most part of the year, whereas it
stands in the edge of the frostie zone. Before the Sun has warmed the
air, and dissolved the Yse, each one well knows that there can be no
saylyng: the Yse once broken through the continual abode, the Sun makes a
certain season in those parts: how shall it be possible for so weak a
vessel as a ship is, to hold out amyd whole Islands, as it were, of Yse
continually beatyng on each side, and at the mouth of that goulphe, issuyng
down furiously from the North, safely to pass, when whole mountains of Yse
and Snow shall be tombled down upon her.

Ob. 4.
Well, grant the west Indies not to continue continent unto the Pole, grant
there be a passage betwyxt these two lands, let the goulph lie near us than
commonly in cards we find it set, namely, betwyxt the.61. and.64. degrees
north, as Gemma Frisius in his Mappes and Globes imagines it, and so left by
our countriman Sebastian Cabote, in his table, the which my good Lord your
father has at Cheynies, and so tried this last year by your Honors servant
as he reported, and his card and compass do witness. Let the way be void
of all difficulties, yet does it not follow that we have free passage to
Cathayo. For examples sake. You may trende all Norway, Finmarke, and
Lapponlande, and than bow Southwarde to saint Nicolas in Moscouia: you may
likewise in the Mediterranean sea fetch Constantinople, and the mouth of
Tanais: yet is there no passage by sea through Moscouia, into Pont Euxine, now
called Mare Maggiore. Again, in the aforesaid Mediterranean sea, we sail to
Alexandria in Egypt, the Barbares bring their pearl and spices from the
Moluccaes up the read sea and Arabian goulph to Sues, scarsely three days
journey from the aforesaid haven: yet have we no way by sea, from Alexandria
to the Moluccaes, for that Isthmos or little streicte of land betwyxt the two
seas. In like manner, although the northern passage be free at.61. degrees
latitude, and the West Ocean beyond America, usually called Mar del zur,
known to be open at.40. degrees elevation, for the Island Giapan, yea.300.
leagues northerly above Giapan: yet may there be land to hinder the through
passage that way by sea, as in the examples aforesaid it falls out, Asia and
America there being joined together in one continent. Ne can this opinion
seem altogether frivolous unto any one that diligently peruseth our
Cosmographers doings. Josephus Moletius is of that mind, not only in his
plain hemispheres of the world, but also in his sea card. The French
Geographers in like manner, be of the same opinion, as by their Map cut out
in form of a heart you may perceive: as though the West Indyes were part of
Asie. Which sentence well agrees with that old conclusion in the schools.
Quidquid praeter Africam et Europam est, Asia est. Whatsoever land does
neither appertain unto Afrike nor to Europe, is part of Asie.

5. Ob.
Furthermore it were to small purpose to make so long, so paynefull, so
doubtful a voyage by such a new found way, if in Cathayo you should neither
be suffered to land for silks and silver, nor able to fetch the Molucca
spices and pearl for piracye in those seas. Of a law denying all Aliens to
enter into China, and forbiddyng all the inhabiters under a great penalty to
let in any stranger into that countries, shall you read in the report of
Galeotto Perera there imprisoned with other Portugalles: as also in the
Giaponyshe letters, how for that cause the worthy traueyler Xauierus
bargayned with a Barbarian Merchant for a great sum of Pepper to be brought
into Cantan, a port in Cathayo. The great and dangerous piracie used in that
seas, no man can be ignorant of, that lists to read the Giaponishe and East
Indian history.

Ob. 6.
Finally, all this great labor would be lost, all these charges spent in
vain, if in the end our traueylers might not be able to return again, and
bring safely home into their own natyue country, that wealth and riches, they
in forreyne regions with adventure of goods, and danger of their lives, have
sought for. By the Northeast there is no way, the Southeast passage the
Portugalles do hold, as Lords of that seas. At the Southwest Magellanus
experience has partly taught us, and partly we are persuaded by reason, how
the Eastern current stryketh so furiously on that streicte, and falls with
such force into that narrow goulphe, that hardely any ship can return that
way, into our West Ocean, out of Mar del zur. The which, if it be true, as
truly it is, than may we say, that the aforesaid Eastern current or leuant
course of waters continually following after the heavenly motions, loses not
altogether his force, but is doubled rather by an other current from out the
Northeast, in the passage betwyxt America and the North land, whyther it is of
necessity carried: having none other way to maintain it self in circular
motion, and consequently the force and fury thereof to be no less in the
streict of Ania^, where it strikes South into Mar del zur, beyond America (if
any such streicte of sea there be) than in Magellane frete both streictes being
of like breadth: as in Belognine Zalterius table of new France, and in Don
Diego Hermano di Toledo his card for navigations in that region we do find
precisely set down.

Nevertheless to approve that there lies a way to Cathayo at the Northwest,
from out of Europe, we have experyence, namely of three brethren that went that
journey, as Gemma Frisius records, and left a name unto that streicte,
whereby now it is called Fretum trium Fratrum. We do read again of a
Portugal that passed this streicte, of whom. M. Furbisher speaks, that was
imprisoned therefore many years in Lesbona, to veryfie the old Spanyshe
proverb, I suffer for doing well. Likewise An. Vrdaneta a friar of Mexico came
out of Mar del zur this way into Germany: his Card, for he was a great
discouerer, made by his own experience and travail in that voyage, has been
seen by gentelmen of good credit.

Now if the observation and remembrance of things breeds experience, and of
experience proceeds art, and the certain knowledge we have in all faculties,
as ye best Philosophers that ever were do affirm: Cic. i. de orat. Arist. pri.
Metaph.
truly the voyage of these aforesaid trauaillers that have gone out of Europe
into Mar del zur, and returned thence at the Northwest, do most evidently
conclude that way to be nauigable, and that passage free. So much the more we
are so to think, for that the first principle and chief ground in all
Geographie, as great Ptolome says, is the history of travel, that is, Lib. i.
Geog. Cap. 2.
reports made by trauaylers skylfull in Geometry and Astronomy, of al such
things in their journey as to Geographie do belong. It only then remains,
that we now answer to those arguments that seemed to make against this
former conclusion.

The first objection is of no force, that general table of the world set
forth by Ortelius or Mercator, for it greatly skilleth not, being vnskylfully
drawn for that point: Sol. i.
as manifestly it may appear unto any one that conferreth the same wi^h Gemma
Frisius universal map, with his round quartered card* with his globe, with
Sobastian Cabota his table, and Ortelius general Map alone, worthily
preferred in this case before all Mercator and Ortelius other doings: for that
Cabota was not only a skilful sea man, but a long trauailer, and such a one as
entered personally that streicte, sent by king Henry the seventh to make this
aforesaid discovery, as in his own discourse of navigations you may read in
his card drawn with his own hand, the mouth of the northwesterne streict
lies near the.318. Meridian, betwixt.61. and.64. degrees in elevation,
continuyng the same breadth about.10 degrees west, where it opens southerly
more and more, until it come under the tropike of Cancer, and so runs into
Mar del zur, at the least.18. degrees more in breadth there, then it was where
it first began: otherwise I could as well imagine this passage to be more
unlikely then the voyage to Moscouia, and more impossible then it for the far
situation and continuance thereof in ye frosty clime: as now I can affirm it
to be very possible and most lykely in comparison thereof, for that it nether
coasteth so far north as the Moscouian passage does, nether is this streicte
so long as that, before it bow down southerly toward the Son again. The
second argument concludes nothing. Sol. 2.
Ptoleme knew not what was above.16. degrees south beyond the equinoctial
line, he was ignorant of all passages northwarde from the elevation of.63. he
knew no Ocean sea beyond Asia, yet have the Portugalles trended ye Cape of
good hope at the south point of Afrike, and trauayled to Giapan an Island in
the east Ocean, betwixt Asia and America: our merchants in ye time of king
Edward the syxt discovered the Moscouian passage farther north then Thule, and
showed Groenlande not to be continent with Lapponlande, and Norway: the like
our northwesterne trauaylers have done, declaryng, by their navigations that
way, the ignorance of all Cosmographers that either do join Groenlande with
America, or continue the west Indies with that frosty region under the north
pole. As for Virgil he sange accordingly to ye knowledge of men in his time, as
an other Poet did of the hot Zone.

Quarum quae media est, non est habitabilis aestu. Imaginyng, as most men then
did, Oued. 1. Meta.
Zonam torridam, the hot Zone, to be altogether dishabited for heat, though
presently we know many famous and worthy kingdoms and cities in that part of
the earth, and the Island of saint Thomas near Aethiopia, and the welthy Islands
for the which chiefly al these voyages are taken in hand, to be inhabited even
under the equinoctial line. To answer the third objection, Sol. 3.
besides Cabota and al other trauaylers nauigations, ye only creadit of. M.
Furbisher may suffice, who lately through al these Islands of Ise, and
mountains of snow, passed that way, even beyond the gulphe that tumbleth
down from the North, and in some places though he drew one ynche thick Ise,
as he returning in August did, came home safelye again.

The fourth argument is altogether frivolous and vain, Sol. 4.
for neither is there any isthmos or streict of land betwixt America and Asia,
ne can these two lands jointly be one continent. The first part of my answer
is manifestly allowed of by Homer, Lib. Geog.
whom that excellent Geographer Strabo follows, yeldyng him in this faculty
the prise. The aucthour of that book likewise (...) to Alexander, attributed
unto Aristotle, is of ye same opinion, that Homer and Strabo be of, in two or
three places. Dionisius in (...) has this verse. (...).
(...). So does the Ocean sea run round about the world: speaking only of
Europe, Afric, and Asie, as then Asie was trauayled and known. With these
Doctoures may you join Pomponius Mela, Cap. 2. lib. 1. Plinius lib. 2. Cap.
67. and Pius. 2. Cap. 2. in his description of Asie. All the which writers do
no less confirm the whole Eastern side of Asie to be compassed about with
sea, then Plato does affirm in Timaeo, under the name Atlantide, the West
Indies to be an Island, as in a special discourse thereof. R. Eden writes,
agreeable unto the sentence of Proclus, Marsilius Fi^inus, and others. Out of
Plato it is gathered that America is an Island. Homer, Strabo, Aristotle,
Dionisius, Mela, Pliny, Pius 2. affirm the continent of Asie, Afrike, and
Europe, to be enuironned with the Ocean. I may therefore boldly say, though
later intelligences thereof had we none at all, that Asie and the West Indies,
be not tied together by any isthmos or streict of land, contrary to the
opinion of some new Cosmographers, by whom doubtfully this matter has been
brought in controversy. And thus much for the first part of my answer unto
the fourth objection.

The second part, Lib. 2. Meteor. Cap. 1.
namely that America and Asie cannot be one continent, may thus be proved.
(...). The most rivers take down that way their course, where the earth is
most holowe and deep, writes Aristotle: and the sea, says he in the same
place, as it goes farther, so is it found deeper. Into what goulphe do the
Moscouian ryuers Onega, Duina, Oby, and Rha, power out their streams?
Northwarde out of Moscouia into the sea. Which way does that sea stryke? The
South is main land, the Eastern coast waxes more and more shalowe: from the
North, either naturally, because that part of the earth is higher Aristot. 2.
met. c. 1. or of necessity, for that the forcible influence of some Northern
Stars causes the earth there to shake of the sea, as some Philosophers do
think: or finally for the great store of waters engendered in that frostie and
cold clyme, that the banckes are not able to hold them. Alber. in 2. Meteo.
Cap. 6. From the North I say, contynually falls down great abundaunce of
water. So that this Northeasterne current must at the length abruptly ^owe
toward us South on the West side of Fynmarke and Norwaye: or else stryke down
Southwest above Groneland, or betwixt Groneland and Iseland, into the Northwest
streict we speak of, as of congruence it does, if you mark the situation of
that region, and by the report of M. Furbisher, experience teaches us. And M.
Furbisher the further he trauayled in the former passage, as he told me, the
deeper always he found sea. Lay you now the sum hereof together. The rivers
run where the Channels are most hollow, the sea in taking his course waxes
deeper, the sea waters fall continuallye from the North Southward, the
Northeasterne current strikes down into the streict we speak of, and is
there augmented with whole mountains of ise and snow, falling down furiously
out from ye land under ye North Pole. Where store of water is, there is it a
thing impossible to want sea, Plin. lib. 2. Cap. 67.
where sea not only does not want, but waxes deeper, there can be discovered no
land. Finally, whence I pray you came the contrary tide, that M. Furbisher met
withal after that he had sailed no small way in that passage, if there be any
isthmos or streict of land betwixt the aforesaid Northweststerne gulf and Mar
del Zur, to join Asia and America together? That conclusion frequented in
schools Quidquid preter etc. was meant of the parts of the world then known,
and so is it of right to be understood.

Sol. 5.
The fifte objection requires for answer, wisdom, and policy, in the
trauailer, to win the Barbares favor by some good means: and so to arm and
strengthen him self, that when he shall have the repulse in one coast, he may
safely travail to an other, commodiously taking his convenient times, and
discretly making choice of them with whom he will thoroughly deal. To force a
violent entry, would for us English men be very hard, consyderyng the
strength and valeour of so great a nation, far distaunt from us, and the
attempt thereof might be most perilous unto the doers, unless their part
were very good. Touching their laws against strangers, you shall read
nevertheless in the same relations of Galeotto Berara, that the Cathaian king
is wont to grant free access unto all forreiners that trade into his
country for marchandyse, and a place of liberty for them to remain in: as
the Mores had, until such time as they had brought the Loutea or Lieuetenaunt
of that coaste to be a circumcised Saracene: wherefore some of them were put to
the sword, the rest were scattred abroad: at Fuquien, a great city in China,
certain of them are yet this day to be seen. As for the Giapans, they be most
desirous to be acquaynted with strangers. The Portugals though they were
straightly handled there at the first, yet in the end they found great
favor at the prince his hands, insomuch that the Loutea or president that
misused them, was therefore put to death. The rude Indish Canoa halleth that
seas, the Portugalles, the Saracenes, and Mores traueil continually up and
down that reach from Giapan to China, from China to Malacca, from Malacca to
the Moluccaes: and shall an Englishma^, better appointed then any of them al
(that I say no more of our navy) fear to sail in that Ocean? What seas at al
do want piracie? what navigations is there void of peril? To the last
argument. Our traueylers need not to seek their return by the northeast, ne
shall they be constrained, Sol. 6.
except they list, either to attempt Magellane streicte at the Southwest, or to
be in danger of the Portugalles for the Southeast: they may return by the
northwest, that same way they do go forth, as experience has showed. The
reason alleged for proof of the contrary, may be disproued after this manner.
And first, it may be called in controversy, whether any current continually be
forced by the motion of Primum mobile, round about the world, or no? for
learned men do diuersely handle that question. The natural course of all
waters is downewarde, wherefore of congruence they fall that way where they
find the earth most low and deep: in respect whereof, it was erst said,
the seas to strike from the Northren lands Southerly. Uiolently the seas are
tossed and troubled diverse ways with the wyndes, Luc. lib. 1. Pharsal.
increased and diminished by the course of the Moon, hoysed up and down
through the sundry operations of the Son and the Stars: finally some be of
opinion, that the seas be carried in part violently about ye world after the
daily motion of the highest mouable heaven, in like manner as ye elements of
air and fire, with the rest of the heavenly spheres are, from the east unto
the west. And this they do call their eastern current, or leuant stream.
What the eastern current is.
Some such current may not be denied to be of great force in the hot Zone,
for the nearenes thereof unto the center of the Son and blustryng eastern
wyndes violently dryuing the seas westwarde: howbeit in the temperate climes,
the Son being farther of, and the wyndes more diverse, blowyng as much from
the north, the west, and south, as from the east, this rule does not
effectually withholde us from traueylyng eastwarde, ne be we kept ever back
by the aforesaid Leuante wyndes and stream. But in Magellane streict we are
violently driven back westwarde: Ergo through the Northwesterne streicte or
Anian fret shall we not be able to return eastwarde? it follows not. The
first, for that the northwesterne streict has more sea rome at the least by
one hundred English miles, then Magellane fret has, the only want whereof
causes all narrow passages generally to be most violent. So would I say in
Anian gulf, if it were so narrow as Don Diego and Zalterius have painted it
out, any return that way to be full of difficulties, in respect of such
streictnes thereof, not for the nearenes of the Son, or eastern wyndes,
violently forceing that way any leuant stream. But in that place there is more
sea rome by many degrees, if the cards of Cabota, and Gemma Frisius, and that
which Tramezine imprinted, be true. And hitherto reason see I none at all, but
that I may as well give credyt unto their doings, as to any of the rest. It
must be Peregrinationis historia, that is, true reports of skilful trauailers,
as Ptolome writes, that in such controversies of Geographie must put us out
of double. Ortelius in his universal tables, Lib. 1. Geog. Cap. 2.
in his particular Mappes of the west Indies, of all Asia, of the northren
kingdoms, of the east Indies, Mercator in some of his globes, and general
mappes of the world, Moletius in his universal table of the Globe divided, in
his sea card, and particular tables of the East Indies, Zalterius, and Don
Diego, with Fernando Bertely, and others, do so much dyffer both from Gemma
Frisius and Cabota, among them selves, and in diverse places from them selves,
concerning the diverse situation and sundry limittes of America, that one may
not so rashly, as truly surmise, these men either to be ignorant in those
points touching the aforesaid region, or that the mappes they have given out
unto the world, were collected only by them, and never of their own drawyng.
M. Furbishers prosperous voyage, and happy return, will absolutely decide
these controversies, and certaynely determine where the whole passage lies,
how long it is, what breadth it carries, how perilous, how prosperous the
journey is, and what commodities the paynfull trauayler can reap thereby, what
gain the venterous merchant may look for, what wealth, what honor, what fame
will to our English nation thereof ensue.

Thus much, right honorable, my very good Lady, of your question concerning
your servants voyage. If not so skylfully as I would, and was desirous fully
to do, at the least as I could, and leisure suffered me, for the little
knowledge God has lent me, if it be any at all, in Cosmographie and
Philosophy, and the small experience I have in travail. Chosing rather in the
clear judgment of your Ho. mind to appear rude and ignorant, and so to be
seen unto the multitude, then to be found unthankful and careless in any
thing your Ho. should command me. God preserve your Honor. At the Court
the.xx. of March.

Your Ho. most humbly at commandment. Richard Wills.

To the right worshipful, my singular good Mystres, M. Elizabeth Morisyn.
Our Indian readinges, our Asian lectures, our Geographical description of the
whole world, will I end with certain reports of the province China in
Cathayo, and some intelligences of the worthy Islands lying thereby in the East
Ocean. The relation whereof, though at the first might seem briefly to be
passed over, and in a few substantial points only to be touched, as in the
rest of our discourses concerning this faculty we have done: Yet the
worthynesse of matter herein contained, the order of civil government, the
manners and fashions of the inhabiters, the description of that country, so well
gathered the novelty thereof in our language, have effectually moved me to do
the whole discourse into Englysh. Needless I grant the labor is for you,
that perfectly in so few Months, so few weeks, so few days, learned the
Italian tongue, out of the which language this translation is made. The
singular care you ever have had of my well dooyng, and the special favor I
have found among your Honorable friends for your sake, vvoulde not only not
let me to play the negligent Poet in the fifth Act, but compelled me to handle
even the last Scene more abundantly: as well to acknowledge your good skill both
in Cosmographie and in foreign languages, as also to testify unto the world,
the great benefits the which I have received for vschering, as it were herein,
so good, so wise, so virtuous, so worshipful a mystres. Now after all these
learned exercises of your younger years, God Almyghtie send you great good
success in your present affairs, with increase of prosperity and much
honor, as you daily shall grow elder.

At London the 21. of Feburary. 1576. Your servant ever. R. Wills.

Reports of the province China. Certain reports of the province China,
learned through the Portugalles there imprisoned, and chiefly by the relation
of Galeotto Perera, a gentleman of good credit, that lay prisoner in that
country many years. Done out of Italian into English, by R. W.
THis land of China is parted into.13. shyres, the which sometimes were each
one a kingdom by it self, but these many years they have been all subject
unto one King. Fuquien.
Fuquien is made by the Portugalles the first shyre, because there their
troubles began, and had occasion thereby to know the rest. In this shyre be
viii. cities, but one principally more famous than others, called Fuquieo, the
other seven are reasonably great, the best known whereof unto the Portugalles
is Cinceo, Cinceo.
in respect of a certain haven joining thereunto, whyther in time past they
were wont for merchandyse to resort.

Cantan is the second shyre, not so great in quantity, as well accoumpted of,
both by the King thereof, Cantan.
and also by the Portugalles, for that it lies nearer unto Malacca than any
other part of China, and was first discryed by the Portugalles before any other
shyre in that province: this shyre has in it seven cities.

Chequeam is the third shyre, Chequeam.
the chiefest city therein is Donchion, therein also stands Liampo, with
other thirtiene or fourtiene Boroughes: country towns therein to to many to
be spoken of.

The fourth shyre is called Xutiamfu, Xutiamfu.
the principal city thereof is great Pachin, where the King is always
resident. In it are fyftiene other very great cities: of other towns therein,
and Boroughes well walled and trenched about, I will say nothing.

The fyft shyre has name Chelim: the great city Nanquin, Chelim.
chief of other fyftiene cities was herein of ancient time, the royal seat
of the Chinish kings. From this shyre, and from that aforesaid Chequeam
forward, bare rule the other kings, until the whole region became one
kingdom.

The sixth shyre bears name Quianci, as also the principal city thereof,
Quianci. rather Quinzi
wherein the fine claye to make vessels is wrought. The Portugalles being
ignorant of this country, and fyndyng great abundance of that fine claye to
be sold at Liampo, and that very good cheap, thought at the first that it had
been made there, howbeit in fine, they perceived that the standing of Quinzi
more near unto Liampo than to Cinceo or Cantan, was the cause of so much fine
claye at Liampo: within the compass of Quinci shyre be other.12. cities.

The seventh shyre is Quicin, the eight Quansi, the nienth Confu, the tenth
Vrnan, the eleventh Sichiua. In the first hereof there be.16. cities, in the
next fyftiene: how many towns the other three have, we are ignorant as yet,
as also of the proper names of the.12. and.13. shyres, and the towns therein.

This finally may be generally said hereof, that the greater shyres in China
province, may be compared with mighty kingdoms.

In each one of these shyres be set Ponchiassini and Anchiassini, before whom
are handled the matters of other cities. There is also placed in each one a
Tutan, as you would say a governor, and a Chian, that is a visiter, as it were:
whose office is to go in circuit, and to see justice exactly done. By these
means so vpryghtly things are ordered there, that it may be worthily
accounted one of the best governed provinces in all the world.

Pachin. al. Pochang.
The King makes always his abode in the great city Pachin, as much to say in
our language as by the name thereof I am advertised, the town of the kingdom.
This kingdom is so large, that under five months you are not able to
traueyle from the towns by the sea side to the Court and back again, no not
under three months in post at your urgent business. The Posthorses in this
country are little of body, but swyfte of foot. Many do traueyle the greater
part of this journey by water in certain light barks, for the multitude of
ryuers commodious for passage from one city to an other.

The king, notwithstanding the hugeness of his kingdom, Their months.
has such a care thereof, that every Moon (by the Moons they reckon their
months) he is advertised fully of whatsoever thing happens therein, by
these means following.

The whole province being divided into shyres, and each shyre having in it one
chief and principal city, whereunto the matters of all the other cities,
towns, and Boroughes, are brought: there are drawn, in every chief city
aforesaid, intelligences of such things as do monthly fall out, and be
sent in writing to the Court. If happily in one month every post is not able
to go so long a way, yet does there notwithstanding once every month arryue
one post out of the shyre. Who so comes before the newe-Moone, stays for
the delivery of his letters until the Moon be changed. Then likewise are
dispatched other posts, back into all the.13. shyres again.

Before that we do come to Cinceo we have to pass through many places, and
some of great importance. For this country is so well inhabited near the sea
side, that you can not go one mile but you shall see some town, Borough, or
Hostry, the which are so abundantly provided of all things, that in the cities
and towns they live ciuily. Nevertheless such as dwell abroad are very poor,
for the multitude of them every where so great, that out of a tree you shall see
many times swarm a number of children, where a man would not have thought to
have found any one at all.

From these places in number infinite, you shall come unto two cities very
populose, and being compared with Cinceo, not possibly to be discerned which is
the greater of them. These cities are as well walled as any cities in all the
world. As you come in to either of them, stands so great and mighty a
bridge, that the like thereof I have never seen in Portugal nor else where. I
heard one of my fellows say, that he told in one bridge.40. arches. The
occasion wherefore these bridges are made so great, is for that the country is
toward the sea very plain and low, and overwhelmed ever as ye sea water
increases. The breadth of the bridges, although it be well proportioned unto
the length thereof, yet are they equally buylt, no higher in the middle than at
either end, in such wise that you may directly see from ye one end to the
other, the sides are wonderfully well engraue^ after the manner of Rome works.
But that we did most marueyle at, was therwithall the hugeness of ye stones,
the like whereof as we came in to the city, we did see many set up in places
dishabited by the way, to no small charges of theyrs, howbeit to little purpose,
whereas no body sees them but such as do come bye. The arches are not made
after our fashion, vauted with sundry stones set together: but paued, as it
were, whole stones reaching from one pillar to an other, in such wise that
they lie both for the arches heads, and galantly serve also for the high way.
I have been astunned to behold the hugeness of these aforesaid stones, some
of them are.xii. pases long and upward, the least a.xi. good pases long, and
an half.

The ways echewhere are galantly paued with fouresquare stone, except it be
where for want of stone they use to lay brick: in this voyage we traueyled
over certain hills, where the ways were pitched, and in many places no worse
paued than in the plain ground. This causes us to think, that in all the
world there be no better workmen for buildinges, than the ininhabitantes of
China.

The country is so well inhabited, that no one foot of ground is left
untilled: small store of cattle have we seen this way, we saw only certain
Oxen wherewithal the countrymen do plough their ground. One Ox draws the
plough alone, not only in this shyre, but in other places also, wherein is
greater store of cattle. These countrymen by art do that in tyllage, which
we are constrained to do by force. Here be sold the voydinges of close
stools, although there wants not the dunge of beasts: and the excrements of
man are good merchandise throughout all China. The dungfermers seek in every
street by exchange to buy this durtie ware for herbs and wood. The custom
is very good for keepyng the city clean. There is great abundance of Hens,
Geese, Duckes, Swyne, and Goats, Wethers have they none: the Hens are sold
by weight, and so are all other things. Two pound of Hens flesh, Goose, or
Ducke, is worth two Foi of their money, that is, d. ob. sterling. Swines
flesh is sold at a penny the pound. Beef bears the same price, for the
scarcity thereof, howbeit Northwarde from Fuquieo, and farther of from the sea
coast, there is Beef more plenty and sold better cheap, Beef only
excepted, great abundance of all these viandes we have had in all the cities
we passed through. And if this country were like unto India, the inhabitants
whereof eat neither Hen, beef, nor porke, but keep that only for the
Portugalles and Moors, they would be sold here for nothing. But it so falling
out, that the Chineans are the greatest eaters in all the world, they do feed
upon all things, specially on porke, the fatter that is, unto them the less
loathsome. The highest price of these things aforesaid, I have set down,
better cheap shall you sometimes buy them for the great plenty thereof in
this country. Frogs are sold at the same price that is made of Hens, and
are good meat amongst them, as also Dogs, Cattes, Rattes, Snakes, and all
other unclean meats.

The cities be very gallant, specially near unto the gates, the which are
marvelously great, and covered with Iron. The gatehouses buylt on high with
Towers, the lower part thereof, is made of brick and stone, proportionally
with the walls, from the walls upward, the buyldyng is of timber, and many
stories in it one above the other. The strength of their towns is in the
mighty walls and ditches, artillery have they none.

The streets in Cinceo, and in all the rest of the cities we have seen are
very fair, so large and so straight, that it is wonderful to behold. Their
houses are buylte with timber, the foundations only excepted, the which are
laid with stone, in each side of the streets are paynteses or continual
porches for the marchantes to walk under: the breadth of the street is
nevertheless such, that in them.xv. men may ride commodiously side by side.
As they ride they must needs pass under many high arches of triumph that
cross over the streets made of timber, and carved diuersely, covered with
tyle of fine claye: under these arches the Mercers do utter their smaller
wares, and such as list to stand there, are defensed from rain and the heat
of the Sun. The greater gentlemen have these arches at their doors: although
some of them be not so myghtyly buylt as the rest.

I shall have occasion to speak of a certain order of gentlemen that are
called Loutea, Loutea.
I will first therefore expound what this word signifies. Loutea is as much
to say in our language as Sir, and when any of them calls his name, he
answers Sir: and as we do say, that the king has made some gentleman, so
say they, that there is made a Loutea. And for that amongst them the degrees
are diverse both in name and office, I will tell you only of some principalles,
being not able to advertise you of all.

The manner how gentlemen are created Louteas, and do come to that honor and
title, is by the gyuyng of a broad gyrdle not like to the rest, and a cap, at
the commandment of the king. The name Loutea is more general and common unto
more, than equality of honor thereby signified, agrees withal. Such Louteas
that do serve their prince in weighty matters for justice, are created after
trial made of their learning: but the other which serve in smaller affairs,
as Capitaynes, Constables, Sergeantes by land and sea, Receyuers, and such
like, whereof there be in every city, as also in this, very many, are made for
favor: the chief Louteas are served kneelyng.

The whole province China is divided, as I have said, into thirtiene shyres,
in every shyre at the least is one governor called there Tutan, in some shyres
there be two.

Chief in office next unto them be certain other named Chians, that is,
Chian, al. Chaen.
high Commissioners as you would say, or visiters, with full authority in
such wise, that they do call unto an account the Tutanes them selves, but
their authority lasts not in any shyre longer than one year. Nevertheless
in every shyre being at the least seven cities, yea, in some of them fyftiene
or sixtiene, beside other Boroughes and towns not well to be numbered, these
visiters, where they come, are so honored and feared, as though they were some
great princes. At the years end their circuit done, they come unto that city
which is chief of others in the shyre, to do justice there: finally busiyng
them selves in the searchyng out of such as are to receive the order of
Louteas, whereof more shall be said in an other place.

Over and besides these officers, in the chief city of each one of these
aforesaid thirtiene provinces, Ponchiassi.
is resident one Ponchiassi, Captain thereof, and Treasurer of all the kings
revenues. This Magistrate makes his abode in one of the four greatest houses
that be in all these head cities. And although the principal part of his
function be, to be Captain, to be Treasurer of the revenues in that province,
to send these revenues at appointed times to the Court: yet has he
notwithstanding by his office also to meddle with matters apperteynyng unto
justice.

In the second great house dwells an other Magistrate called Anchiassi, a
great offycer also, Anchiassi. al. Hexasi.
for he has dealings in all matters of justice. Who although he be somewhat
inferior in dignity unto the Ponchiassi, yet for his great dealings and
general charge of justice, whosoever sees the affairs of the one house and
the other, might judge this Anchiassi to be the greater.

Tuzi, an other officer so called, lies in the third house, a magistrate of
importance, Tuzi.
specially in things belongyng unto warfare, for thereof has he charge.

There is resident in the fourth house a fourth officer, bearyng name Taissu.
Taissu.
In this house is the principal prison of all the city. Each one of these
Magistrates aforesaid may both lay evil doers in prison, and deliver them
out again, except the fact be heinous and of importance: in such a case they
can do nothing, except they do meet altogether. And if the deed deserve
death, all they together can not determine thereof, without recourse made unto
the Chian wheresoever he be, or to the Tutan: and eftsoon it falls out,
that the case be referred unto higher power. In all cities, not only chief in
each shyre, but in the rest also, are means found to make Louteas. Many of
them do study at the prince his charges, wherefore at the years end they
resort unto the head cities, whyther the Chians do come, as it has been erst
said, as well to give these degrees, as to sit in judgment over the prisoners.

The Chians go in circuit every year, but such as are to be chosen to the
greatest offices, meet not but from three years to three years, and that in
certain large halles appointed for them to be examined in. Many things are
asked them, whereunto if they do answer accordingly, and be found sufficient
to take their degree, the Chian by and by grants it them: Licentiates.
but the Cappe and gyrdle whereby they are known to be Louteas, they wear not
before that they be confirmed by the king. Their examination done, Doctors.
and trial made of them, such as have taken their degree wont to be given them
with all ceremonies, use to banquet and feast many days together (as the
Chineans fashion is to end all their pleasures with eating and drinkyng) and so
remain chosen to do the king service in matters of learning. Dutch like.
The other examinates found insufficient to proceed, are sent back to their
study again. Whose ignorance is perceived to come of negligence and default,
such a one is whipped, and sometimes sent to prison, where we lying that year
when this kind of act was, we found many thus punished, and demaundyng the
cause thereof, they said it was for that they knew not how to answer unto
certain things asked them. It is a world to see how these Louteas are
served and feared, in such wise, that in publyke assemblies at one shryke they
give, all the seruitors belongyng unto justice, tremble thereat. At their being
in these places, when they list to move, be it but even to the gate, these
seruitors do take them up, and carry them in seats of beaten gold. After this
sort are they borne when they go in the city, either for their own business
abroad, or to see each other at home. For the dignity they have, and office
they do bear, they be al accompanied: the very meanest of them all that goes
in these seats is vshered by two men at the least, that cry unto the people to
give place, howbeit, they need it not, for that reverence the common people
has unto them. They have also in their company certain Sergeantes, with their
Maces either siluered, or altogether silver, some two, some four, other six,
other eight, conveniently for each one his degree. The more principal and
chief Louteas have going orderly before these Sergeantes, many other with
staves, and a great many catchpoules with rods of Indishe canes, dragged on
the ground, so that the streets being paued, you may hear a far of as well
the noise of the rods, as the voice of the cryers. These fellows serve also
to apprehende others, and the better to be known they wear livery read
girdles, and in their cappes Pecockes feathers. Behind these Louteas come such
as do bear certain tables hanged at staves ends, wherein is written in
silver letters the name, degree, and office of that Loutea, whom they follow.
In like manner they have borne after them hattes agreeable unto their tytles: if
the Loutea be mean, then has he brought after him but one hatte, and that may
not be yealowe: but if he be of the better sort, then may he have two, three,
or four: the principal and chief Louteas, may have all their hattes yealowe,
the which among them is accounted great honor. The Loutea for wars, although
he be but mean, may notwithstanding have yealowe hattes. The Tutanes and
Chians, when they go abroad, have besides all this before them led.3. or.4.
horses with their guard in armor. Furthermore the Louteas, yea and all the
people of China, are woonte to eat their meat syttyng on stools at high
tables as we do, and that very cleanly, although they use nether table clothes
nor napkyns. Whatsoever is set down upon the boorde, is first carved, before
that it be brought in: they feed with two styckes, refraynyng from touching
their meat with their hands, even as we do with forkes, for ye which respect,
they less do need any table clothes. He is the nation only civil at meat,
We, that is the Italians and Spaniardes.
but also in conversation, and in courtesy they seem to exceed all other.
Likewise in their dealings, after their manner, they are so ready, that they
far pass all other Gentyles and Moors: the greater states are so vain,
that they line their clothes with the best sylke that may be found. The
Louteas, are an idle generation, without all manner of exercises and pastymes,
except it be eating and drynkyng. Somtymes they walk abroad in the fields,
to make the souldyars shoot at pricks with their bows, but their eating
passes: they will stand eating even when the other do draw to shoot. The
prick is a great blanket spread on certain long poles, he that stryketh it,
has of the best man there standing a piece of crymson taffata, the which is
knyt about his head: in this sort the wynners honored, and the Louteas with
their bellyes full, return home again. The inhabitants of China, be very
great Idolaters, all generally do worship the heavens: and as we are wont to
say, God knows it: so say they at every word, Tien Tautee, that is to
say, The heavens do know it. Some do worship the Son, and some the Moon,
as they think good, for none are bound more to one then to an other. In their
temples, the which they do call Meani, they have a great altar in ye same place
as we have, true it is that one may go round about it. There set they up the
Image of a certain Loutea of that country, whom they have in great reverence
for certain notable things he did. After the Dutch fation.
At the right hand stands the devil, much more ugly painted then we do use
to set him out, whereunto great homage is done by such as come into the temple
to ask counsel, or to draw lottes: this opinion they have of him, that he is
malicious and able to do evil. If you ask them what they do think of the
souls departed, they will answer, that they be immortal, and that as soon
as any one departs out of this life, he becomes a devil if he have lived
well in this world, Pithigorian like.
if otherwise, that the same devil changes him into a bufle, ox, or dog.
Wherefore to this devil do they much honor, to him do they sacrifice, praying
him that he will make them like unto him self, and not like other beasts.
They have moreover an other sort of temples, wherein both upon the altars and
also on the walls do stand many Idols well proportioned, but bare headed:
These bear name Omithofon, accounted of them spirits, but such as in heaven
do nether good nor evil, thought to be such men and women, as have chastlye
lived in this world in abstinence from fyshe and flesh, fed only with rise
and salates. Of that devil they make some account, for these spirits they
care little or nothing at all. Again they hold opinion that if a man do well
in this life, the heavens will give him many temporal blessings, but if he do
evil, then shall he have infirmities, diseases, troubles, and penury, and all
this without any knowledge of God. Finally, this people knows no other thing
then to live and die, yet because they be reasonable creatures, al seemed good
unto them we speak in our language, though it were not very sufficient: our
manner of praying especially pleased them, and truly they are well enough
disposed to receive the knowledge of the truth. Our lord grant for his
mercy all things so to be disposed, that it may some time be brought to
pass, that so great a nation as this is, peryshe not for want of help.

Our manner of praying so well lyked them, that in prison importunately they
besoughte us to write for them somewhat as concerning heaven, the which we did
to their contentation with such reasons as we knew, howbeit not very
cunnyngly. As they do their Idolatry they laugh at them selves. If at any time
this country might be joined in league with the kingdom of Portugale, in such
wise that free access were had to deal with the people there, they might al
be soon converted. The greatest fault we do find in them is Sodomie, a vice
very common in the meaner sort, and nothing strange amongst the best. This
sin were it left of them, in all other things so well disposed they be, that
a good interpretour in a short space might do there great good, if, as I said,
the country were joined in league with us.

Furthermore the Louteas, with all the people of China, are wont to solempnize
the days of the new and full Moons in visiting one each other, and making
great bankettes, for to that end, as I erst said, do tend all their pastymes,
and spendyng their days in pleasure. They are wont also to solempnize each
one his birth day, whereunto their kyndred and friends do resort of custom,
with presents of Iuelles or money, receyuyng again for their reward good
cheer. They keep in like manner a general feast with great bankets that day
their king was borne. But their most principal and greatest feast of al, and
best cheer, is the first day of their new year, namely the first day of the
new Moon of Februarye, so that their first month is March, and they reckon
the times accordynglye, respect being had unto the reign of their Princes: as
when any deed is written, they date it thus, Made such a day of such a
Moon, and such a year of the reign of such a King. And their ancient
wrytynges bear date of the years of this or that King.

Now will I speak of the manner the which the Chineans do observe in dooyng
Justice, that it may be known how far these Gentyles do herein exceed
many Christians, that be more bounden then they to deal justly and in truth.
Because the Chinishe King makes his abode contynually in the City Pachyn, his
kingdom so great, the shyres so many, as tofore it has been said: in it
therefore the Governors and Rulers, much like unto our Shyryffes, be so
appointed suddenly and speedely discharged again, that they have no time to
grow naught. Furthermore to keep the state in more security, the Louteas
that govern one shyre, are chosen out of some other shyre distaunt far of,
where they must leave their wives, children, and goods, carryeng nothing with
them but them selves. True it is, that at their coming thither they do find
in a readiness all things necessary, their house, furniture, servants, and
all other things in such perfection and plenty, that they want nothing. Thus
the king is well served without all fear of treason.

In the principal cities of the shyres be four chief Louteas, before whom
are brought all matters of the inferior towns, throughout the whole realm.
Diverse other Louteas have the maneagyng of justice, and receyuyng of rentes,
bound to yield an account thereof unto the greater officers. Other do see
that there be no evil rule keept in the city: each one as it behooves him.
Generally al these do impryson malefactors, cause them to be whypped and
racked, hoysing them up and down by the arms with a cord, a thing very
usual there, and accounted no shame. The Italians call it the strapad^.
These Louteas do use great diligence in ye apprehending of thieves, so that it
is a wonder to see a thief escape away in any town, city, or village. Upon
the sea near unto the shore many are taken, and look even as they are taken,
so be they first whypped, and afterward laid in prison, where shortly after
they all dye for hunger and cold. At that time, when we were in prison, there
died of them above threscore and ten. If happily any one, having the means to
geat food, do escape, he is set with the condemned persons, and provided for
as they be by the king, in such wise as hereafter it shall be said.

Their whyps be certain pieces of canes, cleft in the middle, in such sort
that they seem rather plain then sharp. He that is to be whipped lies
grouelong on the ground. Upon his thighs the Hangman lays on blows myghtely
with these canes, that the standers by tremble at their cruelty. Ten s^rypes
draw a great deal of blood, twenty or thyrtie spoil the flesh altogether,
fyftie or threescore will require long time to be healed, and if they come to
the number of one hundred, then are they incurable.

The Louteas observe moreover this: when any man is brought before them to be
examined, they ask him openly in the hearing of as many as be present, be ye
offense never so great. Thus did they also behave them selves with us. For this
cause amongst them can there be no false witness, as daily amongst us it falls
out. This good comes thereof, that many being always about the judge to hear
the evidence, and bear witness, the process can not be falsified, as it
happens sometimes with us. The Mores, Gentiles, and Jews, have al their
sundry oaths, ye Mores do swear by their Mossafos, the Brachmans by their
Fili, the rest likewise by the things they do worship. The Chineans though
they be wont to swear by heaven, by the Moon, by the Sun, and by all their
Idolles, in judgment nevertheless they swear not at all. If for some offense
an oath be used of any one, by and by with the least evidence he is tormented,
so be the witnesses he brings, if they tell not the truth, or do in any point
disagree, except they be men of worship and credyte, who are believed without
any farther matter: the rest are made to confess the truth by force of
torments and whyppes. Besides this order observed of them in examinations,
they do fear so much their king, and he where he makes his abode keeps
them so low, that they dare not once stir. Again, these Louteas as great as
they be, notwithstanding the multitude of Notaries they have, not trusting any
others, do write al great processes and matters of importance them selves.
Moreover one virtue they have worthy of great praise, and that is, being men so
well regarded and accounted of as though they were princes, they be patient
above measure in geuyng audience. We poor strangers brought before them might
say what we would, as all to be lies and falaces that they did write, ne did
we stand before them with the usual ceremonies of that country, yet did they
bear with us so patiently, that they caused us to wonder, knowing specially
how little any advocate or judge is wont in our country to bear with us. For
where so ever in any town of Christendom should be accused unknown men as
we were, I know not what end the very innocents cause would have: but we in
a Heathen country, having our great ennimies two of the chiefest men in a
whole town, wantyng an interpreter, ignorant of that country language, did in
the end see our great adversaries cast into prison for our sake, and deprived
of their offices and honor for not doing justice, yea not to escape death,
for as the rumor goes, they shall be beheadded. Somewhat is now to be said of
the laws that I have been hable to know in this country, and first, no
theft or murder, is at any time pardoned: adulterers are put in prison, and
the fact once proved, condemned to dye, the woman's husband must accuse them:
this order is keapt with men and women found in that fault, but thieves and
murderers are inprisoned as I have said, where they shortly dye for hunger and
cold. If any one happily escape by brybyng the gayler to give him meat, his
process goes farther, and comes to the court where he is condemned to dye.
Sentence being given, the prisoner is brought in publyke with a terrible band
of men that lay him in Irons hand and foot, with a boorde at his neck one
handefull broad, in length reachyng down to his knees, A pylle^^ boorde.
clefte in two parts, and with a hole one handefull downewarde in the table
fyt for his neck, the which they enclose up therein, naylyng the boorde fast
together. one handefull of the boorde stands up behind in the neck: the
sentence and cause wherefore the fellon was condemned to dye, is written in that
part of the table that stands before.

This cerimonie ended, he is laid in a great prison in the company of some
other condemned persons, the which are found by the king as long as they do
live. The board aforsaid so made, tormenteth the prisoners very much, keeping
them both from rest, and eke lettyng them to eat commodyously, their hands
being manecled in Irons under that board, so yt in fine there is no remedy but
death. In ye chief cities of every shire, as we have erst said, there be four
principal houses, in each of them a prison: but in one of them where the Taissu
makes his abode, there is a greater and a more principal prison the^ in any of
ye rest: and although in every city there be many, nevertheless in three of
them remain only such as be condemned to die. Their death is much prolonged,
for that ordinarily there is no execution done but once a year, though many
die for hunger and cold, as we have seen in this prison. Execution is done in
this manner. The Chian, to wit the high commissioner or Lord chief Justice, at
the years end goes to the head city, where he hears again the causes of
such as be condemned. Many times he delyuereth some of them, declaryng that
board to have been wrongfully put about their necks: the visitation ended, he
choseth out seven or.viii. not many more or less, of the greatest
malefactors, the which, to fear and keep in awe the people, are brought
into a great market place, where all the great Louteas meet together, and
after many ceremonies and superstitions, as the use of the country is, are
beheaded. This is done once a year: who so escapes that day, may be sure that
he shall not be put to death all that year following, and so remains at the
kings charges in the greater prison. In that prison where we lay were al ways
one hundred and more of these condemned persons, besides them that lay in other
prisons.

These prisons wherein the condemned caytyfes do remain are so strong, that it
has not been hard, that any prisoner in all China has escaped out of prison,
for in deed it is a thing impossible. The prisons are thus builded. First all the place is myghtelye walled about, the walls be very strong and high, the
gate of no less force: within it three other gates, before you come where the
prisoners do lie, there many great lodginges are to be seen of the Louteas,
Notaries, Parthions, that is, such as do there keep watch and ward day and
night, the court large and paued, on the one side whereof stands a prison,
with two myghtie gates, wherein are kept such prisoners as have committed
enormious offenses. This prison is so great, that in it are streates and Market
places wherein al things necessary are sold. Yea some prisoners live by that
kind of trade, buyeng and selling, and letting out beds to hyre: some are
daily sent to prison, some daily delivered, wherefore this place is never void
of seven or eight hundred men that go at liberty.

Into one other prison of condemned persons shall you goo at three iron gates,
the court paued and vauted round about, and open above as it were a cloister.
In this cloister be eight rooms with iron doors, and in each of them a large
Gallerie, wherein every night the prisoners do lie at length, their feet in
the stocks, their bodies hampered in huge wooden grates that keep them from
sitting, so that they lie as it were in a cage, sleep if they can: in the
morning they are losed again, that they may go into ye court. Notwithstanding
the strength of this prison, it is kept with a garrison of men, part whereof
watch within the house, part of them in the Court, some keep about the prison
with lanterns and watchebelles answeryng one an other five times every night,
and giving warning so loud, that the Loutea resting in a chamber not near
thereunto, may here them. In these prysons of condemned persons remain
some.15. other 20. years imprisoned, not executed, for the love of their
honorable friends that seek to prolong their lives. Many of these prisoners be
shomakers, and have from the king a certain allowaunce of rise: some of them
work for the keeper, who suffers them to go at liberty without fetters and
boordes, the better to work. Howbeit when the Loutea calls his check roll,
and with the keeper vieweth them, they al wear their lyuereys, that is, boords
at their necks, yronned hand and foot. When any of these prisoners dies, he
is to be seen of the Loutea and Notaries, brought out at a gate so narrow,
that there can but one be drawn out there at once. The prisoner being brought
forth, one of the aforesaid Parthians stryketh him thryse on the head with an
iron sledge, that done, he is delivered unto his friends, if he have any,
otherwise the king hyreth men to carry him to his burial in the fields.

Thus adulterers and thieves are used. Such as be imprisoned for debt once
known, lie there until it be paid. The Taissu or Loutea calls them many
times before him by the virtue of his office, who understanding the cause
wherefore they do not pay their debtes, appoints them a certain time to do
it, wtin the compass whereof if they discharge not their debtes being debtors
in deed, then they be whipped and condemned to perpetual imprisonment: if the
creditours be many, and one is to be paid before an other, they do, contrary to
our manner, pay him first, of whom they last borrowed, and so ordinarily the
rest, in such sort that the first lender be the last receyuer. The same order
is kept in paying legacies: the last named, receives his portion first. They
account it nothing to show favor to such a one as can do the like again: Of
like the first lenders be the more welthier.
but to do good to them that have little or nothing, that is worth thanks,
therefore pay they the last before the first, for that their intent seems
rather to be virtuous then gainful.

When I said that such as be committed to prison for theft and murder, were
judged by the Court, I meant not them that were apprehended in the deed doing,
for they need no trial, but are brought immediately before the Tutan, who out
of hand gives sentence. Other not taken so openly, and do need trial, are
the malefactors put to execution once a year in the chief cities, to keep in
awe the people: or condemned, do remain in prison, lokyng for their day.
Thieves being taken, are carried to prison from one place to an other in a
chest upon men's shoulders, hired therefore by the king, the Chest is six
handfulles high, the prisoner sits therein upon a benche, the cover of the
chest is two boordes, amyd them both a pillerylyke hole, for the prisoner his
neck, there sits he with his head without the chest, and the rest of his
body within, not able to move or turn his head this way or that way, nor to
pluck it in: the necessities of nature he voydeth at a hole in the bottom of
the chest, the meat he eats is put into his mouth by others. There abides
he day and night during his whole journey: if happily his porters stumble, or
the chest do iogge, or be set down carelessly, it turns to his great pains
that sits therein, all such motions being unto him hangyng as it were. Thus
were our companyons carried from Cinceo, seven days journey, never taking any
rest as afterward they told us, and their greatest grief was to stay by the
way: as soon as they came, being taken out of the chests, they were not able
to stand on their feet, and two of them dyed shortly after.

When we lay in prison at Fuquieo, we came many times abroad, and were brought
to the palaces of noble men, Fuquieo.
to be seen of them and their wives, for that they had never seen any
Portugal before. Many things they asked us of our country, and our fashions,
and did write every thing, for they be curious in novelties above measure.
Hereof to fore.
The gentlemen show great courtesy unto strangers, and so did we find at
their hands, and because that many times we were brought abroad into the
city, somewhat will I say of such things as I did see therein, being a
gallant city, and chief in one of the thirtiene shyres aforesaid.

The city Fuquieo, is very great, and mightily walled with square stone both
within and without, and as it may seem by the breadth thereof, filled up in
the middle with earth, laid over with brick and covered with tyle, after the
manner of porches or galeryes, that one might dwell therein. The steyers they
use, are so easily made, that one may go them up and down a horseback, as
eftsoons they do: the streets are paued, as already it has been said:
there be a great number of Merchantes, every one has written in a great table
at his door such things as he has to sell. In like manner every artisane
paynteth out his craft: the market places be large, great abundance of all
things there be to be sold. The city stands upon water, many streams run
through it, the banks pitched, and so broad that they serve for streets to
the cities use. Over the streams are sundry brydges both of timber and stone,
that being made level with the streets, hinder not the passage of the Barges
to and fro, the chanelles are so deep. Where the streams come in and go out
of the city, be certain arches in the wall, there go in and out their
Parai, Parai.
that is a kind of Barges they have, and this only the day time: at night
these arches are closed up with gates, so do they shut up all the gates of the
city. These streams and Barges do ennoblyshe very much the city, and make
it as it were to seem an other Uenice. The buyldinges are even, well made,
high, not lofted, except it be some wherein merchandise is laid. It is a
world to see how great these cities are, and the cause is, for that the
houses are buylt even, as I have said, and do take a great deal of room.
One thing we saw in this city that made us all to wonder, and is worthy to
be noted: Namely, over a porche at the coming in to one of the aforesaid
four houses, the which the king has in every shyre for his governors as I
have erst said, stands a Tower buylt upon forty pyllers, each one whereof
is but one stone, each one forty handfulles or spannes long: in breadth or
compass twelve, as many of us did measure them. Besides this, their greatness
such in one piece, that it might seem impossible to work them: they be
moreover cornerde, and in color, length, and breadth so like, that the one
nothing dyffereth from the other. This thing made us all to wonder very much.

We are wont to call this country China, and the people Chineans, but as long
as we were prisoners, not hearing amongst them at any time that name, I
determined to learn how they were called: and asked sometimes by them
thereof, for that they understood us not when we called them Chineans, I
answered them that all the inhabitants of India named them Chineans, wherefore
I prayed them that they would tell me, for what occasion they are so called,
whether peradventure any city of theyrs bare that name. Hereunto they always
answered me, to have no such name, nor ever to have had. Than did I ask them
what name the whole country bears, and what they would answer being asked
of other nations what countrymen they were? It was told me that of ancient
time in this country had been many kings, and though presently it were all
under one, each kingdom nevertheless enjoyed that name it first had, these
kingdoms are the provinces I spoke of before. In conclusion they said, that
the whole country is called Tamen, and the inhabitants Tamegines, Tamen the
proper name of China.
so that this name China or Chineans, is not heard of in that country. I do
think that the nearenesse of an other province thereabout called Cochinchina,
and the inhabitants thereof Cochinesses, first discovered before that China
was, lying not far from Malacca, did give occasion both to the one nation and
to the other of that name Chineans, as also the whole country to be named
China. But their proper name is that aforesaid.

I have heard moreover that in the city Nanquim remains a table of gold,
and in it written a king his name, as a memory of that residence the kings were
wont to keep there. This table stands in a great palace, covered always,
except it be in some of their festival days, at what time they are wont to
let it be seen: covered nevertheless as it is, all the nobility of the city
goes of duty to do it every day reverence. The like is done in the head
cities of all the other shyres in the palaces of the Ponchiassini, wherein
these aforesaid tables do stand with the king his name written in them,
although no reverence be done thereunto but in solemn feasts.

I have likewise understood that the city Pachin, where the king makes his
abode, Pochang. al.
is so great, that to go from one side to the other, besides the Subarbes, the
which are greater than the city it self, it requires one whole day a
horseback, going hackney pase. In the Subarbes be many wealthy marchantes of
all sorts. They told me furthermore that it was Moted about, and in the Motes
great store of fyshe, whereof the king makes great gaynes.

Their enemies
It was also told me that the king of China had no king to wage battle
withal, besides the Tartares, with whom he had concluded a peace more than
fourscore years ago. Nevertheless their friendshyp was not so great, that
the one nation might marry with the other. And demanding with whom they
married, Marriage of the kings children.
they said, that in old time the Chinish kings, when they would marry their
daughters, accustomed to make a solemn feast, whereunto came all sorts of men.
The daughter that was to be married, stood in a place where she might see
them all, and look whom she lyked best, him did she choose to husband, and
if happily he were of a base condition, he became by and by a gentleman: but
this custom has been left long since. Now a days the king marryeth his
daughters at his own pleasure, with great men of the same kingdom: the like
order he observes in the marriage of his sons.

They have moreover one thing very good, and that which made us all to
marueyle at them being Gentiles: namely, that there be hospitalles in all their
cities, always full of people, we never saw any poor body beg. He speaks
not here of all China, but of the cities, for in other places there be beggars,
as you have seen already, swarmyng out of trees.
We therefore asked the cause of this: answered it was, that in every city
there is a great circuit, wherein be many houses for poor people, for blind,
lame, old folk, not able to traueyle for age, nor having any other means to
live. These folk have in the aforesaid houses, ever plenty of rice during
their lives, but nothing else. Such as be received into these houses, come in
after this manner. When one is sick, blind, or lame, he makes a supplication
to the Ponchiassi, and prouyng that to be true he writes, he remains in the
aforesaid great lodgyng as long as he lives: besides this they keep in these
places Swyne and Hens, whereby the poor be relieved without going a beggyng.

I said before that China was full of ryuers, but now I mind to confyrme the
same anewe: for the farther we went into the country, the greater we found the
ryuers. Sometimes we were so far of from the sea, that where we came no sea
fyshe had been seen, and salt was there very dear, of fresh water fyshe yet
was there great abundance, and that fysh very good: they keep it good after
this manner. Where the ryuers do meet, and so pass into the sea, there lies
great store of Boats, specially where no salt water comes, and that in
March and Apryll. These Boats are so many that it seems wonderful, ne
serve they for other than to take small fyshe. By the ryuers sides they make
leyres of fine and strong nets, that lie three handfulles under water, and
one above, to keep and nourysh their fyshe in, until such time as other
fyshers do come with Boats, bryngyng for that purpose certain great chestes
lyned with paper, able to hold water, wherein they carry their fyshe up and
down the river, every day renuyng the chest with fresh water, and sellyng
their fyshe in every city, town, and village, where they pass, unto the
people as they need it: most of them have net leyres to keep fyshe in
always for their provision. Where the greater Boats can not pass any farther
forward, they take lesser, and because the whole country is very well watered,
there is so great plenty of diverse sorts of fyshe, that it is wonderful to
see: assuredly we were amazed to behold the manner of their provision. Their
fyshe is chiefly nourished with the dung of Bufles and Oxen, that greatly
fatteth it. Although I said their fyshyng to be in March and April at what
time we saw them do it, nevertheless they told us that they fyshed at all
times, for that usually they do feed on fyshe, wherefore it behooves them to
make their provision continually. When we had passed Fuquien, He speaks of
Fuquien shyre.
we went into Quicin shyre, where the fine claye vessel is made, as I said
before: and we came to a city, the one side whereof is built upon the foot
of a hill, whereby passes a river nauigable: there we took Boat, and went by
water toward the sea: on each side of the river we found many cities, towns,
and villages, wherein we saw great store of marchandyse, but specially of fine
clay: there did we land by the way to buy victualles and other necessaryes.
Going down this river Southwarde, we were glad that we drew near unto a
warmer country, from whence we had been far distant: this country we
passed through in eight days, for our journey lay down the stream. Before
that I do say any thing of that shyre we came into, I will first speak of the
great city of Quicin, wherein always remains a Tutan, that is a governor,
as you have seen, though some Tutans do govern two or three shyres.

That Tutan that was condemned for our cause, of whom I spoke before, was
borne in this country, but he governed Foquien shyre: nothing it auayled him
to be so great an officer. This country is so great, that in many places
where we went, there had been as yet no talk of his death, although he were
executed a whole year before. At the city Quanche whyther we came, the river
was so great that it seemed a sea, Aliis Cenchi.
though it were so little where we took water, that we needed small boats. One
day about.ix. of ye clock, beginning to row near the walls with the stream,
we came at noone to a bridge made of many barges, ouerlinked all together with
two mighty cheyns. There stayed we until it was late, but we saw not one go
either up thereon or down, except two Louteas yt about the going down of ye
sun, came and set them down there, the one in one side, the other in the other
side. Than was the bridge opened in many places, and barges both great and small
to the number of.600. began to pass: those that went up the stream, at one
place, such as came down, at an other. Wha^ al had thus shot the bridge, than
was it shut up again. We hear say that every day they take this order in all
principal places of merchandyse, for paying of ye custom unto the king,
specially for salt, whereof the greatest reuenews are made that the king has in
this country. The kings revenues.
The passages of the bridge where it is opened, be so near the shore, that
nothing can pass without touching the same. To stay the barges at their
pleasure, that they go no farther forward, are used certain iron instruments.
The bridge consists of.112. barges, there stayed we until the euenyng that
they were opened, lothesomely oppressed by the multitude of people that came to
see us, so many in number, that we were enforced to go aside from the bank
until such time as the bridge was opened: howbeit we were nevertheless
thronged about with many boats full of people. And though in other cities and
places where we went, the people came so importunate upon us, that it was
needful to withdraw our selves: yet were we here much more molested for the
number of people, and this bridge, the principal way out of the city unto an
other place so well inhabited, that were it walled about, it might be compared
to the city. When we had shot the bridge, we kept along the city until that
it was night, than met we with an other river that joined with this, we rowed
up that by the walls until we came to an other bridge gallantly made of
barges, but lesser a great deal than that other bridge over the greater
stream: here stayed we that night, and other two days with more quiet, being
out of the prease of the people. These rivers do meet without at one corner
point of the city. In either of them were so many barges great and small, that
we all thought them at the least to be above three thousand: the greater
number thereof was in the lesser river, where we were. Amongst the rest here lay
certain greater vessels, called in their language Parai, that serve for the
Tutan, Parai.
when he takes his voyage by other ryuers that join with this, toward
Pachin, where the king makes his abode. For, as many times I have erst said,
all this country is full of rivers. Desirous to see those Parai we got into
some of them, where we found some chambers set forth with gilded beds very
richly, other furnished with tables and seats, and all other things so neat
and in perfection, that it was wonderful.

Quiacim shyre, as far as I can perceive, lies upon the south. On that side
we kept at our first entry thereinto, traueyling not far from the high
mountains we saw there. Asking what people dwells beyond those mountains,
it was told me that they be thieves, and men of a strange language. And because
that unto sundry places near this river, ye mountains do approach, whence the
people issuing down do many times great harm, this order is taken at ye entry
into Quiacim shyre. To guard this river whereon continually go to and fro Parai
great and small fraught with salt, fish poudred with pepper, and other
necessaries for that country: they do lay in diverse places certain Parai, and
great barges armed, wherein watch and ward is kept day and night in both sides
of the river, for the safety of the passage, and security of such Parai as
do remain there, though the traueylers never go but many in company. In every
rode there be at the least thirty, in some two hundred men, as the passage
requires.

This guard is kept usually until you come to the city Onchio, where
continually the Tutan of this shyre, and eke of Cantan, makes his abode. From
that city upward, where the river waxes more narrow, and the passage more
dangerous, there be always armed one hundred and fifty Parai, to accompany
other vessels fraught with marchandyse, and all this at the king his charges.
This seemed unto me one of the strangest things I did see in this country.

When we lay at Fuquien, we did see certain Moors, who knew so little of
their sect, that they could say nothing else but that Machomet was a Moore, my
father was a Moore, and I am a Moore, with some other words of their Alcorane,
wherewithal, in abstinence from Swynes flesh, they live until the devil
take them all. This when I saw, and being sure that in many Chinish cities the
relics of Machomet are kept, as soon as we came to the city where these
fellows be, I enfourmed my self of them, and learned the truth.

These Moors, as they told me, in times past came in great ships fraught
with merchandise from Pachin ward, to a Port granted unto them by the king,
as he is wont to all them that traffike into this country, where they being
arrived at a little town standing in the havens mouth, in time converted unto
their sect the greatest Loutea there. When that Loutea with all his family was
become Moorysh, the rest began likewise to do the same. In this part of China
the people be at liberty, every one to worship and follow what him lyketh best.
Wherefore no body took heed thereto, until such time as the Moors
perceyuyng that many followed them in superstition, and that the Loutea favored
them, they began to forbid wholly the eating of Swines flesh. But all this
countrymen and women, chosing rather to forsake father and mother, than to
leave of eating of porke, by no means would yield to that proclamation. For
besides the great desire they all have to eat that kind of meat, many of
them do live thereby: and therefore the people complained unto the
Magistrates, accusing the Moors of a conspiracy pretended betwixt them and the
Loutea against their king. In this country, as no suspicion, no not one
traiterous word is long borne withal: so was the king speedily advertised
thereof, who gave comcommaundement out of hand that the aforesaid Loutea
should be put to death, and with him the Moors of most importance: the other
to be laid first in prison, and afterward to be sent abroad into certain
cities, where they remained perpetual slaves unto the king. To this city came
by hap men and women threescore and odd, who at this day are brought to five
men and four women, for it is now twenty years ago this happened. Their
ofspryng passes the number of.200. and they in this city, as the rest in
other cities, whyther they were sent, have their Moscheas, whereunto they al
resort every friday to keep their holydaye. But, as I think, That is their
temples.
that will no longer endure, then whiles they do live, that came from thence,
for their posterity is so confused, that they have nothing of a Moore in them
but abstinence from Swynes flesh, and yet many of them do eat thereof
privily. They tell me that their native country has name Camarian, a fyrme
land, wherein be many kings, and the Indishe country well known unto them.
It should seem by their voyage to be Cardandan in Ortelius.
It may so be: for as soon as they did see our servants (our servants were
Preuzaretes) they judged them to be Indians: many of their words sounded
upon the Persike tongue, but none of us could understand them. I asked them
whether they converted any of the Chinishe nation unto their sect: they
answered me, that with much a do they converted the women with whom they do
marry, yeldyng me no other cause thereof, but the difficulty they find in them
to be brought from eating swines flesh and drynking of wine. I am persuaded
therefore, that if this country were in league with us, forbyddyng them neither
of both, it would be an easy matter to draw them to our religion, from their
superstition, whereat they them selves do laugth when they do their Idolatry. I
have learned moreover that the sea whereby these Moors that came to China, were
wont to travail, is a very great gulf, It seems they came up the river
from the Caspian sea.
that falls into this country out from Tartaria and Persia, leaving on the
other side all the country of China, and land of the Mogorites, drawyng
always toward the south: and of all lykelyhood it is even so, because that
these Moors, the which we have seen, be rather brown then white, whereby
they show them selves to come from some warmer country then China is, near
to Pachin, At cacan.
where the ryuers are frosen in the winter for cold, and many of them so
vehemently, that carts may pass over them.

We did see in this city many Tartares, Mogorites, Bremes, and Laoynes, Ali.
Auoins Tartares.
both men and women. The Tartares are men very white, good horsemen and
archers, confinyng with China on that side where Pachin stands, separated
from thence by great mountains that are betwyxt these kingdoms. Over them be
certain ways to pass, and for both sides, Castelles continually keapte with
soldiers: Mount Vsont.
in time past the Tartares were wont always to have wars with the Chineans,
but these fourscore years past they were quiet, until the second year of
our imprysonment. The Mogorites be in like manner white, Mogorites.
and heathen, we are advertised that of one side they border upon these
Tartares, and confine with the Persike Tartares on the other side, whereof we
saw in them some tokens, as their manner of clothes, and that kind of hat the
Saracenes do wear. The Moors affirmed, that where the king lies, there be
many Tartares and Mogorites, that brought into China certain blewes of great
valewe: al we thought it to be Vanil of Cambaia wont to be sold at Ormus. So
that this is the true situation of that country, not in the Northpartes, as
many times I have hard say, confynyng with Germany.

As for the Bremes we have seen in this city Chenchi certain men and women,
Bremes.
amongst whom there was one that came not long since, having as yet her hear
tied up after the Pegues fashion: this woman, and other more with whom a black
Moore damsel in our company had conference, and did understand them well
enough, had dwelte in Peghu. This new come woman, imaginyng that we meant to
make our abode in that city, bid us to be of good comfort, for that her
country was not distant from thence above five days journey, and that out of
her country there lay a high way for us home into our own. Being asked the
way, she aunsweared that the first three days the way lies over certain
great mountains and wilderness, afterward people to be met withal again.
Thence two days journey more to the Breames country. Wherefore I do conclude,
that Chenchi is one of the confynes of this kingdom, Southwarde from Chenchi
to the sea.
separated by certain huge mountains, as it has been already said, that lie
out toward the South. In the residue of these mountains stands the
province Sian, the Laoyns country, Cambaia, Chinapa, and Cochinchina. Auoins.


This city, chief of other syxteene, is situated in a pleasant plain,
aboundyng in things necessary, sea fysh only excepted, Chenchi.
for it stands far from the sea: of fresh fyshe so much store, that the
market places are never empty. The walls of this city are very strong and
high: one day did I see the Louteas thereof go upon the walls, to take the
view thereof, borne in their seats I spoke of before, accompanied with a
troop of horsemen, that went two and two: It was told me they might have gone
three and three. We have seen moreover, that within this aforesaid city the
king has more than a thousand of his kynne lodged in great palaces, in diverse
parts of the city: their gates be read, and the entrye into their houses,
that they may be known, for that is the king his color. These gentlemen,
according to their nearenesse in blood unto the king, as soon as they be
married, receive their place in honor: this place neither increases nor
diminishes in any respect, as long as the king lives, the king appoynteth
them their wives and family, allowyng them by the Month al things necessary
abundantly, as he does to his governors of shyres and cities, howebeit, not
one of these has as long as he lives, any charge or government at al. They
give them selves to eating and drinkyng* and be for the most part burly men of
body, insomuche that espiyng any one of them, whom we had not seen before, we
might know him to be the king his cosyn. They be nevertheless very pleasant,
courteous, and fair conditioned: ne did we find, all the time we were in that
city, so much honor and good entertaynement any where, as at their hands.
They bid us to their houses, to eat and drink, and when they found us not,
or were not wyllyng to go with them, they bid our servants, and slaves,
causing them to sit down with the first. Notwithstanding the good lodging these
gentlemen have so commodious that they want nothing, yet are they in this
bondage, that during life they never go abroad. The cause, as I did
understand, wherefore the king so uses his cousynes, is that none of them at
any time may rebel against him: and thus he shuts them up in three or
four other cities. Most of them can play on the Lute: and to make that kind
of pastyme peculier unto them only, all other in the cities where they do live
be forbidden that instrument, the Curtisans and blind folk only excepted, who
be musitions, and can play.

This king furthermore for the greater security of his realm, and the
auoydyng of tumultes, lets not one in all his country to be called Lord,
except he be of his blood. Many great estates and governors there be, that
during their office are lodged Lordlyke, and do bear the port of myghtie
Princes: but they be so many times displaced, and other placed a new, that
they have not the while to become corrupt. True it is that during their office
they be well provided for, as afterward also lodged at the kings charges, and
in pension as long as they live, paid them Monthly in the cities where they
dwell, by certain officers appointed for that purpose. The king then is a Lord
only, not one besides him as you have seen, except it be such as be of his
blood. A Nephewe likewise of the king, the king his systers son, lies
continually within the walls of the city, in a strong palace built
Castelwyse, even as his other cousins do, remaynyng always within doors,
served by Eunuchs, never dealyng with any matters. Their festival days, new
Moons, and full Moons the magistrates make great bankets, and so do such as be
of the king his blood. The king his Nephewe has name Vanfuli, his palace is
walled about, the wall is not high, but four square, and in circuit nothing
inferior to the walls of Goa, Goa is a city of the Portugales in East Indie.
the outside is painted red, in every square a gate, and over each gate a
tower, made of timber excellently well wrought: before the principal gate of the
four, that opens into the high streat, no Loutea, be he never so great, may
pass on horsbacke, or carried in his seat. Amydde this quadrangle stands the
palace where that gentleman lies, doubtless worth the sight, although we
came not in to see it. By report the roofes of the towers and house, are glased
green, the greater part of the Quadrangle set with savage trees, as Oaks,
Chestnuttes, Cypres, Pineapples, Cedars, and other such like that we do want,
after the manner of a wood, wherein are keapt Stagges, Oxen, and other beasts,
for that Lord his recreation never going abroad, as I have said. One
pre-eminence this city has above the rest where we have been, and it of
right as we do think, that besides the multitude of market places, wherein all
things are to be sold, through every streate continually are cried all
things necessary, as flesh of all sorts, freshe-fyshe, herbs, oil,
vinegar, meal, rise, in summa, al things so plentifully, that many houses
need no servants, every thing being brought to their doors. Most part of
the merchantes remain in the suburbs, for that ye cities are shut up every
night as I have said. The merchantes therefore the better to attend their
business, do choose rather to make their abode without in the suburbs, then
within the city. I have seen in this river a pretty kind of fyshyng, not to
be omitted in my opinion, and therefore will I set it down. The king has in
many ryuers good store of barges full of sea crows, that breed, are fed,
and do dye therein, in certain cages, allowed monthly a certain provision of
rise. These barges the king bestows upon his greatest magistrates, geuyng to
some two, to some three of them, as he thinks good, to fyshe therewithal
after this manner. At the hour appointed to fyshe, all the barges are brought
together in a circle, where the river is shalowe, and the crows, tied
together under the wings, are let leap down into the water, some under,
some above, worth the lookyng upon: each one as he has filled his bag,
goes to his own barge and emptieth it, which done, he retourneth to fyshe
again. Thus having taken good store of fyshe, they set the crows at liberty,
and do suffer them to fyshe for their own pleasure. There were in that city,
where I was, twenty barges at the least of these aforesaid crowes^ I went
almost every day to see them, yet could I never be thoroughly satisfied to see
so strange a kind of fyshyng.

Of the Island Giapan, and other little Isles in the East Ocean.
By R. Wylles.
THe extreme part of the known world unto us, is the noble Island Ciapan,
written otherwise Iapon and Iapan. This Island stands in the East Ocean,
beyond all Asie, betwixt Cathayo and the West Indies 36. degrees Northwarde
from the aequinoctial line, in the same clime with the South part of Spain and
Portugal, distant from thence by sea.6000. leagues: the travail thither, both
for civil discord, great piracie, and often shipwrackes, very dangerous.
This country is hylly, and pestred with snow, wherefore it is nether so warm
as Portugal, and yet very poor, as far as we can learn, wantyng oil,
butter, cheese, milk, eggs, sugar, honny, vyneger, saffarne, cynamome, and
pepper. Barley branne the Ilanders do use in steed of salt: medicinable
things wholesome for the body have they none at al. Nevertheless in that Island
sundry fruits do grow, not much unlike the fruits of Spain: and great store
of Silver mines are therein to be seen. The people tractable, civil, wyttye,
courteous, without deceyte, in virtue and honest conversation exceedyng all
other nations lately discovered, but so much standing upon their reputation,
that their chief Idol may be thought honor. The contempt thereof causes
among them much discord and debate, manslaughter and murder: even for their
reputation they do honor their parents, keep their promises, absteyne from
adultery and robberyes, punyshing by death the least robbery done, holdyng for
a prynciple, that whosoever steals a tryfle, will if he see occasion steal a
greater thing. It may be theft is so severely punished of them, for that the
nation is oppressed with scarcity of al things necessary, and so poor, that
even for misery they strangle their own children, preferring death before
want. These fellows do nether eat nor kill any foul. They live chiefly by
fyshe, herbs, and fruits, so healthfully, that they dye very old. Of Ryce
and Wheat there is no great store. No man is ashamed there of his poverty, ne
be their gentlemen therefore less honored of the meaner people, ne will the
poorest gentleman there* match his child with the baser sort for any gain,
so much they do make more account of gentry then of wealth. The greatest
delyght they have, is in armorie, each boy at fourteen years of age, be he
borne gentle or otherwise, has his swoorde and dagger: very good archers they
be, contempnyng all other nations in comparison of their manhood and prowess,
puttyng not up one injury, be it never so small in word or deed, among them
selves. They feed moderately, but they drink largely. The use of vines they
know not their drink they make of Ryce, utterly they do abhor dyse, and all
games, accomptyng nothing more vile in a man, then to give him self unto those
things, that make us greedy and desirous to get other men's goods. If at any
time they do swear, for that seldom they are wont to do, they swear by the
Sun: many of them are taught good letters, wherefore they may so much the
sooner be brought unto Christianity. Each one is contented with one wise: they
be all desirous to learn, and naturally inclined unto honesty and courtesy:
godly talk they lysten unto wyllinglye, especially when they understand it
throughlye. Their government.
Their government consists of three estates. The first place is due unto the
high priest, by whose laws and decrees, al public and private matters,
apparteynyng unto religion, are decided. The sects of their clergy men, whom
they do call Bonzi, be of no estimation or authority, except the high priest
by letters patent do confyrme the same: he confyrmeth and allows of their
Tundi, who be as it were Bishops, although in many places they are nominated by
sundry Princes. These Tundi, are greatly honored of all sorts: Tundi.
they do give benefices unto inferior ministers, and do grant licenses for
many things, as to eat flesh upon those days they go in Pilgrimage to
their Idols, with such like privileges. Finallye, this high priest, wont to
be chosen in China, for his wisdom and learning: made in Giapan, for his
gentry and birth: has so large a Dominion, and revenues so great, that
eftsoon he beardeth the pety Kings, and Princes there.

Their second principal Magistrate, in their language Vo, is the chief
Herehaught, made by succession and birth, honored as a God. This gentleman
never touches the ground with his foot without forfaytyng of his office, he
never goes abroad out of his house, nor is at all times to be seen. At home
he is either carried about in a lytter, or else he goes in wooden Choppines a
foot high from the ground: commonly he sits in his Chair with a sword in
one side, and a bow and arrows in the other, next his body he wears black,
his outward garment is read, all shadowed over with Cipresse, at his cap hang
certain Lambeaux much like unto a Bishops Myter, his forehead is painted white
and red, he eats his meat in earthen Dishes. This Herehaught determines in
all Giapan the diverse tytles of honor, whereof in that Island is great plenty,
each one perticularly known by his badge, commonly seen in sealyng up their
letters, and daily altered according to their degrees. About this Vo every
noble man has his Soliciter, for the nation is so desirous of praise and
honor, that they strive among them selves who may brybe him best. By these
means the Herehaught grows so rich, that although he have neither land nor
any revenues otherwise, yet may he be accounted the wealthyest man in all
Giapan. For three causes this great Magistrate may loose his office: first, if
he touch the ground with his foot, as it has been already said: next, if he
kyl any body: thyrdlye, if he be found an enemy unto peace and quietness,
howebeit neither of these aforesaid causes is sufficient to put him to death.

Their third chief officer is a Judge, his office is to take up and to end
matters in controversy, to determine of wars and peace, that which he
thinks right, to punyshe rebels, wherein he may command the noble men to
assist him upon pain of forfettyng their goods: nevertheless at all times he
is not obeyed, for that many matters are ended rather by might and arms, than
determined by law. Other controversies are decided either in the Temporal
Court, as it seems good unto the Princes, or in the Spiritual consistory
before the Tundi.

Rebels are executed in this manner, especially if they be noble men, P. 231.
or officers. The king, look what day he gives sentence against any one, the
same day the party, wheresoever he be, is advertised thereof, and the day
told him of his execution. The condemned person asks of the messenger where
that it may be lawful for him to kill him self: the which thing when the king
does grant, the party taking it for an honor, puts on his best apparel,
and launcyng his body a cross from the breast down all the belly, murdreth him
self. This kind of death they take to be without infamy, ne do their
children, for their fathers crime so punished, lose their goods. But if the
king reserve them to be executed by the Hangman, than flocketh he together
his children, his servants, and friends home to his house, to preserve his
life by force. The king commits the fetchyng of him out unto his chief
Judge, who first sets upon him with bow and arrows, and afterward with
pykes and swoords, until the rebel and all his family be slain, to their
perpetual ignominy and shame.

The Indyshe writers make mention of sundry great cities in this Island, as
Cangoxima a Haven town in the South part thereof, and Meaco distant from
thence.300. leagues northward, the royal seat of the king, and most wealthy of
all other towns in that Island. The people thereabout is very noble, and their
language the best Iaponishe. In Meaco are said to be nienetie thousand houses
inhabited and upward, a famous University, and in it five principal
Colleges, besides closes and cloisters of Bonzi, Leguixil, and Hamacata, that
is, Priests, Monks, and Nuns. Other five notable Uniuersities there be in
Giapan, namely, Coia, Negru, Homi, Frenoi, and Bandu. The first four have in
them at the least.3500. scholars: in the fyft are many more. For Bandu province
is very great, and possessed by six princes, five whereof are vassalles unto
the sixth, yet he him self subject unto the Iaponish king, usually called the
great king of Meaco: lesser schools there be many in diverse places of this
Island. And thus much specially concerning this glorious Island, among so many
barbarous nations and rude regions, have I geathered together in one sum, out
of sundry letters written from thence into Europe, by no less faithful
reporters tha^ famous traueylers. For confirmation whereof, as also for the
knowledge of other things not contained in the premises, the curious readers
may peruse these four volumes of Indishe matters written long ago in Italian,
and of late compendiously made latin, by Petrus Maffeius my old acquaynted
friend, entitulyng the same, De rebus Iaponicis. One whole letter out of the
fyft book thereof, specially entreatyng of that country, have I done into
English word for word, in such wise as follows.

Aloisius Froes* to his companyons in Jesus Christ, that remain in China and
Indie.
THe last year, dear brethren, I wrote unto you from Firando, how Cosmus
Turrianus had appointed me to traueyle to Meaco, to help Gaspar Vilela, for
that there the harvest was great, the laborers few, and that I should have
for my companyon in that journey Aloisius Almeida It seems now my part,
having by the help of God ended so long a voyage, to signify unto you by
letter such things specially as I might think you would most delyght to
know. And because at the beginning Almeida and I so parted the whole labor of
writing letters betwixt us, that he should speak of our voyage, and such
things as happened therein, I should make relation of the Meachians estate,
and write what I could well learn of the Giapans manners and conditions:
setting aside all discourses of our voyage, that which stands me upon I will
discharge in this Epistle, that you considering how artificially, how
cunningly, under the pretexte of religion that crafty adversary of mankind,
leads and draws unto perdition the Giaponish minds, blinded with many
superstitions and ceremonies, may the more pity this nation.

The inhabiters of Giapan, as men that never had greatly to do with other
nations, in their Geography divided the whole world into three parts, Giapan,
Sian, and China. And albeit the Giapans received out of Sian, and China, their
superstitions and ceremonies, yet do they nevertheless contemn all other
nations in comparison of them selves, and standing in their own conceit do
far prefer them selves before all other sorts of people in wisdom and
policy.

Touching the situation of the country, and nature of the soil, unto the
things eftsoon erft written, this one thing will I add: in these Islands the
summer to be most hot, the winter extreme cold. In the kingdom of Canga, as
we call it, falls so much snow, that the houses being buried in it, ye
inhabiters keep within doors certain months of the year, having no way to
come forth except they break up the tiles. Whirlewyndes most vehement,
Earthquakes so common, that the Giapans dread such kind of fears little or
nothing at all. The country is full of silver mines, otherwise barren, not so
much by fault of nature, as through the slouthfulnes of the inhabiters:
howebeit Oxen they keep, and that for tillage sake only. The air is
wholesome, ye waters good, the people very fair and well bodied: bare headed
commonly they go, procuring baldnes with sorrow and tears, eftsoons rooting up
with pinsars all the hear of their heads as it grows, except it be a little
behind, the which they knot and keep with all diligence. Even from their
chyldehood they wear daggers and swoords, the which they use to lay under
their pillows when they go to bed: in show courteous and affable: in deed
haughty and proud. They delight most in warlyke affairs, and their greatest
study is arms. Men's apparel dyuersly colored, is worn down half the
legs, and to the elbowes: women's attire made hansomely, like unto a veil, is
somewhat longer: all manner of dysyng and theft they do eschew. The merchant,
although he be wealthy, is not accounted of. Gentlemen, be they never so
poor, retain their place: most precysely they stand upon their honor and
woorthynesse, cerimoniously stryuyng among them selves in courtesies and fair
speeches. Wherein if any one happily be less careful than he should be,
even for a trifle many times he gets evil will. Want, though it trouble
most of them, so much they do deteste, that poor men cruelly taking piety
of their infantes newly borne, especially gyrles, do many times with their
own feet strangle them. Noble men, and other likewise of meaner calling,
generally have but one wife a piece, by whom although they have issue, yet for
a trifle they divorce themselves from their wives, and the wives also sometimes
from their husbands, to marry with others. After ye second degree, coosins may
there lawfully marry. Adoption of other men's children is much used among them.
In great towns most men and women can write and read.

This nation feeds sparely, their usual meat is rise and salattes, and
near the sea side fyshe. They feast one an other many times, wherein they use
great diligence, especially i^ drinkyng one to an other, insomuch that the
better sort, least they might rudely commit some fault therein, do use to
read certain books written of duties and ceremonies apperteynyng unto
bankettes. To be delicate and fine, they put their meat into their mouths with
little forkes, accompting it great rudenes to touch it with their fingers:
winter and summer they drink water as hot as they may possible abide it. Their
houses are in danger of fire, but finely made, and clean, laid all over with
straw pallettes, whereupon they do both sit in steed of stools, and lie in
their clothes, with billets under their heads. For fear of defilyng these
pallettes, they go either barefoote within doors, or wear straw pantofles
on their buskynnes when they come abroad, the which they lay aside at their
return home again. Gentlemen for the most part do pass the night in
banketting, music, and vain discourses, they sleep the day time. In Meaco
and Sacaio there is good store of beds, but they be very little, and may be
compared unto our pues.

In bryngyng up their children they use words only to rebuke them,
admonishyng as diligently and advisedly boys of six or seven years age, as
though they were old men. They are given very much to entertayne strangers, of
whom most curiously they love to ask even in trifles what forreyne nations
do, and their fashions. Such arguments and reasons as be manifest, and are
made plain with examples, do greatly persuade them. They detest all kind of
theft, whosoever is taken in that fault may be slain freely of any body. No
public prisons, no common gayles, no ordinary Iusticers: privately each
householder has the hearing of matters at home in his own house, and the
punishyng of greater crimes that deserve death without delay. Thus usually the
people is kept in awe and fear.

About four hundred years ago (as in their old records we find) all
Giapan was subject unto one Emperor, whose royal seat was Meaco, in the
Giaponishe language called Cubucama. But the nobility rebellyng against him,
by little and little have taken away the greatest part of his dominion, howbeit
his title continually remains, and the residue in some respect do make great
account of him still, acknowledging him for their superior. Thus the Empire of
Giapan, in times past but one alone, is now divided into sixty six kingdoms,
the only cause of civil wars continually in that Island, to no small
hynderaunce of the Gospel, whilst the kings that dwell near together
invade one an other, each one couetyng to make his kingdom greater.
Furthermore in the city Meaco is the palace of the high priest, whom that
nation honors as a God, he has in his house.366. Idolles, one whereof by
course is every night set by his side for a watcheman. He is thought of the
common people so holy, that it may not be lawful for him to go upon the
earth: if happily he do set one foot to the ground, he loses his office.
He is not served very sumptuously, he is maynteined by alms. But his alms are
very good.
The heads and beards of his ministers are shaven, they have name Cangues, and
their authority is great throughout all Giapan. The Cubucama uses them for
Ambassadors to decide controversies betwixt princes, and to end their
wars, whereof they are wont to make very great gain. It is now two years
since, or there about, that one of them came to Bungo, to entreat of peace
betwixt the king thereof, and the king of Amanguzzo. This Agent favoring the
king of Bungo his cause more than the other, brought to pass that the
foresaid king of Bungo should keep two kingdoms, the which he had taken in
wars from the king of Amanguzzo. Wherefore he had for his reward of the king
of Bungo above thirty thousand Ducattes. And thus far hereof.

I come now to other superstitions and ceremonies, that you may see, dear
brethren, that which I said in the beginning, how surlye the devil has
deceived the Giaponishe nation, and how diligent and ready they be to obey and
worship him. And first, all remembrance and knowledge not only of Christ our
redeemer, but also of that one God the maker of all things, is clean
extinguished, and utterly abolished out of the Giapans hearts. Moreover their
superstitious sects are many, whereas it is lawful for each one to follow that
which lyketh him best: but the principal sects are two, namely the Amidans
and Xacaians. Wherefore in this country shall you see many monasteryes, not
only of Bonzii men, but also of Bonziae women diversely attyred, for some do
wear white under, and black upper garments, other go apparelled in ash
color, and their Idol has name Denichi: from these the Amidanes differ very
much. Again the men Bonzii for the most part dwell in sumptuous houses, and
have great revenues. These fellows are chaste by commandment, marry they may
not under pain of death. In the mydst of their Temple is erected an Altar,
whereon stands a wodden Idol of Amida, naked from the gyrdle upward, with
holes in his ears, after the manner of Italian Gentlewomen, sittyng on a
wooden rose, goodly to behold. They have great libraries, and halles for them
all to dyne and suppe together, and belles wherewith they are certain hours
called to prayers. In the euenyng the Superintendent gives each one a theme
for meditation. After mydnyght before the Altar in their Temple they do say
Mattens as it were out of Xaca his last book, one quier one verse, the other
quier an other. Early in the morning each one gives him self to meditation
one hour: they shave their heads and beardes. Their Cloisters be very large,
and within the precinct thereof, Chappelles of the Fotoquiens, for by that
name some of the Giapanish Saints are called: their holidays yearly be very
many. Most of these Bonzii be Gentlemen, for that the Giaponish nobility,
charged with many children, use to make most of them Bonzii, not being able to
leave for each one a patrimony good enough. The Bonzii most couetously bent,
know all the ways how to come by money. They sell unto the people many
scroles of paper, by the help whereof the common people thinks it self
warranted from all power of the deuylles. They borowe likewise money to be
repayde with great usury in an other world, gyuyng by Obligation unto the
lender an assurance thereof, the which departing out of this life he may
carry with him to hell.

There is an other great company of such as are called Inambuxu, Inambuxu.
with curlde and staryng hear. They make profession to find out again
things either lost or stolen, after this sort. They set before them a child,
whom the devil inuadeth, called up thither by charms: of that child than do
they ask that which they are desirous to know.

These men's prayers both good and bad are thought greatly to prevail, insomuch
that both their blessings and their curses they sell unto the people. The
Nouices of this order, before they be admitted, go together two or three
thousand in a company, up a certain high mountain to do penance there,
threescore days voluntarily punishyng them selves. In this time the devil
shows him self unto them in sundry shapes: and they, like young graduates,
admitted as it were fellows into some certain company, are set forth with
white tasselles hanging about their necks, and black Bonettes that scarsely
cover any more than the crown of their heads. Thus attyred they range abroad
in all Giapan, to set out them selves and their cunnyng to sale, each one
beatyng his basen he carries always about with him, to give notice of their
coming in all towns where they pass.

There is also an other sort called Genguis, that make profession to show by
southsaying where stolen things are, Genguis.
and who were the thieves. These dwell in the top of an high mountain, black
in face for the continual heat of the sun, for the cold, wyndes, and
raynes they do continually endure. They marry but in their own tribe and
line: the report goes that they be horned beasts. They clyme up most high
rocks and hills, and go over very great ryuers by the only art of the
devil, who to bring those wretches the more into error, byddeth them to go
up a certain high mountain, where they stand myserably gazing and earnestly
lookyng for him as long as the devil appoynteth them. At the length at
noonetyde, or in the euenyng, comes that devil, whom they call Amida, among
them to show him self unto them: this show breeds in the brains and hearts
of men such a kind of superstition, that it can by no means be rooted out of
them afterward.

The devil was wont also in an other mountain to show him self unto the
Giaponish nation. Who so was more desirous than other, to go to heaven and to
enjoy Paradyse, thither went he to see that sight, and having seen the devil,
followed him, so by the devil persuaded, into a den until he came to a
deep pytte. Into this pytte the devil was wont to leap, and to take with him
his worshypper whom he there murdered. This deceit was thus perceived. An old
man blinded with this superstition, was by his son dissuaded from thence, but
all in vain. Wherefore his son followed him privily into that den with his
bow and arrows, where the devil gallantly appeared unto him in the shape of
a man. Whilst the old man falls down to worship the devil, his son
speedily shootyng an arrow at the spirit so appearyng, stroke a Fox in steed
of a man, so suddenly was that shape altered. This old man his son trackyng
the Fox so runnyng away, came to that pit whereof I spoke, and in the bottom
thereof he found many bones of dead men, deceived by the devil after that
sort in time past. Thus delivered he his father from present death, and all
other from so pestilent an opinion.

There is furthermore a place bearyng name Coia, very famous for the multitude
of Abbeyes the Bonzii have therein. The beginner and founder whereof is thought
to be one Combendaxis a subtle crafty fellow, that got the name of holiness
by cunnyng speech, although the laws and ordinances he made were altogether
deuilishe: he is said to have found out the Giapanishe letters used at this
day. In his later years this Sim subtle buried him self in a fouresquare
grave, four cubits deep, severely forbyddyng it to be opened, for that than
he dyed not, but rested his body, wearyed with continual business, until
many thousand thousands of years were passed, after the which time a great
learned man named Mirozu should come into Giapan, and than would he rise up out
of his grave again. About his tumbe many lamps are lyghted, sent thither out
of diverse provinces, for that the people is persuaded, that whosoever is
liberal and beneficial toward the beautifying of that monument, shall not
only increase in wealth in this world, but in the life to come be safe
through Combendaxis help. Such as give them selves to worship him, live in
those Monasteries or Abbayes, with shaven heads, as though they had forsaken
all secular matters, whereas in deed they wallow in all sorts of wickedness
and lust. In these houses, the which are many (as I said) in number, do
remain 6000. Bonzii, or thereabout, besides the multitude of lay men: women
be restrained from thence upon pain of death. An other company of Bonzii
dwells at Fatonochaiti. They teach a great multitude of children all tricks
and sleightes of guyle and theft: whom they do find to be of great
towardness, those do they instruct in all the petigrues of princes, and
fashions of the nobility, in chiualry, and eloquence, and so send them abroad
into other provinces, attyred like young princes, to this end, that faynyng
them selves to be nobly borne, they may with great sums of money, borrowed
under the color and pretense of nobility, return again. Wherefore this
place is so infamous in all Giapan, that if any scholar of that order be
happily taken abroad, he incontinently dies for it. Nevertheless these
cousyners leave not daily to use their wonted wickedness and knavery.

North from Giapan, three hundred leagues out of Meaco, lies a great country
of savage men, clothed in beasts skynnes, rough bodyed, with huge beardes, and
monstrous muchaches, the which they hold up with little forkes as they drink.
These people are great drinkers of wine, fierce in wars, and much feared of
the Giapans: being hurt in fight, they wash their wounds with salt water,
other surgery have they none. In their breasts they are said to carry lookyng
glasses: their swords they tie to their heads, in such wise, that the handle
do rest upon their shoulders. Service and ceremonies have they none at all,
only they are wont to woorshyppe heaven. To Aquita, a great town in that
Giaponishe kingdom, we call Geuano, they much resort for merchandyse, and the
Aquitanes likewise do traueyle into their country, howebeit not often, for
that there many of them are slain by the inhabiters.

Much more concerning this matter I had to write, The Giaponish Funerals.
but to avoid tediousness, I will come to speak of the Giapans madness
again, who most desirous of vain glory, do think than specially to geat
immortal fame, when they procure them selves to be most sumptuously and
solempnely buried. their buryalles and obsequies in the city Meaco, are done
after this manner. About one hour before the dead body be brought forth, a
great multitude of his friends, apparelled in their best array, go before unto
the fire, with them go their kyns women, and such as be of their
acquayntaunce, clothed in white (for that is the mournyng color there) with a
chaungeable colored veil on their heads. Each woman has with her also,
according to her ability, all her famely trymmed up in white silk m^ccado:
the better sort and wealthier women go in litters of Caedar, artificially
wrought, and richly dressed. In the second place marches a great company of
footmen sumptuously apparelled. Than a far of comes one of these Bonzii,
master of the ceremonies for that superstition, bravely clad in silks and
gold, in a large and high lytter excellently well wrought, accompanied with.30.
other Bonzii, or thereabout, wearing hattes, linen albes, and fine black
upper garments. Than attired in ash color (for this color also is mourning)
with a long torch of pineaple, shows the dead body the way unto the fire,
least it either stumble, or ignorantly go out of the way. Welneare.200. Bonzii
follow him singing the name of that devil the which the party deceassed
chiefly did woorship by his life time, and therwithall a very great basen is
beaten, even to the place of fire, in steed of a bell. Than follow two great
paper baskets hanged open at staves ends, full of paper roses diversely
colored: such as bear them, do march but slowly, shaking ever now and than
their staves, that the aforesaid flowers may fall down by little and little, as
it were drops of rain, and be whirled about with the wynd. This shoure say
they is an argument that the soul of the dead man is gone to Paradyse. After
all this, eight beardles Bonzii orderly two and two dragge after them on the
ground long spears, the points backewarde, with flagges of one cubite a
piece, wherein the name also of that Idol is written. Than he there carried te^
Lanternes trimmed with the former inscription, ouercast with a fine veil, and
candelles burning in them. Besides this, two young men clothed in ash color,
bear pineaple torches, not lighted, of three foot length, the which torches
serve to kindle the fire wherein the dead corpse is to be burnt. In the same
color follow many other that wear on the crowns of their heads fair, little,
threesquare, black lethren caps, tied fast under their chins (for yt is
honorable amongst them) with papers on their heads, wherein the name of ye
devil, I spoke of, is written. And to make it the more solemn, after comes
a man with a table one cubite long* one foot broad, covered with a very fine
white veil, in both sides whereof is written in golden letters the aforesaid
name. At the length by four men is brought forth the corpse sitting in a
gorgeous ly^ter, clothed in white, hanging down his head, and holding his
hands together like one that prayed: to the rest of his apparel may you add
an upper gown of paper, written full of that book the which his God is said
to have made, when he lived in the world, by whose help and merits commonly
they do think to be saved. The dead man his children come next after him
most gallantly set forth, the youngest whereof carries likewise a pineaple
torch to kyndle the fire. Last of all follows a great number of people in
such cannes as erst spoke of.

When they are al come to the place appointed for the obsequie, all the Bonzii
with the whole multitude, for the space of one hour, beating pannes and basens
with great clamors, call upon the name of that devil, the which being ended,
the obsequie is done in this manner. In the midst of a great quadrangle, rayled
about, hanged with course lynnen, and agreeably unto the four parts of the
world, made with four gates to go in and out at, is dug a hole: in the
hole is laid good store of wood, whereon is raised gallantly a waued roof,
before that stand two tables furnished with diverse kinds of meats,
especially dry figs, Pomegranates, and tartes good store, but neither fyshe
nor flesh: upon one of them stands also a chaffre with coals, and in it
sweet wood to make perfumes. When all this is ready, the cord wherewith the
lytter was carried, is thrown by a long rope into the fire: as many as are
present strive to take the rope in their hands, using their aforesaid clamors,
which done, they go in procession as it were round about the quadrangle
thryse. Than setting the lytter on the wood buylte up ready for the fire, that
Bonzius who than is master of the ceremonies, says a verse that no body
there understands, whyrlyng thryse about over his head a torche lyghted, to
signify thereby that the soul of the dead man had neither any beginning, ne
shall have at any time an end, and throws away the torche. Two of the dead
man his children, or of his near kynne, take it up again, and standing one at
the East side of the lytter, the other at the West, do for honor and
reverence, reach it to each other thryse over the dead corpse, and so cast it
into the pyle of wood: by and by they throw in oil, sweet wood, and other
perfumes, accordyngly as they have plenty, and so with a great flame bring the
corpse to ashes: his children in the mean while p^^^yng sweet wood into the
Chaffer at the table, with doors, do solempnely and religiously woorshyp
their father as a Saint: which being done, the Bonzii are paid each one in
his degree. The master of the ceremonies has for his part five ducates,
sometimes ten, sometimes.xx. the rest have ten Iulies a piece, or else a
certain number of other presents called Caxae. The meat that was ordained,
as soon as the dead corpse friends and all the Bonzii are gone, is left for
such as served at the obsequie, for the poor, and impotent lazares.

The next day return to the place of obsequie the dead man his children, his
kynread, and friends, who geatheryng up his ashes, bones, and teeth, do put
them in a gylded pot, and so carry them home, to be set up in the same pot
covered with cloth, in the mydst of their houses. Many Bonzii return likewise
to these private funeralles, and so do they again the seventh day. than carry
they out the ashes to be buried in a place appointed, laying therevppon a
fouresquare stone, wherein is written in great letters, drawn all the length
of the stone over, the name of that devil the which the dead man woorshypped
by his life time. Every day afterward his children resort unto that grave,
with roses and warm water, that the dead corpse thirst not. Nor the seventh
day only, but the seventh month, and year, within their own houses they
renew this obsequie, to no small commodities and gain of the Bonzii: great
rich men do spend in these their funeralles.3000. ducates, or there about,
the meaner sort two or three hundred. Such as for poverty be not able to go
to that charges, are in the night time, darkelong without all pomp and
ceremonies, buried in a dunghill.

They have an other kind of burial, especially near the sea side, for them
that be not yet dead. These fellows are such, as having religiously with much
devotion worshipped Amida, now desirous to see him, do slaye them selves. And
first they go certain days begging alms, the which they thrust into their
sleeves, than preach they in publyke a sermon unto the people, declaring what
they mind to do, with the great good lykyng of all such as do hear them:
for every body wondreth at such a kind of holiness. Than take they hooks to
cut down briars and thorns that might hinder them in their way to heaven, and
so imbarke them selves in a new vessel, tying great stones about their
necks, arms, loins, thighs, and feet: thus they launchyng out into the
main sea, be either drowned there, their ship bouged for that purpose, or
else do cast them selves over boorde headlong into the sea. The empty bark is
out of hand set a fire, for honor sake, by their friends that follow them in
an other boat of their own, thynkyng it blasphemy that any mortal creature
should afterward once touch the bark that had been so religiously hallowed.

Truly when we went to Meaco, eight days before we came to the Isle of Hiu,
at Fore town, six men and two women so dyed. To all such as dye so, the
people erecteth a Chapel, and to each of them a pyllar and a pole made of
pinaple, for a perpetual monument: hangyng up many shreddes of paper in
sticks all the roof over, with many verses set down in the walls, in
commendation of that blessed company. Wherefore unto this place both day and
night many come very superstitiously in pylgrimage. It happened even then as
Aloisius Almeida and I went to Christen a child, we traueyled that way, at what
time four or five old women came forth out of the aforesaid Chapel with
beads in their hands (for in this point also the devil counterfayteth
Christianity) who partly scorned at us for folly, partly frowned and taunted
at our small devotion, for passing by that holy monument, without any reverence
or woorshyp done thereunto at all.

It remains now we speak two or three words of those Sermons the Bonzii
are wont to make, not so many as ours in number, but assuredly very well
provided for. The Pulpit is erected in a great Temple with a silk Canapie over
it, therein stands a costly seat, before the seat a table with a bell and a
book. At the hour of sermon, each sect of the Giapans resorteth to their
own doctors in diverse Temples. Up goes the doctor into the Pulpit, and being
set down, after that he has Lordlyke looked him about, signifies silence
with his bell, and so reads a few words out of that book we spoke of, the
which he expounds afterward more at large. These preachers be for the most
part eloquent, and apt to draw with their speech the minds of their
hearers. Wherefore to this end chiefly, such is their greedynesse, tends
all their talk, that the people be brought under the color of godliness to
enryche their monasteries, promysing to each one so much the more happiness in
the life to come, how much the greater costs and charges they be at in church
matters and obsequies: notwithstanding this multitude of superstitious sects
and companyes, and the diversities thereof amongst them selves: yet in this
principally all their superintendentes do traueyle, so to persuade their
Nouices in their own tales and lies, that they think nothing else truth,
nothing else sure to come by everlasting salvation, nothing else worth the
hearing. Whereunto they add other subtilties, as in going, gravity: in
countenance, apparel, and in all other outward show, comeliness. Whereby the
Giapanes minds are so noussed in wicked opinions, and do conceive thereby
such trust and hope of everlasting salvation, that not only at home, but also
abroad in every corner of the town, continually almost they run over their
beads, humbly asking of Amida and Xaca wealth, honor, good health, and
everlasting joys. Thus than, dear brethren, may you think how greatly they
need the help of God, that either do bring the Gospel into this country, or
receiving it brought unto them, do forsake Idolatry, and join them selves with
Christ, being assalted by so many snares of the devil, troubled with the daily
dissuasions of their Bonzii, and finally so injuriously, so hardely, so
sharply vexed of their kindread and friends, that except the grace of God
obtained by the sacrifices and prayers of the Catholic church do help us, it
can not be chosen, but that the faith and constancy of many, if not of all, in
these first beginninges of our churches, will greatly be put in ieopardie. So
much the more it stands you upon, that so earnestly long for the health of
souls, to commend specially these Giaponish flocks unto our Lord.

We came to Sacaio, the.xxviii. of January. Aloysius Almeida first for
business, but afterward let by sickness, stayed there some while, but I
parting the next day from thence, came thirtiene leagues of, to Meaco the last
of January. Of my coming all the Christians took great comfort, but specially
Gasper Vilela, who in six years had seen none of our company at Meaco: his
years are not yet forty, but his gray hears show him to be seventy, so
vehemently is his little body afflicted and worn with extreme cold. He
speaks Giapanish so skilfully after the phrase of Meaco (the which for the
renown of this people, and royal seat of the king is best accounted of) that
he does both confess and preach in that language. Certain godly books also
he has done into that speech, not omitting to translate other as leisure
suffers him. To make an end, our Lord for his goodness vouchsafe to preserve
us all continually, and to give us aid both ryghtly to interpret his will, and
well to do the same. From Meaco the.xix. of February. 1565.

Other such like matter is handled both in other his letters, and also in the
Epistles written by his companyons, to be seen at large in the aforesaid
volume. Amongst the rest this seemed in my judgment one of the principal, and
therefore the rather I took upon me to do it into English.

Of the Isles beyond Giapan, in the way from China to the Moluccaes.
AMongst other Isles in the Asian sea, betwixt Cantan a Chinishe haven in
Cathayo, and the Moluccaes, much spoken of in the Indish histories, and
painted out in Mappes, Ainan and Santlianum, are very famous.

Ainan stands nienetiene degrees on this side of the Equinoctial line near
China, Ainan.
from whence the Chinishe nation have their provision for shppyng and other
necessaryes requisite for their Navy. There stayed Balthazar Gagus, a great
traueyler, five months, who describes that place after this manner. Ainan is
a goodly country, full of Indishe fruits, and all kind of victualles, (...)
besides great store of Iuelles and pearl, well inhabited, the ^own^s buylte
of stone, the people rude in conditions, apparelled (...) diversely colored
rugges, with two Ox horns, as it (...) made of fine cypres hangyng down
about their (...) and a pair of sharp cyzers at their foreheades.

The cause wherefore they go in such attire, I could not understand, except
it be for that they do counterfaite the devil in the form of a brute
beast, offering to him up them selves.

Santianum, is an Isle near unto the haven Cantan, in the confines likewise of
China, Santianum.
famous for the death of that worthy traueyler, and godly professor, and
paynefull doctor of the Indyshe nation, in matters concerning religion, Francis
Xauier, who after great labors, many injuries, and calamities infinite suffered
with much patience, singular joy and gladness of mind, departed in a cabben
made of bows and rushes upon a desarte mountain, no less void of all
worldly commodities, than endued with all spiritual blessings, out of this
life, the second day of December, the year of our Lord.1552. after that many
thousands of these Easterlynges were brought by him to the knowledge of
Christ. Of this holy man, his particular virtues, and specially traueyle, and
wonderful works in that region, of other many little Isles, yet not so little
but that they may right well be written of at leisure, all the later histories
of the Indyshe regions are full.

FINIS.
Of the Northeast frostie Seas, and kyngdoms lying that way, declared by the
Duke of Moscouia his ambassador, to a learned Gentleman of Italy, named
Galeatius Butrigarius: likewise of the viages of that worthy old man Sebastian
Cabote, sometimes governor of the company of the Merchantes of Cathay, in the
City of London.
IT is doubtless a marvelous thing to consider what changes and alterations
were caused in all the Roman Empire by the Goths and Vandales, The Roman
Empire.
and other Barbarians into Italy. For by their inuations were extinguyshed all
arts and sciences, and all trades of Merchandies that were used in diverse
parts of the world. The desolation and ignorance which insued hereof, 4.
hundredth years of ignorance.
continued as it were a cloud of perpetual darkness among men for the space
of four hundred years and more, insomuche that none durst adventure to go
any whyther out of their own native countries: whereas before the incursions
of the said Barbarians, East India well known in old time.
when the Roman Empire floryshed, they might safely pass the seas to all
parts of East India, which was at that time as well known and frequented, as
it is now by the nauigations of the Portugales. And that this is true, it is
manifest by that which Strabo wrytteth, who was in the time of Augustus and
Tiberius. Strabo.
For speaking of the greatness and riches of the city of Alexandria in Egypt
(governed then as a province of the Romans) he writes thus. This only place
of Egypt, The great richesse of Egypt.
is apt to receive all things that come by sea, by reason of the commodity
of the haven, and likewise all such things as are brought by land, by reason
of the river of Nilus, The city of Alexandria.
whereby they may be easily conveyed to Alexandria, being by these commodities
the rychest city of merchauntes that is in the world. The revenues of Egypt
are so great, that Marcus Tullius says in one of his orations, Marvelous
richesse.
that king Ptolomeus, surnamed Auleta, the father of queen Cleopatra, had of
revenues twelve thousand and five hundred talentes, which are seven millions
and a half of gold. If therefore this king had so great revenues when Egypt
was governed of so few and so negligently, The governance and revenues of the
Romans. Trogloditica. and India. The gulf of Arabia.
what might it then be worth to the Romans, by whom it was governed with
great diligence, and their trade of merchandies greatly increased by the
traffike of Trogloditica and India? whereas in time past there could hardly be
found.xx. ships together that durst enter into the gulf of Arabie, or
show their prowess without the mouth of the same. But at this present, great
nauies sail together into India, and to the furthest parts of Ethiope, from
whence are brought many rich and precious merchandies into Egypt, Ethiope.
and are carried from thence into other countries. And by this means are the
customs redoubled, Rych customs.
as well by such things as are brought thither, as also by such as are carried
from thence, forasmuch as great customs arise of things of great value. The
richesse which were brought in old time from India and the red sea.
And that by this voyage infinite and precious merchaundies were brought from
the red sea and India, and those of diverse other sorts then are known in
our time, it appears by the fourth volume of the civil law, wherein is
described the commission of Themperours, The commision of Themperours Marcus
and Comodus.
Marcus and Commodus, with the rehearsal of al such stuff and merchandies,
whereof custom should be paid in the red sea, by such as had the same in
fee farm, as were paid the customs of all other provinces partaynyng to the
Roman Empire: and they are these following. Cinamome. Long pepper. White
pepper. Cloves. Costus. Cancomo. Spikenarde. Cassia. Sweet perfumes
Xilocassia. Myr. Amome. Ginger. Malabatrum. Ammoniac. Galbane. Lasser. Agarike.
Gum of Arabie. Cardamome. Xilocinamome. Carpesio. Sylkes of diverse sorts.
Lynnen cloth. Skynnes and Furs of Parthia and Babylon. Iuorie. Wood of Heben.
Precious stones. Pearls. Iewelles of Sardonica. Ceraunia. Calamus Aromaticus.
Berille. Cilindro. Slaves. Cloth of Sarmatia. The sylke called Metaxa. Uestures
of sylke. Died cloth, and sylke. Carbasei. Sylke threede. Gelded men.
Popingayes. Lions of India. Leopardes. Panthers. Purple.
Also that juice or lyquour which is geathered of wool, and of the hear of
the Indians.

By these words it does appear, that in old time the said navigations by
the way of the red sea, was well known, and much frequented, and perhaps more
then it is at this present: The great riches the kings of Egypt had by customs.
Insomuch that the ancient kings of Egypt, consyderyng the great profit of
the customs they had by the viages of the red sea, and wylling to make the
same more easy and commodious, attempted to make a fosse or chanel, which
should begin in the last part of the said sea, where was a city named Arsinoe
(which perhaps is that that is now called Sues) and should have reached to
a branch of the river of Nilus, named Pelusio, The noble enterpryses of the
kings of Egypt Arsinoe. Damiata. Pelusio.
which emptieth it self in our sea toward the East, about the city of
Damiata. They determined also to make three causeys or high ways by land,
which should pass from the said branch to the city of Arsinoe: but they
found this too difficult to bring to pass. In fine, king Ptolomeus surnanamed
Philadelphus, ordained another way, as to sail upon Nilus, against the course
of the river, unto the city of Copto, Nilus. Copto.
and from thence to pass by a desert country, until they come above the red
sea, to a city named Berenice, or Miosormo, Berenice.
where they embarked al their merchandise and wares for India, Ethiope, and
Arabie, as appears by the writing first of Strabo (who writes that he was in
Egypt) and then by Pliny, who was in the time of Domitian. Strabo also,
speaking of the said fosse or trenche which was made toward the red sea, A
nauigable trenche made from Egypt to the red sea.
writes thus, There is a trenche that goes toward the red sea, and the gulf
of Arabie, Lacus amari.
and to the city of Arsinoe, which some call Cleopatrida, and passes by the
lakes named Amari (that is) bitter, because in deed they were first bitter:
but after that this trenche was made, and the river entered in, they became
sweet, and are at this present full of fowls of the water, by reason of their
pleasantness. This trenche was first begun by king Sesostre, before the
battle of Troy. King Sesostre.
Some say that it was begun by king Psammiticus, while he was a child, and
that by reason of his death it was left imperfect: King Psammiticus. King
Darius.
also, that afterward, king Darius succeeded in the same enterprise, who
would have finished it, but yet brought it not to the end, because he was
enfourmed that the red sea was higher then Egypt, and that if this land
(dividing both the seas) were opened, all Egypt should be drowned thereby.
King Ptolomeus.
King Ptolomeus would in deed have finished it, but yet left it shut at the
head, that he might, when he would, sail to the other sea, and return
without peril. Here is the city of Arsinoe, The city Heroum.
and near unto that, the city called Heroum, in the uttermost part of the
gulf of Arabie, toward Egypt, with many ports and habitations. Pliny
likewise, speaking of this trenche, says, What Pliny writes of the nauigable
trenche.
In the furthest part of the gulf of Arabie, is a port called Danco, from
whence they determined to bring a nauigable trenche unto the river of Nilus,
whereas is the first Delta. Between the said sea and Nilus, there is a
streict of land of the length of.lxii. miles. The first that attempted this
thing, was Sesostre king of Egypt, and after him Darius king of the Persians,
whom Ptolomeus followed, who made a trenche a hundred foot large, and thirty
foot deep, being.CCC. miles in length, The largeness and length of the
trenche.
unto the lakes named Amari, and durst proceed no further for fear of
inundation, having knowledge that the red sea was higher by three cubits then
all the country of Egypt. Other say that this was not the cause: but, that he
doubted that if he should have let the sea come any further, all the water of
Nilus should have been thereby corrupted, which only ministers drink to
all Egypt. But notwithstanding, all these things aforesaid, all this viage is
frequented by land from Egypt to the red sea, The viage by land from Egypt
to the red sea.
in which passage are three Causeyes or high ways. The first begins at the
mouth of Nilus, named Pelutio: All which way is by the sands, insomuche that
if there were not certain high Reeds fyxt in the earth, to show the right
way, the Causey could not be found, by reason the wind ever covers it with
sand. The second Causey is two miles from the mountain Cassius: And this also
in the end of threescore miles, comes upon the way or Causey of Pelusius,
inhabited with certain Arabians, called Antei. The third begins at Gerro,
named Adipson: and passes by the same Arabians, for the space of threescore
miles, somewhat shortter, but full of rough mountains, and great scarceness
of water. Al these Causeyes, lead the way to the city of Arsinoe, builded by
Ptolomeus Philadelphus in the gulf Carandra by the red sea. What king
Ptolomeus discovered.
This Ptolomeus was the first that searched all that part of the red sea,
which is called Trogloditica. Of this trench, described of Strabo and Pliny,
there are seen certain tokens remaynyng at this present, as they do affirm
which have been at Sues beyond the city of Alcayr, Alcayre.
otherwise called Babylon in Egypt. But the merchauntes that of later days
travail this viage by land, ride through the dry and barren desartes, on
Camels, both by day and by night, directyng their way by the stars and
compass, as do mariners on the sea, and carrying with them water sufficient for
many days journeys. The viage to East India frequented in old time.

The customs and manners of the Indians.


The places of Arabie, and India, named of Strabo and Pliny, are the self
same where the Portugales practyse their trade at this day, as the manners and
customs of the Indians do yet declare: for even at this present their women
use to burn them selves alive with the dead bodies of their husbands. Which
thing (as writes Strabo in his.xv. book) they did in old time by a law, for
this consyderation, that sometime being in love with other, they forsook or
poisoned their husbands. And for as much as according to this custom, the
old Poet Propertius (who lived about an hundred years before the incarnation
of Christ) has in his book made mention of the contention that was among the
Indian women, which of them should be burned alive with their husbands, I
have thought good to subscribe his verses, which are these.

Faelix Eois lex funeris vna maritis,
Quos aurora suis rubra colorat equis.
Namque vbi mortifero iacta est fax vltima lecto,
Vxorum fusis stat pia turba comis,
Et certamen habent lethi, quae viua sequatur
Coniugium, pudor est non licuisse mori.
Ardent victrices, and flammae pectora praebent.
Imponuntque suis ora perusta viris.
As touching these viages both by sea and by land to East India and Cathay,
many things are written very largly by diverse autours, which I omit, because
they parteyne not so much unto us as does the viage attempted to Cathay by the
north seas, The voyage to Cathay.
and the coasts of Moscouia, discovered in our time by the viage of that
excellent young man Rychard Chaunceller, no less learned in all mathematical
sciences, Richard Chaunceler.
then an expert pilotte, in the year of our Lord.1554. As concerning this
viage, I have thought good to declare ye communication which was between the
said learned man Galeatius Butrigarius, and that great philosopher and noble
gentleman of Italy named Hieronimus Fracastor, as I find written in the
Italian histories of nauigations. As they were therefore conferryng in matters
of learning, A learned descourse of diverse voyages.
and reasoning of the science of Cosmographie, the said learned man, having in
his hand an instrument of Astronomy, declared with a large oration how much
the world was bound to the kings of Portugale, rehearsing the noble factes
done by them in India, and what lands and Islands they had discovered, The
voyages of the Portugales.

The world hangyng in the air.

What is known of the lower hemispherie.

The land of Brasile. Peru.

The charg and duty of Christian princes. Note.


and how by their nauigations they made the whole world to hang in the air.
He further declared of what parts of the ball, the earth remained yet
undiscovered: and said, that of the lands of the inferior hemispherie, or
half compase of the ball toward the pole Antartike, there was nothing known
but that little of the coaste of Brasilia, unto the straight of Magellanus: also
a part of Peru: also a little above Affrike toward the cape of Bona Speranza.
Also that he marueyled without measure, that this thing was no better
considered of Christian Princes, to whom God has deputed this charge, having
ever on their counsel men of great learning, which may infourme them of this
thing, being so marvelous and noble, whereby they may obtain glory and fame by
virtue, and be imputed among men as gods, by better demerites then ever were
Hercules and great Alexander, who traueyled only into India: Hercules and
Alexander.
and that by making the men of this our Hemispherie known to them of the other
half compass of the ball beneathe us, they might by the title of this
enterprise, without comparison, far excel all the noble factes that ever
were done by Julius Caesar, or any other of the Roman Emperors. Which thing
they might easily bring to pass, by assigning colonies to inhabit diverse
places of that Hemispherie, in like manner as did the Romans in provinces newly
subdued: whereby they might not only atteyne great riches, but also enlarge
the Christian faith and Empire, to the glory of God, and confusion of infidels.
After this, The colonies of the Romans in regions subdued.
he spoke of the Island of Saint Laurence, called in old time Madagasear,
which is greater then the realm of Castile and Portugale, and reaches from
the.xii degree toward the Pole Antartike, unto the.xxvi. degree and a half,
lying Northeast from the cape of Bona Speranza, and partly under the line of
Tropicus Capricorni, being well inhabited, and of temperate air, The great
Island of Saynct Laurence or Madagascar.
with abundance of all things necessary for the life of man, and one of the
most excellent Islands that is found this day in the world: And that
nevertheless there is nothing known thereof, except only a few small Havens
by the sea side, as the like ignorance remains of the greatest part of the
Islands of Taprobana, Giaua, the more and the less, and infinite other. The
Islands of Taprobana or Giaua. Pliny.
Then beginning to speak of the parts of our Pole, he caused the books of
Pliny to be brought him, where diligently ponderyng the lxvii. Chapter of the
second book, he found where he rehearses the history of Cornelius Nepos,
by these words: The history of Cornelius Nepos.
That in his time one Eudorus escapyng the hands of king Lathyro, departed
from the gulf of Arabie, and came by sea to the Island of Calese: Declaryng
further, that whereas this narration was many years reputed for a fable, was
now in our time, by the virtue of the Portugales, known to be true: And that
likewise the same Cornelius Nepos recites, that at the time when Quintus
Metellus Celer was Proconsul or Lieue^^^ant for the Romans in France, Shyps
of India driven into the sea of Germany.
the king of Sueuia gave him certain Indians, which saylyng out of India for
merchandies, were by tempest driven to the coasts of Germany. When he had
read these words, he proceeded, saying that the same thing might be verified
now in our time, if the princes which confine upon that sea would endeavor
their industry and diligence to bring it to pass: An enterprise whereby Princes
may obtain true fame and glory.

Cathay discovered by Marcus Paulus.


and that there could not any navigations be imagined so commodious and
profitable to all Christendom as this way might be, if by this voyage should be
found open to India, to come to the rych country of Cathay, which was
discovered now two hundred years since by Marcus Paulus. Then taking the
globe in his hand, he made demonstration that this voyage should be very
short, in respect of that which the Portugales now follow, and also of that
which the Spanyardes may attempt, to the Islands of Molucca. He declared
furthermore, that the city of Lubyke, being rich and of great power, The
city of Lubyke.
and situate upon the sea of Germany, and also accustomed with continual
nauigations to travail the sea of Norway and Gothlande, and likewise the right
noble king of Polonie, The king of Polonie.
whose dominions, with his realm of Lituania, extend to the said sea,
should be apt to discover this secret: But that above al other, the Duke of
Moscouia, should perform the same, The Duke of Moscouia.
with greater commodity, and more facility then any other Prince. And here
staying a while, he began to speak again, and said. Now, forasmuch as we are
come to this pass, me think it should seem a great discurtesie if I should
not show you all that I know as touching this viage, whereof I greatly mused
with my self many years by occasion of the words of Pliny. Whereas
therefore, being a young man, I was in Germany in the city of Augusta, it so
chanced that in those days there came thither an ambassador of the Duke of
Moscouia, An ambassador from the Duke of Moscouia.
a man singulerly learned both in the Greek tongue and the Latin, and of good
experience in worldely things, having been sent to diverse places by the said
Prince, and one of his counsel. Of whose learning being advertised, I sought
his acquayntaunce, and talkyng with him one day of these Indians, driven by
fortune to the coasts of Germany, and of the viage that might be discovered
by the North sea to the Islands of spices, I perceived that at the first he
marueyled exceedyngly, as at a thing that he could never have imagined. But
restyng a while in manner astonyshed in his secret fantasy, he took great
pleasure therein, and said: forasmuch as the Portugales have now compassed
about all the South parts, The words of the Ambassador of Moscouia.
supposed in old time to be inaccessable by reason of great heat, why should
we not certaynely think that the like may be done about this part of the
North, without fear of cold, especially to men borne and brought up in that
clime: Yet proceedyng further, he said, that if his Prince and master had men
that would animate him to discover this vyage, there was no Prince in
Christendom that might do it with more facility. Then calling for a Map,
in which was the description of Moscouia, The way from Moscouia to the North
Ocean and Cathay
and the provinces subject to the same, he declared that from the city of
Moscouia or Mosca, going toward the Northeast for the space of.lx. miles, they
come to the river of Volochda, Volochda, Vstiug. Iug. Succana. Duina. Colmogor.
The North Ocean.
and afterward by that, and following the course thereof, to the city of
Vstiug, so called, because the river of Iug falls into the river of Succana,
where they lose their own names, and make the great river Duina, and by that,
leauyng on the right hand the city of Colmogor, they sail unto the North
Ocean. The which way, although it be a long tracte, as more then.800. miles,
nevertheless he said that in summer it might commodiously be sailed. And that
whereas it falls into the sea, Great woods.
there are infinite woods of goodly trees, apt to make ships, and the place
so convenient for this purpose, that shypwryghtes and other skylfull woorkemen
for all things hereunto apperteynyng, may easily come out of Germany: also,
that the men which are used to traueyle the sea of Germany about the coasts
of Gothlande, Gothlande,
should be best and most apt to attempt this enterprise, because they are
indurate to abide cold, hunger, and labor. He said furthermore, that in the
court of his Prince, The Moscouites have knowledge of the great Came of Cathay.
Permia. Pescora. Catena mundi Obdora, Vecchiadoro, Obo.
they have much knowledge of the great Came of Cathay, by reason of the
continual wars they have with the Tartars, of whom the greatest part give
obedience to the said great Came, as to their chief Emperor. He made also
demonstration in the said card by the Northeast, that being past the province
of Permia, and the river Pescora (which falls into the North sea) and
certain mountains named Catena Mundi, there is thentraunce into the province
of Obdora, whereas is Vecchiadoro, and the river Obo, which also falls into
the said sea, and it is the furthest border of Thempyre of the Prince of
Moscouia. The said river has his original in a great lake called Chethai,
The lake Chethay

The Tartars.


which is the first habitacion of the Tartars, that pay tribute to the great
Cane. And from this lake for the space of two months vyage (as they were
credybly informed by certain Tartares taken in the wars) is the most noble
city of Cambalu, The city of Cambalu.
being one of the chiefest in the dominion of the great Cane, whom some call
the great Cham. He also affyrmed, that if ships should be made on the coasts
of the said sea, Note this secret.
and sail on the back half of the coast thereof (which he knew by many
relations made to his Prince, to reach infinitely toward the Northeast) they
should doubtless in following the same, Difficult traueylyng in Moscouia.
easily discover that country. Unto these words he added, that although
there were great difficulty in Moscouia, by reason that the way to the said
sea is full of thick woods and waters, which in the summer make great
maryshes, and impossible to be traueyled, as well for lack of victuals, which
can not there be found, not for certain days, but for the space of certain
months, the place being desolate without inhabitauntes: nevertheless he
said, that if there were with his Prince, only two Spanyardes or Portugales,
to whom the charge of this viage should be committed, Commendation of the
Spanyardes and Portugales.
he no ways doubted but that they would follow it, and find it, forasmuch as
with great ingeniousnesse and inestimable patience, these nations have overcome
much greater difficulties then are these, which are but little in comparison to
those that they have ouerpassed, and do ouerpasse in all their viages to
India. He proceeded, declaryng that not many years since, there came to the
court of his Prince, The history of Paulus Centurio.

(...) his read more at large in the book of Paulus Iomus.

Malice may do more with some then virtue.

The Caspian sea. Riga.


an Ambassador from pope Leo, named master Paulo Centurione, a Genuese, under
diverse pretenses. But the princypall occasion of his coming, was, because he
had conceived great indignation and hatred against the Portugales: And therefore
intended to prove if he could open any vyage by land, whereby spyces might be
brought from India by the land of Tartaria, or by the sea Caspium (otherwise
called Hircanum) to Moscouia, and from thence to be brought in ships by the
river Riga, which runnyng by the country of Liuonia, falls into the sea of
Germany: And that his Prince gave ear unto him, and caused the said vyage to
be attempted by certain noble men of Lordo, of the Tartars confinyng next unto
him. The Tartars of Lordo,
But the wars which were then between them, and the great desartes which
they should of necessity ouerpasse, Desartes. The vyage by the North sea.
made them leave of their enterprise: which if it had been purposed by the
coasts of this our North sea, it might have been easily fynyshed. The said
Ambassador continued his narration, saying that no man ought to doubt of that
sea, but that it may be sailed six months in the year, forasmuch as the
days are then very long in that clime, and hot, by reason of continual
reuerberation of the beams of the Sun, and short nyghtes: The worthiness
of this vyage.
And that this thing were as well worthy to be proved, as any other
navigations, whereby many parts of the world, heretofore unknown, have been
discovered and brought to civility. And here making an end of this talk, he
said: Let us now omyt this part of Moscouia with his cold, and speak
somewhat of that part of the new world, in which is the land of Brytons,
The vyages of the Frenchmen to the land of Baccalaos.
called Terra Britonum, and Baccaleos, or Terra Baccalearum, where in the
year.1534. and.1535. Jacques Cartiar, in two vyages made with three great
French Galleys, found the great and large countries named Canada, Ochelaga,
and Sanguenai: Pleasant countries. New France. Apostrophe to to the Christian
Princes.
which reach from the.xlv. to the.51. degree, being well inhabited, and
pleasant countries, and named by him Noua Francia. And here staying a while,
and lyftyng up his hands, he said, Oh what do the Christian princes mean,
that in such lands discovered, they do not assign certain colonies to
inhabit the same, to bring those people (whom God has so blessed with
natural gifts) to better civility, and to embrase our religion, then the
which, nothing can be more acceptable to God? The said regions also, being so
fair and fruitful, with plenty of all sorts of corn, herbs, fruits,
Great ryuers.
wood, fyshes, beasts, metals, and ryuers of such greatness that ships may
sail more then.180. miles upon one of them, being on both sides infinitely
inhabited: A thing worthy to be searched.
And to cause the governors of the said colonies to search whether that
land toward the North, named Terra de Laborador, do join as one firm land
with Norway: Or whether there be any straight or open place of sea, as is most
like there should be, forasmuch as it is to be thought that the said Indians,
driven by fortune about the coasts of Norway, came by that straight or sea, to
the coasts of Germany, The way to Cathay and the Islands of Molucca by the
Northwest. A notable enterprise.

The noble enterprise of Antonie di Mendoza, viceroy of Mexico.


and by the said straight to sail northwest, to discover the lands and
countries of Cathay, and from thence to sail to the Islands of Molucca, and
these surely should be enterpryses able to make men immortal. The which
thing, that right worthy Gentleman master Antony di Mendoza considering, by
the singular virtue and magnanimity that is in him, attempted to put this
thing in practyse. For being viceroy of the country of Mexico (so named of the
great city Mexico, otherwise called Temistitan, now called new Spain, being
in the.xx. degree above the Equinoctial, and part of the said firm land)
he sent certain of his Captains by land, and also a navy of ships by sea,
The discoueryng of the Northwest parts.
to search this secret. And I remember that when I was in Flaunders in
Themperours court, I saw his letter written in the year.1541. and dated from
Mexico: wherein was declared how toward the Northwest, he had found the
kingdom of Set Citta (that is) seven Cities, whereas is that, called Ciuola,
by the reverend father Marco da Niza: and how beyond the said kingdom yet
further toward the Northwest, Captain Francesco Vasques of Coronado, having
ouerpassed great desartes, Ships saylyng from Cathay by the North Hyperboream
sea, to the coasts of the Northwest part of the land of Baccaleos. Cathay.
came to the sea side, where he found certain ships which sailed by that
sea with merchandies, and had in their banner upon the prooes of their
ships, certain fowls made of gold and silver, which they of Mexico call
Alcatrazzi, and that their mariners showed by signs that they were xxx. days
saylyng, in coming to that haven: whereby he understood that these ships
could be of none other country then of Cathay, forasmuch as it is situate on
the contrary part of the said land discovered. The said master Antonie
wrote furthermore, that by the opinion of men well practiced, there was
discovered so great a space of that country unto the said sea, that it
passed.950. leagues, The sea from new France or Tarra Britonum to Cathay.
which make.2850. miles. And doubtless if the French men, in this their new
France, would have passed by land toward the said Northwest and by North,
they should also have found the sea whereby they might have sailed to Cathay.
But above all things, this seemed unto me most worthy of commendation, A
notable book.
that the said master Antonie wrote in his letter, that he had made a book
of all the natural and marvelous things which they found in searchyng those
countries, with also the measures of lands, and altytudes of degrees: A work
doubtless which shows a princely and magnificall mind, whereby we may
conceive that if God had given him the charge of the other hemispherie, he
would or now have made it better known to us. The which thing I suppose no man
does greatly esteem at this time: A great and glorious enterprise.
being nevertheless the greatest and most glorious enterprise that may be
imagined.

And here making a certain pause, and turnyng him self toward us, he
said, Do you not understand to this purpose, how to pass to India toward
the Northwest wind, as did of late a citizen of Uenece, so valiant a man,
Sebastian Cabote the grand pylot of the West Indies.
and so well practiced in all things perteynyng to nauigations, and the
science of Cosmographie, that at this present he has not his like in Spain,
insomuche that for his virtues he is preferred above all other pylottes that
sail to the West Indies, who may not pass thither without his license, and is
therefore called Piloto Maggiore (that is) the graunde pylote. And when we
said that we knew him not, he proceeded, saying, that being certain years
in the city of Siuile, and desirous to have some knowledge of the nauigations
of the Spanyardes, it was told him that there was in the city a valiant man,
a Uenecian borne, named Sebastian Cabote, who had the charge of those things,
being an expert man in that science, Commendation of Sebastian Cabote.
Sebastian Cabote told me that he was borne in Brystow* and that at.iiii years
old he was carried with his father to Venice, and so returned again into
England with his father after certain years: whereby he was thought to have been borne in Venice.
and one that could make cards for the sea with his own hand: and that by
this report, seeking his acquayntaunce, he found him a very gentle person,
who enterteyned him friendly, and showed him many things, and among other a
large Map of the world, with certain particular nauigations, as well of the
Portugales as of the Spanyardes: and that he spoke further unto him, in this
effect. When my father departed from Uenece, many years since, to dwell in
England, to follow the trade of merchandyes, he took me with him to the
city of London, while I was very young, yet having nevertheless some
knowledge of letters of humanity, and of the sphere. And when my father dyed,
in that time when news were brought that Don Christopher Colonus Genuese, had
discovered the coasts of India, whereof was great talk in all the court of king
Henry the seventh, who then reigned: insomuche that all men with great
admiration affirmed it to be a thing more divine then humane, to sail by the
West into the East where spyces grow, by a way that was never known before.
By which fame and report, there increased in my heart a great flame of desire
to attempt some notable thing. And understanding by reason of the sphere, that
if I should sail by the way of the Northwest wind, I should by a shorter
tracte come to India, The first vyage of Sebastian Cabote.
I therevppon caused the king to be advertised of my divise: who immediately
commanded two Carauels to be furnyshed with all things apperteynyng to the
vyage, which was as far as I remember, in the year.1496. in the beginning of
summer. Beginning therefore to sail toward Northwest, not thinking to find
any other land then that of Cathay, and from thence to turn toward India. But
after certain days, I found that the land ran toward the North, which
was to me a great displeasure. Nevertheless, saylyng along by the coast, to
see if I could find any gulf that turned, I found the land still continent
to the.56. degree under our pole: And seeing that there the coast turned toward
the East, dispayring to find the passage, I turned back again, and sailed
down by the coast of that land toward the Equinoctial (ever with intent to
find the said passage to India) and came to that part of this firm land
which is now called Florida. The land of Florida.
Where, my victualles faylyng, I departed from thence, and returned into
England, where I found great tumultes among the people, and preparance for
wars in Scotland: by reason whereof, there was no more consideration had to
this vyage. Whervppon I went into Spain, to the Catholyke king, and queen
Elizabeth: who being advertised what I had done, The second vyage of Cabote to
the land of Brasile, and Rio della Plata,
enterteyned me, and at their charges furnyshed certain ships wherewith
they caused me to sail to discover the coasts of Brasile, where I found an
exceedyng great and large river, named at this present Rio della Plata (that
is) the river of silver, into the which I sailed, and followed it into the
firm land more then six hundred leagues, fyndyng it every where very fair
and inhabited with infinite people, Cabote told me that in a region within
this river he sowed.50. graynes of wheat in September, and geathered
thereof.50. thousand in December, as writes also Francisco Lopes.
which with admiration came runnyng daily to our ships. Into this river,
run so many other rivers, that it is in manner incredible. After this, I made
many other vyages, which I now permyt. And wexyng old, I give my self to
rest from such traueyles, because there are now many young and lusty Pylotes
and mariners of good experience, by whose forwardness I do rejoice in the
fruits of my labors, and rest with the charge of this office as you see. And
this is as much as I have understood of master Sebastian Cabote, as I have
geathered out of diverse nauigations written in the Italian tongue.

And whereas I have before made mention how Moscouia was in our time
discovered by Richard Chanceler in his viage toward Cathay, The viage to
Moscouia.
by the direction and information of the said master Sebastian, who long
before had this secret in his mind, I shall not need here to describe that
viage, forasmuch as the same is largely and faithfully written in the Latin
tongue by that learned young man Clement Adams, schoolemaister to the Queens
Henshemen, as he received it at the mouth of the said Richard Chanceler.
Nevertheless, The hystory of Moscouia.
I have thought good here to speak somewhat of Moscouia, as I have read in
the book of John Faber, written in the Latin tongue, to the right noble
Prince Ferdinando, Archeduke of Austria, and Infant of Spain, of the manners
and religion of the Moscouites, as he was partly instructed by the Ambassadors
of the Duke of Moscouie, sent into Spain to Themperours majesty, in the
year.1525. He writes therefore as follows.

I think it first convenient to speak somewhat of the name of this region
whereby it is called at this day, The diverse names of Moscouia.
and how it was called in old time. Conferryng therefore the most ancient
of the Greek and Latin monumentes with the historyes of later time, I
perceive it to be a thing which requires no small judgment of wit and
learning. For we see in how short time the names of things are changed, as
are also the manners of men. I find therefore that those people whom at this
day we commonly call Moscouites, were in time past (as wynesseth Pliny)
called Roxolani, Roxolani, Rosolan^, Ruthem.
whom nevertheless by chaungyng one letter, Ptolome in his eight table of
Europe, calls Rosolanos, as does also Strabo. They were also many years
called Rutheni, and are that people which sometime fought manfully against the
Captains of Methridates, as Strabo writes. They were called Moscouites, of
the chief city of all the province, The river Mosco.
named Moscouia or Mosca: or (as Volaterane says) of the river Mosco. They
were sometime governed by Duke John, whose wife was Helena, of the lynage of
Themperours of Constantinople, of the noble famelie of the Palcologi. Beyond
these Roxolanos, Strabo says there is no land inhabited. These Ruthenians
therefore or Moscouites, are people of the Northeast part of the world from
us, and are determined with the limittes of the great river Boristhenes of
Scithia: The river Boristhenes.
on the one side with the Lituanians and Polonians, and on the other side with
the Tartars, who cease not to vex them with continual wars and incursions:
The Emperor of Cathay.
Especially the great Emperor Cham of Cathay, the chief Prince of the
Tartars, resydent by the sea side in Taurico Chersoneso, molesteth them with
sore wars. They are toward the North side enclosed with the frosen sea, the
land of whose coasts being very large, The frosen sea.
perteyneth in manner all to the dominion of the Duke of Moscouie. The sea is it
which the old writers call Lacus Cronicus, so named of the Greek word
Cronos, which the Latins call Saturnus, Lacus Cromicus. Saturnus.
whom they feign to be an old man, of complexion cold and slow, and thereby
name all such things as are cold and slow, Cronica, as by like reason they
did this North sea, which being in manner ever frosen, is slow and cold, and in
manner immovable. And for like consideration (as says Pliny) Heathens names
it in the Scithian tongue, Amaltheum.
Amaltheum, which word signifies as much as congealed or frosen. But that I
wander not far from my purpose: Thempyre and dominion of the Duke of
Moscouie, The dominion of the Duke of Moscouia.
reaches so far, that it comprehends certain parts of Asia, and also of
Europe. The city of Moscouia or Mosco, is counted twyse as byg as Colonia
Agrippina, The city of Moscouia. The chief cities of Moscouia.
as they faithfully report which know both. Unto this they have also an other,
not unequal in bygnesse, called Fladimer. Also Blescouia, Nouogradia, Smolne,
and Otifer, all which, their Ambassadors affirm to be of princely and
magnificall buyldynges, and strongly defended with walls both of brick and
square stone. Of these, Blescouia is strongest, and environed with three
walls. Other which they have innumerable, are not so famous as are these
whereof this Duke of Moscouie and Emperor of Russia takes thinscription of
his title. For even at this present, when so ever, The Duke of Moscouia and
Emperor of Russia.

The duke of Moscouia his title.


either by his ambassadors or his letters, he does signify him self to be
Emperor of Moscouie, he is accustomed to use this title, Basilius by the grace
of God Emperor of al Russia, and great Duke of Fladamer, Moscouie, Nouigrade,
Blascouia, Smolne, and Otifer. etc. And this is the title whereby the said
ambassadors saluted your majesty in the name of great Basilius when they
began their oration. This prince of Moscouie, has under him princes of many
provinces, and those of great power: Duke Basilius.
Of the which, that old white bearded man, whom this Emperor of the
Ruthians, sent for his ambassadoure to Themperours majesty into Spain, is not
one of the least. For even he, Their power.
when necessity of war requires, is accustomed to make for his Emperor a
band of.xxx. thousand horsemen. Their obedience to their prince.
But this is to their singular commendation, that they are so obedient to their
prince in all things, that being sommoned by him by never so mean an heralde,
they obey incontinent, as if it were to god, thynkeing nothing more glorious
then to die in ye quarrel of their prince. Their wars and conquestes.
By reason of which obedience, they are able, in short time, to assemble an
army of two or three hundred thousand men against their enemies, either the
Tartares, or the great Cham: And have hereby obtained great victories and
triumphs, as well against the Turks, as the Tartars, by the exceeding multitude
of their horsemen, and continual experience in wars. At such time as
The Emperor Maximilian made a league with them, they kept war against the king
of Polonie. They use not only bows and darts, after the manner of the
Parthians, but have also the use of gunnes as we have. And to be brief,
Gunnes. Only the Moscouites have not felt the commodi^^s of peace.
only the Moscouites may seem that nation which has not felt the commodities
of peace: Insomuch that if their region were not strongly defended by the
nature of the place, being impreignable, it had or now been oftentimes
conquered. Their language agrees much with the tongue of ye Bohemians,
Croatians, and Sclauons: Their language.
so that the Sclauon does plainly understand the Moscouite, although the
Moscouian tongue be a more rude and hard phrase of speech. The historiographers
write that the Sclauous tongue took the name of the confusion which was in
Babell in the time of that stout hunter Nemroth, of whom mention is made in
the Genesis. But I can not enough marueyle at this thing, that whereas between
Dalmatia (now called Sclauonia) and Moscouia, Dalmatia.
both the Pannonies are situate, yet this notwithstanding, Pannonia. Hungary.
the Hungarians tongue nothing agrees with the Moscouites. Whereby we may
conjecture that these nations were sometimes divided by legions, and that they
came out of Dalmatia thither: Their original.
which thing also Volateranus affirms, saying that the language of the
Ruthenians (which are the Moscouites) is Semidalmatica (that is, half
Sclauone) How so ever it be, this is certain, The Sclauion tongue reaches
far.
that the Bohemians, Croatians, Sclauons, and Moscouites, agree in language, as
we perceived by thinterpretours which your majesty had then in your court.
For whereas the said interpretours were borne among the Croatians and Sclauons,
and none of them had ever been in Moscouia, or before that time had any
conversation with them, yet did they well understand the ambassadors words.
There are in Mosuia, wooddes of exceedyng byggenesse, in the which black
woolues and white bears are hunted. The cause whereof may be thextreme cold
of the North, Great woods, white bears and black woolues. Abundance of honey
and wax.
which does greatly alter the complextions of beasts, and is the mother of
whiteness, as the Philosophers affirm. They have also great plenty of Bees,
whereby they have such abundaunce of honey and wax, that it is with them of
small price. When the commodity of their country is neglected by reason of
long wars, their chief advantage whereby they have all things necessary
toward their living, is the gaynes which they have by their rich furs,
Rych furs.
as Sables, Marternes, Luzernes, most white Armins, and such other, which they
sell to merchauntes of diverse countries. They bye and sell with simple faith of
words, exchaungyng ware for ware, Their manner of bargayning.
without any curious bonds or cautels. And albeit they have the use of both
gold and silver mines, yet do they for the most part exchange their furs
for fruits, Rude and wild people.
and other things necessary to maintain their life. There are also some
people under the dominion of this Emperor, which have neither wine nor wheat,
but live only by flesh and milk, Tartares.
as do the wild Tartars their borderers, which dwell in wods by the coasts of
the frosen sea. These people are bruitishe, and live in manner like wild
beasts. But they of the city of Mosca and Nouigrade, and other cities, are
civil people, Civil people in cities.
and agree with us in eating of fyshe and flesh, although their manner of
coquerye is in many things differyng from ours. Volaterane writes that the
Ruthenians use money uncoined. Their money.
And enquiryng further, I was infourmed that the money of Hungary is much
current with them. But this is cheeflye to be considered, that they embrace the
Christian faith, They embrase the Christian faith which they received of the
Apostles.
which they affirm to have been preached to them first by Saint Andrewe the
Apostle, and brother to Simon Peter. Such doctrine also as under Constantine
the great, in the year.CCC.xviii. was concluded in the first general
counsel holden in the city of Nicene in Bethynia, and there determined
by.CCC.xviii. Bishops, The counsel of Nicene. Basilius Magnus. Chrisostomus.
and also such as has been written and taught by the Greek Doctors Basilius
Magnus and Chisostomus, they believe to be so holy, fyrme, and sincere, that
they think it no more lawful one hear to transgress or go back from the
same, then from the Gospel of Christ. For their constancy and modesty is
such, that no man dare call those things into question which have once been
decised by holy fathers in their general counsels. Their constancy in their
religion.
They do therefore with a more constant mind persevere in their first faith,
which they received of Saint Andrew thapostle, and his successoure and holy
fathers, then do many of us, being divided into scismes and sects, which thing
never chances among them. But if any difficulty chance to rise as touching
the faith or custom of religion, The bishops define controversies in religion.
all is referred to the Archebyshop and other bishops, as to be defined by
their spirit: not permittyng any judgment to the inconstant and ignorant
people. Their Archbishop is resident in the city of Mosca, where also the
Emperor keeps his court. They have likewise diverse other Bishops: as one in
Nouigradia, Their bishops.
where also Isodorus was Bishop under pope Eugebius. They have an other in
Rosciuia, an other in Sustali, an other in Otifeti: also in Smolne, in Resan,
in C^lmum, and in Volut, all which have their Dioces. They acknoweledge their
Archebyshop as the chief. The Archbishop.

The patriarch of constantinople.


Before the patriarche of Constantinople was oppressed by the tyranny of the
Turks, this Archebyshop recognized him as his superior: Insomuche that this
Duke of Moscouia, and Empeperour of Russia, not vnmyndeful hereof, but a
diligent obseruer of his accustomed religion, does at this day yearly send a
certain stypend, in manner of alms, to the Patriarche of Constantinople, A
notable example of a Christian Prince.
that he may with more quiet mind look for the end of this his Egyptian
servitude, until it shall please almighty God to restore him to his former
church and authority. For he judges it much impiety, if he should now
forsake him whose predicessours have ruled and governed so many churches, and
of whom the faith and religion of so many regions and provinces have depended.

But to speak briefly of their religion, they agree in many things with us,
and in some things follow the Greeks. They have Munkes and religious men.
Their religion.
Not far from the city of Mosca, they have a great Monastery, in the which
are three hundred Munkes, living under the rule of Basilius Magnus, in the
which is also the sepulcher of S. Sergius the Abbot. They observe their vow of
chastity, A monastery of ccc. Munkes.
which none may break that have once professed. Yet such as have married
Uirgins of good fame, may be admitted to thorder of priesthood, but may never
be a Munke. Priests.
The priests and Bishops which are admitted to orders unmarried, may never
after be married: nor yet such as have wives, marry again when they are dead,
but live in perpetual chastity. Such as commit adultery or fornication, are
grievously punished by the Bishops, and deprived of the benefices. They
celebrate mass after the manner of the Greeks, Mass.
which differs from ours in diverse things, as in fermented bread, after the
manner of the Greeks. They put in the Chalice as much water as red wine, A
mystery.
which water they use to heat, because (not without a great mystery) there
ishued forth of the side of our Lord, both blood and water, which we ought by
good reason to think was not without heat: for else should it scarcely have
been judged for a miracle. The primative church.
In fine, they affirm that al their customs and rites are according to the
institutions of the primitive church, and the doctrine of Basilius Magnus, and
Chrisostomus. In this thing they differ greatly from us, A strange custom.
that they minister the communion to young children of three years of age,
which they do with fermented bread dypt in a sponefull of wine, and give it to
them for the body and blood of Christ.

A brief description of Moscouia, after the later writers, as Sebastian
Munster, and Iacobus Gastaldus.
THe province of Moscouia, is so named of the river Mosco, which passes by
the metrapolitane city of Moscouia, called Mosca by the name of the river
Mosco. This province was called of the old writers, Sarmatia Asiatica.
Sarmatia Asiatica.
The borderers or confines to the Moscouians on the one side toward the East,
are the Tartars, called Nogai, and the Scianbanians, with the Zagatians.
Toward the West, the provinces of Liuonia and Lituania. Toward the South, the
river of Tanais, and the people confining with the river of Volga, The Scythian
Ocean.
called of the old writers Rha. And toward the North, the Ocean sea, called
the Scythian sea, and the region of Lapponia. Moscouia is in manner all plain,
and full of maryshes, wooddes, and many very great ryuers, whereof the river of
Volga is the principal. Some call this Ledil, as the old authors named it
Rha. It begins at the great lake called Lacus Albus (that is) the white
lake, and runs into the sea of Bachau, The river of Volga.

Lacus albus.


named of the ancient writers, the sea Caspium or Hircanum. Under the
domininon of Moscouia, are certain regions and Dukedomes: as Alba Russia (that
is white Russia). The Caspian sea.
Also Colmogora, Plescouia, Basrida, Nouogradia, with also many places of the
Tartars, which are subject to the Duke of Moscouia. The chief cities of
Moscouia, are Mosca, Plescouia, Nouogradia, Colmogora, Otogeria, Viatra,
Smolenser, Percaslauia, Cologna, Volodemaria, Roslauia, and Cassam. The people
of Moscouia are Christians, Their chief cities.
and have great abundaunce of honey and wax: also rych furs, as Sables,
Marternes, Foynes, and diverse other. All the Tartars which inhabit toward
the East beyond the river of Volga, have no dwelling places, nor yet cities or
Castles, The wild. Tartars.
but carry about with them certain carts or wagens covered with beasts hydes,
under the which they rest, as we do in our houses.

They remove together in great companyes, which they call Hordas. Hordas.
They are warlyke people, and good horsemen, and are all Macometistes.

Sebastian Munster in his book of Uniuersall Cosmographie, writes that the
city of Mosca or Moscouia conteyneth in circuit.xiiii. miles, and that it is
twyse as bygge as the city of Praga in Bohemie. The bygnes of the city of
Moscouia.
Of the country of Moscouia, beside other provinces subject to the same, he
writes thus: It extends in largeness four hundredth miles, and is rich in
silver. It is lawful for no man to go out of the realm, Silver.

The region of Moscouia.


or come in, without the Dukes letters. It is plain without mountains, and
full of woodds and marshes. The beasts there, by reason of the cold, are
less then in other countries more southwarde. Beasts.
In the midst of the city of Mosca, being situate in a plain, there is a
Castle with.xvii. towers, and three bulwarks, so strong and fair, that the
like are scarsely seen in any other place. A fair and strong castle in the
city of Mosca.
There are also in the Castle.xvi churches, and three very large courts, in
the which the noble men of the court have their lodgings. The Dukes pallaice
is builded after the manner of the Italian buyldyng, The Dukes pallaice.

Their drink.


and very fair, but not great. Their drink is mede and beer, as is the manner
of the most part of the people that inhabit the North parts of the woorlde.
They are exceedyngly given to droonkennesse. They are given to drunkenness.
Yet (as some say) the princes of the land are prohibit on pain of death to
abstain from such strong drinks as are of force to inebriate, except at
certain times when license is granted them, as twice or thrice in the year.
They plowe the ground with horses, and plowes of wood. Their corn and other
grain, Corn and grain.
by reason of long cold, do seldom wax ripe on the ground, by reason whereof
they are sometimes enforced to ripe and dry them in their stooues and hot
houses, Stoues.
and then grynd them. They lack wine and oil. Moscouia is extended unto
Iurham and Corelia which are in Scithia. The famous river of Tanais, the
Moscouites call Don, having his sprynges and original in Moscouia in the
Dukedom of Rezense. The famous river of Tanais.
It ryseth out of a ground that is plain, baren, muddy, full of maryshes and
wooddes. And where it proceeds toward the East to the mountains of Scythia
and Tartarie, it bends to the south: and coming to the maryshes of Meotis,
it falls into them. The river of Volga (sometime called Rha, The marshes of
Meotis. Volga. Ocha.
and now called of the Tartars Edell) runs toward the North certain miles,
to whom is joined the river Occa or Ocha, flowing out of Moscouia, and then
bendyng into the South, and increased with many other rivers, falls into the
sea Euximum, which divides Europe and Asia. The sea Euxinum.


The wood or forest called Hircania silua, occupies a small portion of
Moscouia: Yet is it somewhere inhabited, The forest of Hircania.
and by the long labor of men, made thynner and barer of trees. In that part
that lies toward Prusia, is a kind of great and fierce Bulls, called Vri or
Brisonts, as writes Paulus Iouius. There are also Alces, much like unto
Hearts, with long snowtes of flesh, Vri. Alces.
and long legs without any bowyng of their houx or pasternes. These beasts
the Moscouites call Lozzi, and the Almaines, Helenes. They travail in winter on
sleades.
The journey that is between Vlna of Lituania by Smolence to Mosca, is
trauayled in winter on sleades, by the snow congeled by long frost, and made
very slypperie and compact like Ise, by reason of much wearyng and treadyng, by
means whereof this viage is performed with incredible celeritie. But in the
Summer, the plain countries can not be overcome without difficult labor: For
when the snow begins to be disolued by contynuall heat, it causes marshes
and quamyres inextricable and dangerous both for horse and man, were it not
for certain Causeis made of timber with in manner infinite labor. Causeys of
timber.
The region of Moscouia (as I have said) bears neither Uines nor Olive trees,
nor yet any other trees that bear any apples or fruits of very pleasant and
sweet savor or taste, except Cherry trees, Trees and fruits.
forasmuch as al tender fruits and trees, are burnt of the cold blasts of the
North wind. Yet do the fields bear al kinds of corn, as wheat, and the
grain called Siligo, Corn and graynes.
whereof the fynest kind of bread is made: also Mylle, and Panycke, which
the Italians call Melica: Likewise al kinds of pulse, as Beans, Peason,
Tares, and such other. But their chief harvest consists of Honye and Wax,
Honey in wods and trees.
forasmuch as the whole region is replenished with fruitful Bees, which make
most sweet Honey, not in the husband men's hyues, but even in hollow trees. And
hereby comes it to pass, that both in the wooddes and shalowed launes, are
seen many swarms of Bees hangyng on the bows of trees, so that it shall not
be necessary to call them together, or charm them with the sound of Basens.
There are oftentimes found great masses of Honey combs, conserved in trees of
the old Honey forsaken of bees, forasmuch as the husbandmen can not seek
every tree in so great and large woods: Insomuche that in the stocks or bodies
of exceedyng great and hollow trees, are sometimes found great pooles or
lakes of Honey. Demetrius thambassadour of the Duke of Moscouia, whom he sent to
the Bishop of Rome not many years since, made relation that a husbandman of
the country, Lakes or pooles of Honey.
not far from the place where he remained, seeking in the woods for Honey,
descended into a great hollow tree full of Honye, into the which he slypt up
to the breast, A man almost drowned in honey.
and lived there only with Honey for the space of two days, calling in vain
for help in that desert of woodds: and that in fine dispayryng of help, he
escaped by a marvelous chance, A merueylous chance.
being drawn out by a great Bear that descended into the tree, with her
loins downewarde after the manner of men. For when the man (as present
necessity and opportunity served) perceived the Bear to be within his reach,
he suddenly clasped her about the loins with his arms, and with a terrible
cry provoked the beast to enforce her strength to leap out of the tree, and
therewith to draw him out, as it chanced in deed. These regions abound with
Bears, which every where seek both Honye and Bees, not only herewith to fill
their bellyes, Bears feed of honey and bees.
but also to help their sight: For their eyes are oftentimes dulled, and their
mouths wounded of the Bees: both which greefes are eased by eating of Honye.
They have weakest heads, as Lions have strongest: Insomuche that when (being
thereto enforced) they cast them selves down headlong from any rocks, they
cover their heads with their feet, and lie for a time astonyshed, and half
dead with knockes. They walk sometimes on two feet, and spoil trees, Bears
invade Bulls.
backewarde. Sometime also they invade Bulls, and so hang on them with all
their feet, that they weerye them with weight. The Bears birth.
The Bear (as says Pliny) brings forth her birth the thirty day, and
often times two. Their birth is a certain white mass of flesh without form,
and little bigger then a mouse, without eyes, and without hear, with only the
nails or claws coming forth: but the damme with continual lyckyng, by
little and little figureth the inform birth. When she enters into the den
which she has chosen, The Bears den.
she creeps thither with her belly upward, least the place should be found
by the steps of her feet. And being there delivered of her birth, remains
in the same place for the space of.xiiii. days, immovable as writes
Aristotle. They live without meat.xl. days, Bears live without meat xl.
days.
and for that time sustain them selves only by lyckyng and suckyng their right
foot. At the length chaunsing to find meat, they fill them selves so full,
that they remedy that surfeyte by vomyte, which they provoke by eating of
Antes. Their birth is oppressed with so heavy a sleep for the space of.xiiii.
days, The sleep of Bears.
that it can not be raised either with prickyng or wounds, and in the mean
time grow exceedyng fat. After fourtiene days they wake from sleep, and
begin to lycke and suck the soles of their fore feet, and live thereby for a
space: Nor yet is it apparent that they live by any other meat, until the
spring time of the year. At which time beginning to run abroad, they feed
of the tender buddes and young sprygges or branches of trees, and other
herbs correspondent to their lyppes.

Before five hundred years, The religion of the Moscouites.
the Moscouites honored the Gods of the Gentyles: And then first received
the Christian faith when the Bishops of Grecia began to descent from the
church of the Latins: and therefore received the rites of the Greeks. They
minister the sacrament with fermented bread under both kinds: And think that
the souls of dead men are not helped with the suffragies of priests, nor yet
by the devotion of their friends or kynsfolke: Also that the place of
Purgatory is a fable. In the time of the divine service, the history of the
miracles of Christ, and the Epistles of saint Paul are rehearsed out of the
Pulpitte. Beyond Moscouia, are many people which they call Scythians, The
Scythians subject to the Duke of Moscouia.
and are partly subject to the Prince of Moscouia. These are they which Duke
Iuan subdued, as are the people of Perm, Baskird, Cezriremissa, Iuhra, Corela,
and Permska. These people were Idolatours before the Duke compelled them to
baptism, and appointed a bishop over them named Steven, whom the Barbarians
after the departure of the Duke, flayed alive, and slew. But the Duke returnyng
shortly after, afflicted them sore, and assigned them a new bishop.

It is here also to be noted, that the old Cosmographers feigned, that in these
regions toward the North pole, there should be certain great mountains,
which they called Ripheos and Hyperboreos, which nevertheless are not found
in nature. It is also a fable, It was then an opinion that all ryuers sprung
out of mountains. The fruitful region of Colmogora.

The great river Diuidna.


that the ryuers of Tanais and Volham do spring out of high mountains,
whereas it is apparent that both these ryuers, and many other, have their
original in the playnes.

Next to Moscouia, is the fruitful region of Colmogora, through the which
runs the river of Diuidna, being the greatest that is known in the North
parts of the world. This river increases at certain times of the year, as
does the river of Nilus in Egypt, ouerfloweth the fields round about, and
with abundance of fat moisture, resists the coldness of the air. Wheat
sown in the ground, grows aboundauntly without ploughyng: Wheat without
plowing.
and fearyng the new injury of the proud river, springs, grows, and
rypeth, with wonderful celeritie of hastyng nature.

The river of Iuga. Vstiuga.
Into the river of Diuidna runs the river of Iuga: And in the very angle or
corner where they meet, is a famous mart town named Vstiuga, being a hundred
and fyftie miles distant from the chief city of Mosca. To this mart town,
from the higher countries, are sent the precious furs of Marternes, Sables,
Furs.
Woolues, and such other, which are exchaunged for diverse other kinds of wares
and marchandies. Hitherto Munsterus.

And forasmuch as many do marueyle that such plenty of honey should be in so
cool a country, The natural cause of much honey in cold regions.

Gummes and spyces in hoote countries.


I have thought good to declare the reason and natural cause hereof. It is
therefore to be considered, that like as spices, gums, and odoriferous fruits
are engendered in hot regions, by continual heat during all the whole year,
without impression of the mortifying quality of cold, whereby all things are
constrained as they are dilated by heat, even so in cold and moist regions
(whose moisture is thynner and more wateryshe then in hot regions) are flowers
engendered more aboundauntly, Flowers in cold regions.
as caused by impression of less and faynter heat, woorkyng in thynne matter
of wateryshe moisture, less concocte then the matter of gummes and spyces, and
other vnc^uous fruits and trees growyng in hot regions. For although (as
Munster says here before) the region of Mosco^^a bears neither vines or
Olives, or any other fruitee of sweet savor, by reason of the coldness
thereof, nevertheless, Flowers of trees.
forasmuch as flowers (whereof honey is chiefly geathered) may in summer season
grow abundantly in the playnes, maryshes, and wood, not only on the ground,
but also on trees in cold regions, it is agreeable to good reason, that great
plenty of honey should be in such regions as abound with flowers, which are
brought forth with the first degree of heat, and first approach of the sun,
as appears in the spryng time, not only by the spryngyng of flowers in
fields and Gardeynes, but also of blossoms of trees spryngyng before the
leaves or fruit, Blossoms of trees.
as the lyghter and thynner matter first drawn out with the lowest and least
degree of heat: An example of the degrees of heat.
as the like is seen in the art of styllyng, whereby all thynne and light
moystures are lyfted up by the first degree of the fire: and the heauyest and
thyckest moystures are drawn out with more vehement fire. As we may therefore
in this case compare the generation of flowers to the heat of May, the
generation of gummes to the heat of June, The generation of flowers by moderate
heat.
and spyces to the heat of July: Even so, in such cold regions whose summer
agrees rather with the temperate heat and moisture of May, then with
thextreme heat of the other months, that heat is more apt to bring forth
abundance of flowers, as things caused by moderate heat, as plainly
appears by their taste and savor, in which is no sharp quality of heat,
either biting the tongue, or offendyng the head, as is in spices, gums, and
fruits of hot regions. And as in cold and plain regions, moderate heat,
with abundance of moisture, Long days and shorce nyghtes.
are causes of the generation of flowers (as I have said) so likewise the
length of the days and shortness and warmenesse of the nyghtes in summer
season, in such cold regions, is a great help hereunto. Cardanus writes in
his book De Plantis, Bramble and fearne.
that bramble and fearne grow not but in cold regions, as does wheat in
temperate regions: and that spices and hot seeds, can not grow in cold
regions, forasmuch as being of thynne substance, Spyces.
they should soon be mortified and extinct by excessive cold. For (as he
says) nothing can concocte, ripe, and attenuate the substance of fruits
without the help of air, agreeable to the natures of such things as are
brought forth in the same, although it may do this in roots. But in manner
all flowers are of sweet savor, The savor of flowers.
forasmuch as the moisture that is in them, being thynne and but little, is by
mean heat soon and easily concocte or made ripe. Such also as are soon
ry^e, are soon rotten, according to the proverb.

What Pliny writes of honey.
Pliny, although in the.xi. book of his natural history. Cap. viii. he
writes that honey is geathered of the flowers of all trees and settes or
plants, except sorell and the herb called Chenopode (which some call Goose
foot) yet he affirms that it descends from the air: for in the.xii.
Chapter of the same book, he writes thus.

Sirius is otherwise called Canicula, that is, the Dog, of whom the canicular
days have their name.
This comes from the air at the rising of certain stars, and especially at
the rysyng of Sirius, and not before the rysyng of Vergiliae (which are the
seven stars called Pleiades) in the spryng of the day. For then at the
morning spryng, the leaves of trees are found moist with a fat dew:
Insomuche that such as have been abroad under the firmament at that time, have
their apparel anointed with lyquour, and the hear of their head clammy. And
whether this be the swette of heaven, What is honey.
or as it were a certain spettyll of the stars, either the iuise of the air
purging it self, I would it were pure, l^quide, and simple of his own
nature, as it first falls from above. How honey is corrupted.
But now descendyng so far, and infected, not only with such unclean
vapors and exhalations, as it meets with by the way, but afterward also
corrupted by the leaves of trees, herbs, and flowers of sundry tastes and
qualities, and likewise as well in stomachs of the bees (for they vomit it at
their mouths) as also by long reseruyng the same in Hiues, it nevertheless
reteyneth a great part of the heavenly nature etc. ^ony of great quantity in
North regions
Again in the xiiii. Chapter of the same book he writes, that in certain
regions toward the North, as in some places of Germany, honey is found in
such quantity, that there have been seen honey combs of eight foot long,
and black in the holow part. By the which words of Pliny, and by the
principles of natural philosophy, it does appear that abundance of honey
should chiefly be engendered in such regions, where the heat of summer is
temperate and continual, as well by night as by day, as it is not in hot
regions, where the nyghtes be long and cold, Hot nyghtes in cold regions.

A simi^itude.


as is declared in the Decades. For like as such things as are fined by
continual heat, mouyng, and circulation, are hyndered by refrigeration or
cold (as appears in the art of styllyng and hatchyng of eggs) even so by
the action of temperate and continual heat, without interposition of
contrary and mortifying quality, crude things are in short time made ripe,
sower made sweet, thick made thin, heavy made light, gross made subtyle,
hard made soft, dead made living, and in fine, bodies made spirits, Natural
heat does subtyle and digest all things.
as manifestly appears in the marvelous work of dygestion of living
beasts, whereby the finest part of their nouryshment is turned into blood,
and the finest of that blood converted into spirits, as the like is also seen
in the nouryshment of trees, plants, and herbs, and all other things that
grow on the ground, all which are moved, digested, subtiliate, attenuate,
ryped, and made sweet by the action of this continual heat whereof I have
spoken. To conclude therefore, if honey be either the swette of the stars, or
the iuise of the air purging it self (as Pliny writes) or otherwise
engendered of subtyle and fine vapors rising from the earth, Subtyle vapors
digested by heat.
and concocte or digested in the air by the said continual and moderate
heat, it may seem by good reason that the same should be engendered in summer
season more abundantly in cold regions then in hot, for the causes
aforesaid. Cold regions.
And that it may by authority and reason more manifestly appear, both that
the heat of summer in cold regions is continual (as I have said) and also
that the cold in winter is not there so intolerable to thinhabitauntes of
those regions as other do think, I have thought good for the better
declaration hereof, to add hereunto what I have geathered out of the book of
Ziglerus, Ziglerus.
written of the North regions.

Of the North regions, and of the moderate and continual heat in cold
regions, as well in the night as in the day in summer season: Also how those
regions are habitable to thinhabitauntes of the same, contrary to the opinion
of the old writers.
OF this matter, Ziglerus in his book of the North regions in the description
of Scondia, Ziglerus.
writes as follows.

We will entreat of this matter, not as putting the same in question as did
the old writers, nor geathering judgment deducted of reasons in way of
argument, forasmuch as we are already more certain by history that these
cold regions are inhabited. We will first therefore show by natural reason, and
by consideration of the sphere, declare how by the help of man and art,
cold regions are inhabited without damage or destruction of living beasts:
And will first speak of the quality of summer, The quality of summer in
cold regions.
declaryng how it is there augmented. Yet intend I not to comprehend all that
may be said in this matter, but only rehearse such reasons and similitudes as
are most apparent and easy to be understood.

In such regions therefore, as are extended from the burnt line or Equinoctial
toward the North, The course of the Sun.
as much as the sun ryseth higher over them, so much are they the more burnt
with heat, as Africa, because it ryseth highest over them, as they are nearest
to the Equinoctial: and tarying with them so much the shorter time, causes
shorter days, with longer and colder nyghtes, to restore the damage of the day
past, by reason of the moisture consumed by vapor. Vapors.
But in such regions over the which the sun ryseth lower (as in Sarmatia) it
remains there the longer in the day, Short and warm nights
and causes so much the shorter and warmer nyghtes, as reteynyng warm vapors
of the day past, which vapors help the work of the day. I speak as I have
found by experience, says Vpsalie^sis: For I have felt the summer nyghtes
scarsely tolerable for heat in Gothlande, Gothlande.
whereas I felt them cold in Rome. This benefit of the increase of the day
does augment so much the more in cold regions, as they are nearer the poles:
and cease not until it come directly over the center or point of the axes
or axceltree of the world, where the sun being, at the highest in summer, is
eleuate about.xxiiii. degrees: One day of.vi. months.
In which regions, one continual day consists of.vi. months from the
spryng time, by the standing of the sun (called Solflitium) in the sign of
Cancer, to Autumn. The Sun therefore, without any offense of the night, How
the summer is increased in cold regions.
gives his influence upon those lands with heat that never cease during
that time, which makes to the great increase of summer, by reason of
continuance. We have now therefore thought good to geather, by a certain
conjecture, how greatly we think the summer to be increased hereby.

We have before declared how high the sun is eleuate over the regions that
are under the poles at the stay of the sun: And so many parts is it eleuate
in Rome at the stay of the sun in winter (that is) at the shortest day in
the year. But here, Rome.
in the myd winter, the sun at noonetyde is beneficial, and brings forth
flowers, Roses, and Ie^^floures. I have geathered some in winter in the month
of December, not procured at home by humane art, but growyng in open Gardens
in manner in every bed under the bare heaven, brought forth only by the sun.
But this benignity of the sun, Cold nyghtes in hot regions.
continues not past five hours in the natural day, forasmuch as the
operation thereof is extinct by the coldenesse of the night following. But if
this benefit might be received without hinderaunce of the night, as it is
under the poles, and so continue many months in hot regions unto winter, it
should surely bring forth many wonderful things, if moisture failed not. And
by this condition thus propounded, The Roman winter.
we may well conceive that the Roman winter, although it be not hot, yet to
be equal in heat to the full spryng time in the same city, during the time
of the said five hours. And thus by a similitude of the height of the sun
under both places, and of the known quality of the Roman heaven, and by the
access of the sun to such places where the longest day continues certain
months, we may geather that summer, in places under the pole, is like unto and
equal with the full Roman spryng.

But the more difficult question, Our night of vi. months.
is of the time of the.vi. months in the which the Sun leaves those
regions, and goes by the contrary or ouerthwarte circle toward the south in
winter. For they say that at that time, those regions are deformed with
horrible darkness, Objections.
and nyghtes not increased, which may be the cause that beasts can not seek
their food: And that also the cold should then be intolerable. By which
double euyls all things constrained should dye, so that no beast were able to
abide the iniuryes of winter and famyne insuyng thereof: but that all beasts
should peryshe before the summer following, when they should bring forth their
brood or succession: and that for these causes, the said cold clyme should
be perpetually desolate and uninhabitable. To all which objections, we answer
in this manner.

As touching the nyghtes not increased, I say, that it was not convenient to
assume that for any reason. For not as the Sun falls, The twylightes.
so suddenly comes the dark night: but that the euenyng does substitute and
prolong the day long after, as also the day spryng or dawnyng of the day,
gives a certain light before the rising of the Sun: After the which, the
residue of the night that receives no light by the said euenyng and morning
twilightes, is accomplyshed by the light of the Moon, The light of the Moon.
so that the nyghtes are sildome vnaugmented. Let this be an example proved
by our temperate regions, whereby we may understand the condition of the night
under the pole: Therefore even there also the twilightes help the night a long
time, The night under the pole.
as we will more presently demonstrate. It is approved by the Astronomers,
that the Sun descendyng from the highest half sphere by eightiene paralels
of the under horizon, makes an end of the twilight, so that at the length the
dark night succeeds: A demonstration.
And that the Sun approchyng, and rising above the highest half sphere by as
many paralels, does dyminyshe the night and increase the twylyght. Again, by
the position or placyng of the sphere under the pole, the same is the
horizontall that is the Equinoctial. Those paralelles therefore that are
paralelles to the horizontall line, are also paralelles to the Equinoctial. So
that the Sun descendyng there under the horizon, does not bring dark
nyghtes to those regions, until it come to the paralels distant.xviii. parts
from the Equinoctial.

During the time of these said six months of darkness under the pole, the
night is destitute of the benefit of the Sun and the said twylyghtes, only
for the space of three months, in the which the Sun goes and returns by
the portion of the ouerthwarte circle. But yet neither this time of three
months is without remedy from heaven. For the Moon with her full globe
increased in light, has access at that time, and illuminateth the months
lackyng light, every one by them selves, half the course of the month: The
Moon.
by whose benefit it comes to pass that the night, named as vnaugmented,
possesses those regions no longer then one month and a half, neither that
continually or all at one time: but this also divided into three sorts of
shorter nyghtes, of the which every one endures for the space of two weeks,
and are illuminate of the Moon accordyngly. And this is the reason conceived
of the power of the sphere, whereby we testify that the summers and nyghtes
under the pole are tolerable to living beasts. But we will now declare by
other remedies of nature and art, that this cold so greatly feared, is more
remiss and tolerable then our opinion: so that, Remedies of nature and art.
compared to the nature of such beasts as live there, it may be abydden. And
there is no doubt but there are autours of more antiquity then that age in
the which any thing was exactly known or discovered of the North regions. The
old writers persuaded by conjecture.
The old writers therefore persuaded only by naked conjecture, did geather
what they might determyne of those places: Or rather, by the estimation of
heaven, the which, because they felt it to be hardely tolerable to them
selves, and less to men borne in the clyme of Egypt and Grecia, took thereby
an argument of the whole habitable earth. The history of Strabo is known,
that a pot of brass, A brazen pot broken with frost.
which was broken in sunder with frosen water, was brought from Pontus, and
showed in Delphis in token of a grievous winter. Here therefore, they that so
greatly feared the winter (such as chances to the earth under the xlviii.
paralele) and therefore consecrated that broken pot to the temple of Appollo:
what could such men truly define upon regions so far without that
paralele, whether they were inhabited or not? But such as followed these, being
contented with thinuentions of the old autours, and borne in manner under the
same quality of heaven, persysted wyllyngly in the same opinion, with more
confidence then consideration of the things whereof we now entreat: so
lightly was that opinion received as touching the uninhabitable clime under the
poles. But we with better confidence and faith (forasmuch as we are not
instructed with conjectures) intend to stand against the sentence of the old
autours, affirmyng the North regions within the cold clime to be inhabited
with herrynges, Fyshes of the North seas.
coddes, haddockes, and brettes, tunnyes, and other great fyshes, with
thinfinite number whereof, tables are furnyshed through a great part of
Europe: All which are taken in the North sea extended beyond our knoweledge.
This sea at certain times of the year, The North sea.
pours forth his plentifulnes, or rather drives forth his increase to
seek new mansions, and are here taken in their passage. Furthermore also,
even the mouths of the river of Tiber received a fyshe as a new gest sent
from the north sea: this swamme twice through France, and twice through
Spain, ouerpassed the Ligurion and Tuscan sea, to communicate her self to the
city of Rome. The lakes also and ryuers of those regions are replenyshed with
fyshe: insomuch that no power of cold is able to extinguyshe thincrease of the
year following, and the succession reparable so many hundred years. And I
plainly think, that if it should of necessity follow, that one of these two
elements, the earth and the water, should be destructive to living creatures,
The quality of water.
the water should chiefly have wrought this effect. But this is found so
tractable, that in the deep winter, both that increase is brought forth, and
fyshing is also exercised. The land is likewise inhabited with like
plentifulnesse. But that we wander not to far, The land.
let the faith hereof rest in thexposition following, wherein we intend to
declare how by the power of nature and industry of man, this commodity may
come to pass. The divine providence in moderatyng the elements.
Therefore as touching nature, we suppose that the divine providence has made
nothing uncommunicable, but to have given such order to all things, whereby
every thing may be tolerable to the next. The extremities of the elements
consent with their next. The air is gross about the earth and water: but
thynne and hot about the fire. By this providence of nature, the uttermost sea
is very salt. The nature of the sea.
And salt (as witnesses Pliny) yeldeth the fattnesse of Oil. But Oil, by a
certain natyue heat, is of property agreeable to fire. The sea then, being
al of such quality, Salt.
powers forth it self far upon thextreeme lands, whereby by reason of the
saltness thereof, it moves and stirs up generatiue heat, Generatyue heat.
as by fatness it norisheth the fecunditie of things generate. It gives this
fruitefulnesse to the earth at certain floods, although the earth also it
self have in his inner bowels the same lively and norishing heat, whereby not
only the Dens, Caves, and hollow places, but also spryngs of water are made
warm: Outward cold is cause of inward heat.
and this so much the more, in how much the winter is more vehement. This
thing does more appear by this example, that the mountains of Norway and
Swethlande are fruitful of metales, in the which, Metals.
silver and copper are concoct and molten into veins* which can scarcely by
done in fornaces. By this reason also, the vapoures and hot exhalations
pearsyng the earth and the waters, Vapoures and exhalations.
and through both those natures breathyng forth into the air, temperateth the
quality of heaven, and makes it tolerable to beasts, as witnesses the huge
bygnesse of the Whales in those seas, Whales.
with the strength of body, and long life of such beasts as live on the land:
which thing could not be, Beasts.
except all things were there commodiously norished by the benefit of the
heaven and the air. For nothing that in the time of increase is hyndred by any
injury, or that is evil fed all the time it lives, can prosper well. Neither
are such things as live there, Hereby may be considered the cause of the death
of our men that sail directly to Guinea.
offended with their natural winter, as though an Egiptian or Ethiopian were
suddenly conueighed into those cold regions. For they were in long time, by
little and little, brought first acquaynted with the nature of that heaven, as
may be proved both by the life of man, and by the history of holy scripture
They that were led from Mesopatamia, and that famous Tower of Babylon toward
the North parts of the world, in the first dispertion of nations, did not
immediately pass to the extreme bounds, No passage from our extremity, to an
other, but by a mean.
but planted their habitations first under a myddle heaven, between both, as in
Thracia, and Pontus, where their posterity was accustomed the better to
sustain the rigor of Scythia and Tanais, as he that comes from winter to
summer, may the better after abide yse and snow, being first hardened thereto
by the frostes of Autumn. In like manner mortal men, accustomed to bear the
hardness of places next unto them, were thereby at the length more confirmed
to sustain the extremities. And here also, if any sharpness remain that may
seem intolerable, nature has so provided for the same, with other remedies.
For the land and sea, has given unto beasts, deep and large Caves, Caves and
Dens.
Dens, and other hollow places, and secreete corners in mountains and
rocks, both on the land and by sea banckes, in the which are ever contained
warm vapoures, so much the more intent and vehement, in how much they are the
more constrained by extreme cold. Nature has also given valleys, diuerted
and defended from the North winds. Valleis.
She has likewise covered beasts with hear, so much the thycker, in how
much the vehemency of cold is greater: by reason whereof the best and richest
furs are brought from those regions, as Sables, whose price is grown to
great excess, The best furs. Sables.
next unto gold and precious stones, and are esteemed princely ornaments. The
beasts that bear these furs, are hunted cheefelye in winter (which thing is
more strange) because their hear is then thicker and cleaves faster to the
skin. How grievous then shall we think the winter to be there, Beasts that lie
hyd in winter.
where this little beast lives so well, and where the hunters may search the
Dens and hauntes of such beasts through the woods and snow? But such
beasts, the condition of whose bodies is so tender that they are not able to
abide thiniurie of the cold, either lie hyd in winter, or change their
habitation, as do certain beasts also in our clime. Nature has furthermore
given remedy to man, both by art and industry to defend him self both abroad
and at home. Abroad with a thick vesture, and the same well dowbeled. At home,
with large fyers on Harthes, Chymneyes, and in Stooues for the day, with close
Chaumbers, and Couches, soft and warm Beds for the night: by which remedies
they mittigate the wynters, which seem rigorous to strangers, All beasts have
the nature of the place where they are engendered.
although they are to thinhabitantes more tolerable then our opinion, as in
deed by the first natural mixture or composition of their bodies, such things
are agreeable to them, as seem very hard to other. The Lion in Affrik and the
bear in Sarmatia, are fierce, as in their present strength and vigoure: but
translated into a contrary heaven, are of less strength and courage. The foul
called Ciconia (which some think to be the Storke) does not tarry the winter:
yet do the Cranes come at that time. The Scythian will accuse the Roman heaven
as inducyng fevers, whereas nevertheless there is none more wholesome. Such as
have been tenderly brought up, if they come suddeynely into the camp, can not
away with hunger, watchyng, heat, passages through ryuers, battayles, What
exercise may do.
sieges, and assaults: But the old soldier, exercised in the wars, uses
these as meditations of the field, as hardened thereto by long experience. He
that has been accustomed to the shadow of the city, and will attempt the
saying of the poet Uirgil, Nudus ara, sero nudus, that is, naked and bare,
without house and home, shall to his peril make an end of the verse, Habebis
frigora febram (that is) he shall have the cold ague. Such things therefore as
seem hard unto us, Use makes masteries.
being accustomed by little and little, become more tolerable: Insomuch that
this exercise of sufferaunce by such degrees, does oftentimes grow to
prodigious effects, far beyond our expectation. And thus we seem to have
made sufficient demonstration, by heaven, nature, and art, whereby it may
appear, that no part of the land or sea is denied to living creatures. The
reader may also perceive how large matter of reasons and examples may be
opened for the declaryng of our opinion, wherein we rest. Let therefore
thauctoritie of the ancient auctours give place, and the consent of the new
writers agree to this history, not as now at the length comprehended (whereas
before many hundred years Germany and Scondia had entercouse of merchandies
not severed by the large gulf of Gothia) but as now by our commentaries
brought to light: and having said thus much in manner of a preface, Scondia.
we will now proceed to write of the North regions.

Schondia.
SCondia, Schondania, or Schondenmarchia, is as much to say as fair Dania,
or fair Denmark. Pliny in one place, names it Scandia, and in an other
Scandinauia, Scone is fair in the duch tongue.
if there be no fault in thexemples.

It was named Schondia, by reason of the fayrenesse and fruitefulnesse thereof.
And this as well for that in beneficial heaven, fertility of ground, The
fertility of Schondia.
commodity of havens and mart towns, abundaunce of ryuers and fyshe, plenty
of beasts, great quantity of metal, as gold, silver, copper, and lead,
diligent culturyng the ground, with towns and cities well ^nhabited and
governed by civil laws, it gives place to none other fortunate region. This
was in manner unknown to the old Greeks and Latins, as may appear by this
argument, that with one consent they affirmed, that in these north regions the
cold Zone or clime, was condemned to perpetual snow, intolerable to al
living creatures. For few of them have made mention hereof as to be inhabited.
Among whom Pliny, as one of the chief, says in his fourth book, that
Schondania is of unknown biggenesse: and only that portion thereof to be
known, which is inhabited with the nation of the Hilleuiones in fifty
villages: Neither yet is Eningia less in opinion. Other more ancient then
Pliny, He means Diodorus Siculus
have placed most fortunate regions, with men of long life (which the Greeks
call Macrobios) and of most innocent behauour under the tracte of those lands:
and that there came from thence to Delphos, certain religious virgins, with
vows and gifts consecrated to Apollo: And furthermore, that that nation
observed this institution, until the said virgins were violated of them, of
whom they were received as strangers. These are most clear testimonies of
Antiquity, both of the greatness of Schondia, and the people that inhabit
the same, although they were since unknown: Thinuasions of the Goths.
as likewise the Goths departing from these North lands, although they
obtained Thempire of the regions about the maryshes of Meotis, and the coasts
of the sea Euxinus, with the realm of Denmark (whereof that is thought to be a
portion which is now called Transiluania) and the banks of the river of
Danubius, Transiluania.
and in fine, invaded the Roman Empire, yet were not the regions well known
from whence they took their original. Therefore like as part of the old
writers are insufficient witnesses, to testify of our narrations as touching
these lands unknown to them: Even so the other part which excluded the same
as uninhabitable, are to be convinced, least their authority, being admitted,
should engender opinions not agreeable or convenient to the nature of places.
Sigismundus Liberus, in his commentaries of Moscouia, writes thus. Scandia or
Scondia, is no Island (as some have thought) but part of the continent or firm
land of Suetia, which by a long tract reaches to Cothland: and that now the
king of Denmark possesses a great part thereof. But whereas the writers of
these things have made Scondia greater then Suetia, and that the Goths and
Lumbardes came from thence, The Goths and Lumbardes.
they seem in my opinion to comprehend these three kingdoms as it were in one
body, only under the name of Scondia, forasmuch as then, that part of land
that lies between the sea Baltheun: (which flows by the coasts of
Finlandia) and the frosen sea, was unknown: and that by reason of so many
maryshes, innumerable rivers, and intemperatenesse of heaven, it is yet rude,
vncultured, and little known. Which thing has been the cause that some judged
all that was called by the name of Scondia, to be one great Island.

Gronelande.
GRonelande is interpreted green land, so called for the great increase and
fruitfulness of pasture. By reason whereof, Fruitful pasture.
what great plenty of cattaile there is, it may hereby appear, that at such
time as ships may pass thither, they set forth great heaps of Cheese and
Butter to be sold, whereby we conjecture that the land is not rough with
barren mountains. It has two Cathedral Churches under the Ordination of
Nidrosia. To one of these, was of late years a Bishop appointed, only by the
title of a Suffragane, in consideration that while the Metropolitan does
neglect the direction of religion for the distance of the place, and difficult
navigations, Religion neglecte^.
the people is in manner fallen to gentilitie, being of them selves of moveable
wits, and given to magical arts. For it is said that they (as also the
people of Laponia) do raise tempests on the sea with magical inchauntmentes,
Inchaunte^^.
and bring such shyps into danger as they entend to spoil. They use little
ships made of Leather, and safe against the brusing of the sea and rocks, and
with them assail other shyps. Peter Martyr of Angleria, writes in his Decades
of the Spanysh nauigations that Sebastian Cabot, saylyng from England
continually toward the North, The viage of Sebastian Cabot to the frosen sea.
followed that course so far, that he chanced upon great flakes of yse in the
Mooneth of July: and that diuertyng from thence, he followed the coast by the
shore bendyng toward the South, until he came to the clyme of the Island of
Hispaniola, above Cuba, an Island of the Canibales. Which narration has given
me occasion to extend Groneland beyond the promontorie or cape of Huitsarch,
Gronelande.
to the contynent or fyrme land of Lapponia, above the castle of Wardhus:
Wardhus.
which thing I did the rather, for that the reverend Archebyshop of Nidrosia,
constantly affirmed that the sea bends there into the form of a crooked
Elbowe. It agrees herewith also, that the Lapones consent with them in the
like Magical practices, Lapponia and Gronelande.
and do neither embrace the Christian religion, nor refuse it: whereby I have
thought this likeness of customs to be between them, because they join
together in one continent. The distance likewise, seems not to disagree. For
beetweene both these people, the distance is not full two hundred Schoeni,
every one being a space of ground containing threescore furlonges, Schoeni.
which make seven miles, and a half. It furthermore agrees with this
conjecture that Cabot chanced into such yse. And albeit, as touching the
Month of July, I will contend it is not well rehearsed, Cabot told me that
this ise is of fresh water and not of the sea.
no although he had sailed under the poole, for such reasons as we have
declared before to the contrary: nevertheless, that at some time he sailed by
yse, this testifies in that he sailed not by the main sea, but in places
near unto the land, comprehending and embrasing the sea in form of a gulf,
whereas for the same cause the gulf of Gothland is frosen, because it is
straight and narrow* A commixtion of salt water and fresh.
in the which also the little quantity of salt water is overcome by the
abundance of fresh water of many and great ryuers that fall into the gulf. But
between Norway and Island, The sea between Norway and Island.
the sea is not frosen, for the contrary cause, forasmuch as the power of
fresh water is there overcome of the abundance of the salt water. There is a
fame (but of uncertain authority) that the Spaniardes sail at this present
to Gronelande, and to an other land, which they call Terra Viridis, that is,
the green land, Terra Viridis.
bringyng from thence such wares as are found in Gronelande. Toward the
North* it reaches to the unknown land under the pole, from whence also the
thieves and robbers of the Pigmei come into this land. Pigmei.
Which is an argument that the regions under the pole are inhabited, and almost
environed with the sea, as are they which the Cosmographers call Chersonnesi,
or Peninsulae (that is) almost Islands.

The description of Gronlande. The description of the East side, which lies
toward Norway.
Wardhus Castle. 54. 70. 30. Toward the North. 53. 30. 71. 30. The first
extention. 40. 71. 40. The second extention. 28. 72. Huitsarch promont. 22. 67.
The extention. 5. 61. 45. It is continued from thence by the coasts of the
land of Baccallaos. Baccallaos.
356. 60. Toward the West and North, it is termined with an unknown end of
lands and seas.

Islande.
ISlande is interpreted the land of Ise, Islande called Thyle.
and is called of the old writers Thyle. It is extended between the South and
the North, almost two hundred schoenes in longitude. Schoene is lx. furlonges.
It is for the most part full of mountains, and vncultured. But in the
playnes it has such fruitful pastures, that they are feign sometimes to drive
the beasts from their feedyng, least they should be suffocate with to much
fatness. This Island is famous by the strange miracles of nature, Miracles of
nature in Islande.
of the which Saxo Grammaticus in his history of Denmark, and Olanus Gothus,
in his description of the North lands, do make mention. There are in it three
mountains of marvelous height, Three marvelous mountains.
the tops whereof are covered with perpetual snow: but the nether parts of
them, are of like nature to the mountain Etna, in the Island of Sicilie,
boylyng with continual flames of fire, and castyng forth brymstone. One of
these is named Helga, Helga.
and the other Mons Crucis (that is) the mount of the cross. The third is
named Hecla, whose flames neither consume flax or tow, matters most apt to
take fire, nor yet are quenched with water. Hecla.
And with like force as the shot of great artillery is driven forth by
violence of fire, even so by the commixtion and repugnance of fire, cold, and
brymstone, great stones are here thrown into the air. Near unto these
mountains are three chynkes or open places in the earth, of huge bygnesse, and
such depth (especially at the mount Hecla) that no sight can attain thereto.
But to such as look into them, Strange visions.
there first appear men as though they were drowned, and yet breathyng forth
their souls: who being exhorted by their friends to resort to their own,
they answer with mournyng voice and grievous sighs, that they must depart
from thence to the mount Hecla, and therewith sodaynely vanyshe out of sight.
Ise.
He flows about the Island for the space of seven or eight months, making
by runnyng together a certain miserable waylyng and gronyng noise, not unlike
the voice of man. Thinhabitauntes think, that in this Ise and the mount Hecla,
are the places where the evil souls of their people are tormented. If any man
take a great portion of this Ise, and keep it as diligently as may be in a
close vessel or cofer, A strange thing.
the same does so vanyshe at the time when the other Ise about the Island
dissolueth, that not so much as one drop of water or Ise can thereof be
found.

Not far from these mountains reachyng toward the sea coasts, Four
spryngs o^ contrary nature.
are four sprynges of water, of most diverse and contrary nature. The first, by
reason of his perpetual and fervent heat, sodaynely turns all bodies, that
are cast therein, into stones, reseruyng nevertheless their first form and
shape. The second, is of intolerable coldness. The third, is sweeter then
honey, and most pleasant to quench thyrst. The fourth, is plain poison,
pestilent, and deadly. There is furthermore in these sprynges such abundance
of brymstone, Abundance of brymstone.
that a thousand pound weight thereof is bought for little, as for the tenth
part of a ducate. Dried fyshe.
Their chief wares, are dried fyshe, as Soles, Maidens, Playces, Salpas,
Stockefyshes, and such other, which they exchange for wheat, and such other
things as are brought thither from Lubecke, Hamborowe, and Amsterdam. For they
have oftentimes such scarsenesse of corn, Scarsenesse of corn.
that they use dried fysh in the stead of bread, although in summer the Island
so florysheth with green and fruitful meadows, that they are feign sometimes
to drive their beasts from pasture, least they should suffocate for to much
fatness, as I have said before. They make very good butter, and apt to be
used in matters of physic. There are found diverse kinds of good Hawks, as
Faulcons, Gerfaulcons, Hawks.
Lanners, and Sperhaukes: Also Ravens, Crows, Bears, Hares, and Foxes, both
white and black. They have most swift horses, White Ravens.
and such as run.xxx. miles continually without rest or bait. They have many
churches: Houses of Whales bones
and houses builded of the bones of Whales and other great fyshes. The
navigations to Islande.
The navigations is not open to this Island but in summer season: and that only
for the space of four months, by reason of the cold and Ise whereby the
passage is stopped. If any strife or debate arise on the sea among the mariners
for the commodity of the haven, the governor of the place, although he have
knowledge thereof, yet does he not punyshe them, forasmuch as it apperteyneth
not to his office to decerne such things as are done on the sea, but only on
the land. Ships are there oftentimes in great peril, by reason of Whales,
Whales.
and such other monsters of the sea, except the Mariners take good heed, and
keep them far from the shyps with the noise of Drums, and empty barrels
cast into the sea. There are many Mynstrels and other that play on instruments,
One thing seruyng for contrary uses.
with the sweet noise whereof, they use to allure fowls and fyshes to their
nets and snares. Many also, lie lurkyng in caves and dens, to avoid the
sharpness of cold, as the Affricanes do the like to defend them selves from
the heat. On the top of a certain mountain called Weyszarch, (lying between
Island and Gruntland, or Greonland) is erected a shypmans quadrant of
marvelous bygnesse, A shypmans quadrant.
made by two Pirates, named Pinnigt and Pothorst, in favor of such as sail
by those coasts, that they may thereby avoid the dangerous places lying
toward Greonland.

The myddest of the Island. 7 0 65 30. The city Harsol. etc. 7 40 60 42.

Laponia.
THe region of Laponia, was so named of the people that inhabit it. For the
Germans call all such Lapones, as are simple or unapt to things. This
people is of small stature, and of such agilitie of body, that having their
quyuers of arrows gerte to them, People of great agilitie.
and their bows in their hands, they can with a leap cast themselves through
a circle or hope of the diameter of a cubite. They fight on foot, armed with
bows and arrows after the manner of the Tartars. They are exercised in hurlyng
the darte, and shootyng, from their youth: insomuche that they give their
children no meat until they hit the mark they shoot at, as did in old time
thynhabitauntes of the Islands called Baleares. They use to make their apparel
straight and close to their bodies, A strange apparel.
that it hinder not their work. Their winter vestures are made of the whole
skynnes of Seals or Bears, artificially wrought, and made supple. These they
tie with a knotte above their heads, leauyng only two holes open to look
through, and have all the residue of their bodies covered, as though they were
sowed in sackes, but that this being adopted to all parts of their bodies, is
so made for commodity, and not for a punishment, as the Romans were
accustomed to sow paricides in sackes of leather with a Cock, The cause of an
old error.
an Ape, and a Serpent, and so to hurl them alive altogether into the river
of Tyber. And hereby I think it came to pass, that in old time it was
rashly believed, that in these regions there were men with rough and heary
bodies like wild beasts, as part made relation through ignorance, part
also taking pleasure in rehearsal of such things as are strange to the
hearers. The Lapones defended by this art and industry, go abroad and
withstand the sharpness of winter and the North wyndes, with all the iniuryes
of heaven. They have no houses, but certain Tabernacles like tents or hales,
wherewith they pass from place to place, So do the Tartars.
and change their mansions. Some of them live after the manner of the people of
Sarmatia, called in old time Amaxobii, which used waynes in the stead of
houses. They are much given to huntyng, Plenty of wild beasts.
and have such plenty of wild beasts, that they kill them in manner in every
place. It is not lawful for a woman to go forth of the tent, at that door
by the which her husband went out on huntyng the same day, nor yet to touch
with her hand any part of the beast that is taken, until her husband reach
her on the spytte such a portion of flesh as he thinks good. They till not
the ground. The region nourysheth no kind of Serpents: No Serpents.
yet are there great and noisome Gnattes. They take fyshe in great plenty:
Great Gnats.
by the commodity whereof, they live after the manner of the Ethiopians, called
Ichthiophagi. For as these dry their fyshe with fervent heat, so do they
dry them with cold, and grynde or stamp them to powder as small as meal or
flower. They have such abundance of these fyshes, Abundance of fyshe.
that they hourd great plenty thereof in certain store houses, to carry them
unto other lands near about them, as Northbothnia, and white Russia. Their
ships are not made with nails, Shyps without nails.
but are tide together and made fast with cords and wythes. With these they
sail by the swyft ryuers between the mountains of Laponia, being naked in
summer that they may the better swymme in the time of peril, and geather
together such wares as are in danger to be lost by shypwracke. Part of them
exercise handie crafts, as imbroderyng and weauyng of cloth, interlaced with
gold and silver. Such as have devised any necessary Art, Science honored.
or do increase and amend the inventions of other, are openly honored, and
rewarded with a vesture, in the which is imbrodered an argument or token of the
thing they devised. And this remains to the posterity of their famelie, in
token of their desartes. They frame ships, build houses, and make diverse
sorts of household stuff artificially, and transporte them to other places
near about. They buy and sell both for exchange of wares, and for money. And
this only by consent of both parties, without communication: Barge^n^ without
words.
yet not for lack of wit, or for rudeness of manners, but because they have
a peculiar language unknown to their borderers. It is a valiant nation, and
lived long free, and sustained the wars of Norway and Suetia, until at the
length they submitted them selves, and paid rich furs for their tribute.
They chose them selves a governor, whom they call a king: But the king of
Suetia, gives him authority and administration. Nevertheless, the people in
their suites and doubtful causes, resort to Suetia to have their matters
decised.

In their iourneys, they go not to any Inn, nor yet enter into any house, but
lie all night under the firmament. They have no horses, No horses. A beast of
marvelous strength and swyftnesse.
but in the stead of them, they tame certain wild beasts which they call
Reen, being of the just bygnesse of a M^le, with rough hear like an Ass,
cloven feet, and braunched horns like a Heart, but lower and with fewer
antlettes. They will not abide to be rydden. But when their peytrels or drawyng
collers are put on them, and they so joined to the Chariotte or stead, they
run in the space of.xxiiii. hours, a hundred and fyftie miles, or.xxx.
Schoenos, the which space they affirm to change the horizon thryse, What
Schoenus is, look in Gronlande.
that is, thryse to come to the furthest sign or mark that they see a far of.
Which doubtless is a token both of the marvelous swyftnesse and great
strength of these beasts, The change of the horizon.
being able to continue runnyng for so great a space, in the mean while also
spendyng some time in feedyng. I suppose that this thing was somewhat known to
the old writers, although received in manner by an obscure and doubtful fame:
The old aucthours called all the North people Scythyans.
For they also write that certain Scythians do ride on Hearts.

They neither follow the Christian religion, nor yet refuse it, or are offended
therewith as are the Jews: but do sometimes receive it favorably, to
gratify the princes to whom they obey. And that no more of them imbrase the
Christian faith, the fault is somewhat to be imputed to the Bishops and
Prelates that have either rejected this cure and charge of instructyng the
nation, ^^^smus la^^^teth this (...) first (...) de ratine contionan di* where
he speaks of the people, called Pilapii.
or suffered the faith of Christ to be suffocate, even in the first spryng.
For under the pretense of religion, they would have advanced their own
revenues, and ouerburdened the people by an intolerable example, none
otherwise here then in all Christendom, which thing is doubtless the cause of
most grievous defections. I heard John, a bishop of Gothlande, say thus: We
that govern the church of Vpsalia, and have under our diocese a great part
of that nation, like as it is not convenient to declare many things of our
vigilance and attendaunce over the flock committed to our charge, even so
absteynyng from myscheeuous covetousness, whereby religion is abused for
luker, we do in all places our diligent endeavor, that we minister none
occasion, whereby this nation, as offended by our sins, may be the less
wyllyng to embrase the Christian faith. This is the state of the religion among
the Lapones: although of their own institution and custom received of their
predicessours, they are Idolatours, Idolatry.
honoring that living thing that they meet first in the morning, for the God
of that day, and diuinyng thereby their good luck or evil. They also erecte
Images of stone upon the mountains, which they esteem as Gods,
attributyng to them divine honor. They solemn marriages, and begin the same
with fire and flynt, A mystery of marriage in fire and flynt.
as with a mystery so aptely applied to the Image of stone, as if it had been
received from the myddest of Grecia. For in that they adhibite a mystery to
fire, as they do not this alone (forasmuch as the Romans observed the same
custom) even so are they herein partly to be commended, in that they use the
ceremonies of so noble a people. The mystery of the flinte is no less to be
praised, both forasmuch as this is domestical philosophy, and has also a
near affinity and signification to these solemnities. For as the flynt has
in it fire lying hyd, which appears not but by mouyng and force: so is there
a secret life in both kynds of man and woman, which by mutual conjunction
comes forth to a living birth. Expert inchaunters.
They are furthermore expert inchaunters. They tie three knottes on a stryng
hangyng at a whyp. When they lose one of these, they raise tolerable wynds:
When they lose an other, the wind is more vehement: but by losyng the third,
they raise plain tempests, as in old time they were accustomed to raise
thunder and lyghtnyng. This art do they use against such as sail by their
coasts, and stay or move the ryuers and seas more or less, as they list to
show favor or displeasure. They make also of lead certain short magical
darts of the quantity and length of a finger. Magical darts.
These they throw against such, of whom they desire to be revenged, to places
never so far distant. They are sometimes so vexed with the canker on their
arms or legs, The canker.
that in the space of three days they dye through the vehemency of the pain.
The Sun falls very low in these regions: One night of three months.
and prolongeth one continual night for the space of three months in winter,
during which time they have none other light but like unto the twilight of
eueninges and morninges. This is very clear, but continues but few hours,
and is like the bright shynyng of the Moon. Therefore that day that the Sun
returns to the hemispherie, they keep holy day, and make great mirth with
solemn festiuitie. And these are the manners of this nation, not so brutyshe or
saluage, as worthy therefore to be called Lapones for their vnaptenesse or
simplicity, as when they lived under their own Empire, and used no
familiarity or intercourse with other nations, and knew not the commodity of
their own things, neither the price and estimation of their furs in our
regions, Rich furs.
by reason whereof, they sold great plenty of them for some of our wares of
small value.

The bounds or limittes of Laponia (being the extreme land of Scondia known
toward the North pole) are extended toward this part of the North, to the
world yet unknown to us: And furthermore toward the same part of the
uttermost sea, according to this description.

The first coast. 70 72. The coast following. 80 7. That that yet follows. 90
70.

Plenty of sea fyshe.
From the fyshyng places and store houses of this sea, they carry forth to
Nordbothnia, and white Russia, lands confinyng to them, great plenty of
fyshe. Whereby we may conjecture that this sea is extended on every side
toward the North. Toward the West, it is limited with the most inward gulf
at the Castle of Wardhus, Wardhus.
at the degree.54 70 30.

Toward the South, it is limited by a line drawn from thence unto the
degree.90 69.

Norwegia, or Norway.
NOrdway, is as much to say, as the Northway. This was sometime a floryshyng
kingdom, whose dominion comprehended Denmark, Friselande, and the Islands
far about, until the domestical Empire was governed by the succession of
inheritance. In the mean time while this governance ceased for lack of due
issue, it was instituted by consent of the nobility, that the kings should be
admitted by election: supposing that they would with more equity execute that
office, forasmuch as they were placed in the same by such authority, and not
by obteynyng the kingdom by fortune and new advancement. But it came so to
pass, that as every of them excels in richesse, ambition, and favor by
consangiuitie, so were they in greater hope to obtain the kingdom: and were
by this means divided into factions, Kingdoms destroyed by factions.
attemptyng also occations to invade foraigne realms, whereby they might
strenghten their parties. It is therefore at this present under the dominion of
the Danes, The Danes.
who do not only exact intolerable tributes, but also bring al their riches
and commodities into Denmark, constitutyng the continuance of their
governance in thinfirmitie and poverty of the subjects: which exemple, The
defant of princes.
some other princes do follow at this day in the Christian Empire. For after
that the princes had forsaken such virtues as should have shyned in them, as to
be Patres patriae (that is) the fathers of their countries, and that in the
place hereof, only the proud countenance of dominion remained, which opened
licentiousness to thiniurie of the subjects: this followed thereof, that
whereas the Danes by this occasion had no further trust or aid in the love of
the people, they provided, An exemple of tyranny.
for thindempnitie of their own estate, by forcible extenuatyng the goods and
power of them whom they desired to keep in subjection. This is the fortune of
Norway, whose edefices, towns, and cities can not defend their ancient
amplitude and dignity: neither is there any hope of repayryng their state. For
there are no consultations admitted for the redress of the commonwealth: No
man dare show his advice, or attempt any thing, uncertain of the minds and
consent of other. To this difficulty is added the quality of the place: For
the Danes have in their power all the nauigations of Norway, whereby it may
exercise no trade by sea, neither carry forth wares to other places: The
miserable state of Norway.
So that in fine it may seem most unfortunate, as lackyng the favor of
heaven, the sea, and the land. From hence is brought into all Europe a fyshe
of the kinds of them which we call haddockes or hakes, Stockfyshe.
indurate and dried with cold, and beaten with clubbes or stocks, by reason
whereof the Germans call them stockefyshe. The taking of these, is most
commended in January, that they may be sufficiently dried and hardened with
cold: For such as are taken in the more temperate months, do corrupt and
putrify, and are not meet to be carried forth.

The description of the west coaste, with the part thereof lying most toward
the north.

Wardhus (that is) the watch house, or watch tower 54.70.30. It is a strong
Castle or fortress appointed to the Lapones. The coaste following,.48.50.70
Matthkur. etc.

All the coast from hence, and the places near about unto the degree.45.69.
being sometime left desolate by the sedition and destruction of Norway, the
Lapones chose for their habitations, as coming to amore beneficial heaven. The
Lapones.
From ye castle of Wardhus, unto the degree.40.30.64.10. all the coast in the
spring time is dangerous to pass, Ships in danger by reason of whales.
by reason of whales, of such huge byggenesse, that some of them grow to an
hundred cubits: for these fyshes at that time of the year resort together
for generation. Such ships as chance to fall either upon their bodies, or
into such whyrlepooles as they make by their vehement motions, are in great
peril. The remedy to avoid this danger, Castoreum.
is to power into the sea Castoreum (that is) oil made of the stones of the
beast called the Beuor, myngeled with water: For with this, the whole heard
of whales vanysheth suddeynely to the bottom of the sea: They make a terrible
roryng, and have two breathyng places in the highest part of their forheads,
The roryng of whales.
standing forth right a cubite in length, and are broad at the ends, being
covered with a skin, through the which they blow waters like showers or
storms of rain. The pricks of their backs, are found conteynyng three else
in circuit, and every knotte between them of one ell. They are at the least
of.lx. cubits in length, and are salted and kept in store houses. whales
salted and reserved.
The greatest are unprofitable to be eaten, by reason of their rank and
unsavory taste, which can not be qualified.

Nidrosia standing upon the south side of the sea bank, was the chief city
and Metropolitan church throughout all Norway, The city of Nidrosia.
Iselande, Gronlande, and the Islands there about. This city was noble at the
first under the floryshyng Empire of Norway, conteynyng in circuit.xxiiii.
paryshes, but it is now brought in manner to a village, and is called in the
Germane tongue Truthaim, as the house of the Dryides. There remains at this
day a Cathedral church in token of the ancient felicity, A magnificiall
church
being such that in bygnesse and workmanshyp of wrought stone, the like is not
in all Christendom. The greeses or compass about the Altar, was destroyed by
fire, and repared at the same time that we wrote this history. The charge of
the reparation, was esteemed to be seven thousand crowns: by which small
portion, an estimate may be made of the excellency of the whole Church.

The tract of all the sea coasts of Norway is very quiet and meek, the sea is
not frosen, the snowes endure not long. This land has also a peculiar
pestilence, which they call Leem or Lemmer. This is a little four footed
beast, Noisome beasts of unknown generation.
about the byggenesse of a Ratte, with a spotted skin: these fall upon the
ground at certain tempests and soddeyne showers, not yet known from whence
they come, as whether they are brought by the wyndes from remote Islands, or
otherwise engendered of thycke and feculent clouds. But this is well known,
that as soon as they fall down, green grass and herbs are found in their
bowels not yet digested. They consume al green things, as do Locustes: and
such as they only byte, wyther and dye. This pestilence lives as long as it
does not taste of the grass newely sproong. They come together by flocks, as
do Swalows: and at an ordinary time, either die by heaps, with great
infection of the land (as by whose corruption ye air is made pestiferous, and
molesteth the Noruegians with swimming in the head and the Iaundies) or are
consumed of other beasts named Lefrat. Toward the East, it is included within
the line that is drawn by the mountains, whose ends or vttermoste bounds,
they are, that lie toward the South, above the mouths of the river Trolhetta:
but that part that lies toward the North, passes by the castle of Wardhus,
Wardhus. The unknown land of the Lapons.
and is extended to the unknown land of the Lapones.

The Lake called Mos, and the Island of Hosfuen in the myddest thereof, is in
the degree.45 30 61.

In this Lake appears a strange monster: which is, a serpent of huge
byggenesse. A serpent of huge bigness.
And as to all other places of the world, blasing stars do portend
thalteration and change of things: so does this to Norway. It was seen of
late (in the year of Christ.1522. appearyng far above the water, rowlyng
like a great pyller, and was, by conjecture far of, esteemed to be of fyftie
cubits in length. Shortly after followed the reiectyng of Christiernus king of
Denmark. Such other monstrous things are said to be seen in diverse places of
the world. God warns us by signs of things to come.
And doubtless except we should think that the divine providence, having
mercy upon mortal men, and hereby warnyng them of their offenses, does send
such strange things (as also blasing stars, and armies fyghtyng in the air,
with such other portentous monsters, whereof no causes can be found by
natural things) we might else suspect that such syghtes were but imaginations
of the sense of man deceived.

On the East side, are exceedyng rough mountains, which admit no passage to
Suetia. The sea between Norway and the Islands, is called Tialleslund,
Euripus, or the streyghtes. The Island of Lofoth, whose midst.42 67 10.
Langanas, whose midst.41 67 Vastrall, whose midst.41 30 67 30.

The sea between these three Islands, is called Muscostrom (that is) boiling. At
the flowing of the sea, it is swalowed into the Caves, The streightes or
boiling sea.
and is blown out again at the reflowing, with no less violence then the
streams of ryuers fall from mountains. This sea is nauigable, until it be
lower then the mouths of the rocks. Such as chance into it out of due time,
are carried headlong into Whyrpooles. The fragmentes of the lost shyps, are
seldom cast up again. But when they are cast up, they are so bruised and
fretted against the rocks, Dangerous places in the sea.
that they seem to be ouergrowne with hoare. This is the power of nature,
passing the fabilous Simpleiades and the fearful Malea, with the dangerous
places of Silla and Caribdis, and all other miracles that nature has wrought
in any other sea hitherto known to man.

The Islands about Norway, are of such fruitful pasture, that they bring not
their beasts into the stables before the month of November, Fruitful Islands
about Norway.
and do in many places winter them abroad.

Suecia, or Suethlande.
SVecia, is a kingdom rich in Gold, Silver, Copper, Lead, Iron, fruit,
cattayle, Gold and silver.
and exceedyng increase of fyshe, of the ryuers, lakes, and the sea, and has
no less plenty of such wild beasts as are taken with huntyng. Toward the
West, it is ended with the mountains of Norway from the Castle of Wardhus unto
the end.51.63.40 Toward the South, Wardhus castle.
with the line from this end unto the degrees 53.30.61. And from thence unto
the degrees.61.60.30. Above the gulf of Suecia, toward the north, The gulf
of Suecia.
with the south end of Lapponia from the castle of Wardhus unto the end.62.70.

Toward the East, it is ended with the line from this end unto the
degree.63.69. etc. Stokholme the chief city.64.61. The city of Stokholme.
This is the chief mart town of Suecia, and is strongly defended by art and
nature. It is situate in maryshes, after the manner of Uenice: and was therefore
called Stokholme, forasmuch as being placed in the water, the fundation is
fortified with stocks or piles. The sea enters in^o it with two arms or
branches, of such largeness and depth, that shyps of great burden and with
maine sails may enter by the same with their full freight. This suffered of
late years grievous spoil and destruction, to the singular exemple of cruel
hostility: and such, as the like has not been lightly showed to any other
city, received by league and composion. In all the tract from Stokholme to the
lake above the river of Dalekarle, Gold in cold regions. Fyshe.
which is in the degree.56 30 63 50. are mountains fruiteful of good silver,
copper, and lead. They get great riches by the salmons and plenty of other
fyshes which they take in certain great lakes.

The dukedom of Agermannia occupies the north side to the confines of
Laponia. This tract is full of wods, The beast called Vros or Elg.
in the which they hunt the beasts called Vros or Bisontes, which in their
tongue they call Elg, (that is) wild Asses. These are of such heyght, that the
highest part of their backs are equal with the measure of a man, holdyng up
his arms as high as he may reach etc. Vpsalia the chief city.62.62.30. here
is buried the body of saint Henricus king and martyr. Vpsalia.


Copperdalia (that is) the copper valley, Copperdalia.
is a Dukedom southwarde from the Dukedom of Iemptia. Under this, is the
valyant nation of the people called Dalekarly.

Oplandia, Oplandia.
is a Dukedom and the nauil or myddest of Scondia.

The city of Pircho, on the North side of the lake of Meler* was once a great
city, and able to arm.xiiii. thousand men to the wars: but is now brought
to a vyllage.

All the tracte of Oplandia, has mines of Silver, Copper, and Steel.

Of the Islands and rocks that lie about Suecia, the myddest is.67.30.61.30.
These were called of the old writers Done, the reason of which name remains
unto this day: Birds.
For there are in these innumerable multitudes of birds, insomuch that
thinhabitauntes of the next coast, sail thither in the month of May, while
the birds sit on their eggs: Eggs reserved in salt.
which they steal, and reserve them in salt for a long time.

Bothnia.
BOthnia is so named of the precious furs of all sorts that are carried from
thence into foraigne regions: For by these and their fyshyng, Precious furs.
they have great commodity. Salmons of the best sort are taken in these seas,
and are great riches among these nations. Fyshe.
Bothnia is divided into two parts, as Northbothnia, and South Bothnia, called
Ostrobothhia. Northbothnia, is termined with the South end of the Lapones,
unto the end.78.30.69

Toward the East, it is termined with this end, and unto the
degree.78.30.68.20.

Toward the West, with the line terminyng the East side of Suecia. And toward
the South, with the residue of the gulf of Suecia, from the end that has
degrees.63.69.

Ostrobothnia, toward the East is termined from the said end of the most
East coast. And toward the South, with a line extended by the mountains from
this end unto the degree.71 66

Toward the North and West, with part of the gulf of Suecia, etc.

Gothia or Gothlande.
GOthia, is by interpretation good. For the holy name of God, is in the Germane
tongue Goth (that is) Good. At what time the Goths upon a general consent
sent forth their offspring or sucession to seek new seats or countries to
inhabit, Thinuasions of the Goths.
and when they possessed the coasts of Meotis and Asia, none of the old
writers have made mention as far as I know. But they have been known since
the time that the Romans dilated their Empire by Illirium (now called
Slauonie) unto the river of Danubius, and were also famous from the time of
Caesar Dictator, and Octauianus Augustus, The war of the goths against the
Romans.
by reason of their great wars at Danubius, being the vtermost bound of
Thempire. Nevertheless, in that renown what Gothia was, under what part of
heaven it was situate, or of whom the Goths took their original, it has
been unknown almost to this age. This is termined toward the North, with the
South end of Suetia, and toward the West, The bounds of gothland.
with the other mountains of Norway, which continue from the bounds of
Suetia, to the mouths of the ryuers of Trolheta. etc.

It has many goodly Towns, Cities, Castles, Mines. The city of Visba.
etc. The city of Visba, being in the degree.61.30.54.15. was an ancient and
famous mart Town, as is Genua in Italy at this day: but afterward being
afflicted by ye incursions of the Pirates of the Danes and Moscouites, it was
left desolate. Danes and Moscouites.
There remain to this day certain ruins, which testify the ancient
nobility. In this place were the first stations of the Goths that possessed
Meotis. It is at this day of fruiteful soil, and famous by many goodly and
strong Castles and Monasteries. There is (among other) a Monastery of the
order of Saint Benedict, in the which is a library of about two thousand
books of old auctors. A library of two thousand books.


About the year of Christ fourscore and eight, the Goths, unto whom
resorted a great multitude of other people of these North parts of the world,
as from Li^onia, Prusia, Russia, and Tartaria, with diverse other countries,
The goths invaded Europe, and destroyed Rome.
making them diverse Kings and Captains, did depopulate and bring in
subjection the more part of Europe, invaded Italy, destroyed Rome, inhabited
that part of Italy now called Lumbardie, and likewise subdued the Realms of
Castile and Aragonie. Their wars continued above three hundred years.

Finland, and Eningia.
FInlandia, is as much to say as a fair land, or fine land, so named for the
fertility of the ground. Pliny seems to call it Finnonia: for he says,
that about the coasts of Finland* are many Islands without names, of the which
there lies one before Scithia called Pannonia. The gulf called Sinus
Finnonicus* is so named at this day of the land of Finnonia. Pannonia falsely
taken for Finnonia.
Finnonia confineth with Scithia, and runs without all Tanais, (that is to
say) without the lymittes of Europe to the confines of Asia. But that the name
of Einlande seems not to agree hereunto, the cause is, that this place of
Pliny is corrupted, as are many other in this aucthour. So that from the name
of Finnonia, or Phinnonia, it was a lykely error to call it Pannonia,
forasmuch as these words do not greatly differ in writing and sound: so
that the counterfect name was soon put in the place of the true name, by him
that knew Pannonia and read that name before, being also ignorant of Phinnonia.

Eningia.
Eningia had in old time the title of a kingdom, it is of such largeness,
but has now only the title of an inferior governor, being under the dominion
of the Slauons* and vsyng the same tongue. In religion, it observed the rytes
of the Greeks of late years, when it was under the governance of the
Moscouites: But it is at this present under the king of Suecia, and observes
thinstitutions of the Occidentall church. Spanyshe wynes are brought thither
in great plenty, Spanishe wines.
which the people use meryly and cheerfully. It is termined on the North side
by the South line of Ostrobothnia, and is extended by the mountains. Toward
the West, it is termined with the sea of Finnonia, according to this
description, and has degrees.71 66. etc.

Of the difference of regions, and causes of great cities, after the
description of Hieronimus Cardanus. Liber.xi. De Subtilitate.
THere is an other difference of regions caused of cold and heat. For such as
are near unto the poles, are vexed with to much cold: and such as are under
the line where the Sun is of greatest force, are oppressed with heat. Such
as are in the midst between both, are nearest unto temperatenesse. Under the
pole, it is impossible that there should be populous cities, because the land
is barren, and the caryage or conueyaunce of fruits, victualles, and other
necessaryes, is incommodious. By reason whereof, it is necessary that the
inhabitauntes of such regions live ever in continual wanderyng from place to
place, or else in small vyllages. Such as inhabit temperate regions, have
mean cities, as well for that they have more commodious conueyaunce for
necessaryes, as also that they may dwell better and more safely together then
in vyllages, by reason of fortifying their towns with walls, and exercising
of arts and occupations, whereby the one may the better help the other. Yet
that old Rome (being in a temperate region) was of such incredible bygnesse,
the cause was, that it obtained the Empire of the world, by reason whereof,
all nations had confluence thither, and not the greatness of the walls. But
it is necessary that the greatest cities be in hot regions: first, for that
in such regions, part of the soil is either barren if it lack water, or else
most fruitful if it abound with water. And for this inequality, when they
find any place meet to sustain a multitude, it follows of necessity that
great cities be builded in such places, by reason of great concourse of people
resortyng to the same. An other great cause is, that whereas in such regions,
merchants come very far to such commodious places, they pass through many
desarte and perilous regions: So that it shall be necessary for their better
security, to come in great companyes, as it were great armies. And therefore
whereas such a society is once knyt together in a commodious place, it should
be great hynderance as well to the inhabitants as to merchants, if they
should wander in incommodious places. And by this confluence, both of such as
dwell near to such places, and also of strangers and such as dwell far of,
it is necessary that in continuance of time, small towns become great cities,
as are these: Quinsai, Singui, Cambalu, Memphis, Cairus, or Alcair, otherwise
called Babylon in Egypt. But if here any will obiecte Constantinople (in old
time called Bizantium) being in a temperate region, although it be not to be
compared to such cities as are more then lx. miles in circuit, yet do we
answer hereunto, that the Turks Empire is the cause of the greatness hereof,
as we said before of Rome.

The history written in the latin tongue by Paulus Ionius, bishop of Nuceria
in Italy, of the legation or ambassade of great Basilius Prince of Moscouia,
to Pope Clement the.vij. of that name: In which is contained the description of
Moscouia, with the regions confinyng about the same, even unto the great and
rych Empire of Cathay.
I Intend first briefly to describe the situation of the region which we
plainly see to have been little known to Strabo and Ptoleme, and then to
proceed in rehearsing the manners, customs, and religion of the people: and
this in manner in the like simple style and phrase of speech, as the same was
declared unto us by Demetrius the Ambassador, Demetrius the ambassador of
Moscouia.
a man not ignorant in the latin tongue, as from his youth brought up in
Liuonia, where he learned the first rudiments of letters, and being grown to
man's age, executed thoffice of an Ambassador into diverse Christian provinces.
For whereas by reason of his approved faithfulness and industry, he had
before ben sent as Orator to the kings of Suecia and Denmark, and the great
master of Prussia, he was at the last sent to The Emperor Maximilian, in whose
court (being replenyshed with all sorts of men) while he was c^nuersant, if
any thing of barbarous manners yet remained in so docible and quiet a nature,
the same was put away by fr^ming him self to better civility. The cause of
his legacy or ambassade, was given by Paulus Centurio a Genuese, Paulus
Centurio.
who when he had received letters commendatory of pope Leo the tenth, and came
to Moscouia for the trade of marchaundies, of his own mind conferred with the
familiars of Duke Basilius, as touching the conformation of the rites of both
churches. He furthermore of great magnanimity, and in manner outrageous desire,
Spices brought from India to Moscouia.
sought ^ow by a new and incredible viage, spices might be brought from India.
For while before he had exercised the trade of marchandies in Syria, Egypt,
and Pontus, he knew by fame that spices might be conueighed from the further
India up the river Indus, The river Indus.
against the course of the same, and from thence by a small vyage by land
passing over the mountains of Paropanisus, to be carried to the river Oxus in
Bactria, which having his original a^most from the same mountains from whence
Indus do^th spryng, and violently carrying with it many other ryuers, Oxus or
Hoxina, a river of Asia, runs through the desartes of Sythia.

The sea Hircanum is now called mare Abacu^ke, or mare de Sala. Citrachan or
Astracan. Sarmatia is that great country wherein is contained Russia. L^^oma,
and Tartaria, and the North and East part of Polonia. Against the Portugales.
The trade of spices in old time.


falls into the sea Hircanum or Caspium, at the port called Straua. And he
^arnestly affirmed that from Straua, is an easy and safe navigations unto the
mart town of Citrachan or Astrachan, and the mou^h of the river Volga, and
from thence ^uer against the course of the ryuers, as Volga, Occha, and Mescho,
unto the citte Mosch^, and from thence by land to Riga. and into the sea of
(...), and all the West regions. For he was vehemently, and more then of
equity, accensed and provoked by the injuries of the Portugales, who having by
force of arms subdued a great part of India, and possessed all the mart
towns, taking wholly into their hands all the trade of spyces to bring the
same into Spain, and nevertheless to sell them at a more greeu^us an^
intolerable price to the people of Europe then ever was heard of before: And
furthermore kept the coasts of the Indian sea so straightly with continual
nauies, that those trades are thereby left of, which were before exercised by
the gulf of Persia, and toward the river of Euphrates, and also by the
streightes of the sea of Arabia, and the river Nilus, and in fin^ by our sea:
by which trade all Asia and Europe was abundantly satisfied, and better cheap
then has been since the Portugales had the trade in their hands, with so many
incommodities of such long viages, Spices corrupted.
whereby the spyces are so corrupted by thinfection of the pomp and other
filthiness of the ships, that their natural savor, taste, and quality,
as well hereby, as by their long reseruyng in the shoppes, sellers, and
warehouses in Lusheburne, vanysheth and resolves, so that reseruyng ever the
freshest and newest, they sell only the woorst and most corrupted. But Paulus,
although in all places he earnestly and vehemently argued of these things, and
styrred great malice and hatred against the Portugales, affyrmyng that not only
thereby the customs and revenues of princes should be much greater, if that
vyage might be discovered, but also that spyces might be better cheap bought
at the hands of the Moscouites: yet could ^e nothing avail in this suite,
forasmuch as Duke Basilius thought it not good to make open, or disclose unto
a stranger and unknown man, those regions which give entrance to the sea
Caspium, The Caspian sea.
and the kingdoms of Persia. Paulus therefore excludyng all hope of further
traueyle, and become now of a marchaunte an Ambassador, brought Basilius
letters (Pope Leo being now departed) to Adrian his successor, Basilius wrote
to Pope Adriane.
in the which he declared, with honorable and reverend words, his good will
and favorable mind toward the Bishop of Rome. For a few years before,
Basilius (then keepyng wars against the Polones, at such time as the
general counsel was celebrate at Laterane) required by John, King of
Denmark (the father of Christierne, who was of late expulsed from his
kingdom) that safe passage might be granted to the Ambassadors of Moscouia,
to go to Rome. But whereas it so chanced, that king John and Pope Julius dyed
both in one day, whereby he lacked a convenient sequester or solicitour, he
omitted his consultation as touching that legacy. War between the Polones
and Moscouites.
After this, the war waxed hot between him and Sigismunde the king of
Polonie: who obteynyng the victory against the Moscouites at Boristhene,
supplications were decreed in Rome for the overthrow and vanquyshyng the
enemies of the Christian faith, which thing greatly elienated both king
Basilius him self, and all that nation from the Bishop of Rome. But when
Adrian the.vi. departed from this life, and left Paulus now ready to his
second vyage, The second viage of Paulus to Moscouia.
his successor Clement the.vii. perceyuyng that Paulus still furiously
reuolued and tossed in his unquiet mind that vyage toward the East, sent him
again with letters to Moscouia, by the which with propense and friendly
persuasions, he exhorted Basilius to acknowledge the majesty of the Roman
church, The Pope p^rsw^deth Basilius to acknowledge the Roman church.
and to make a perpetual league and agreement in matters of religion, which
thing should be not only for the health of his soul, but also greatly to the
increase of his honor: And further promised, that by the holy authority of
his office, he would make him a king, and give him kyngly ornaments, if
reiectyng the doctrine of the Greeke^, he would confourme himself to the
authority of the Roman church.

But Paulus, who with more prosperous iourneyes then great vauntage, had from
his youth traueyled a great part of the world, although he were now aged,
and sore vexed with the strangurie, came with a prosperous and speedy journey
to Moscouia, where he was gentelly received of Basilius, and remained in his
Court for the space of two months. But in fine, mistrustyng his own
strength, and deterred by the difficulty of so great a journey, when he had
utterly put away all his imaginations and hope of this trade to India, returned
to Rome with Demetrius the Ambassador of Basilius, before we yet thought that
he had been in Moscouia. The Bishop commanded that Demetrius should be
lodged in the most magnificent and princely part of the houses of Vaticane,
the rooffes of whose edifies are gylted and embowed, and the chambers rychly
furnyshed with silken beds and cloth of Arresse: Wyllyng furthermore that he
should be honorably received, and vestured with silk. He also assigned
Franciscus Cheregatus, Demetrius intertaynement at Rome.
the Bishop of Aprutium (a man that had often times been Ambassador to
diverse regions) to accompany him, and show him the order and rytes of our
religion, with the monumentes and manners of the city. Furthermore, when
Demetrius had certain days rested and recreated him self, washing away the
fylth he had gathered by reason of the long viage, then apparelled with a fair
vesture, after the manner of his country, he was brought to the bishops
presence, whom he honored kneelyng, with great humility and reverence (as is
the manner) and therewith presented unto his holiness certain furs of Sables
in his own name, and in the name of his prince, and also delivered the letters
of Basilius, which they before, Demetrius is brought to the Popes presence.
and then the Illyrian or Slauon interpretour, Nicolaus Siccensis, translated
into the Latin tongue, in this effect as follows.

To Pope Clement, shepard and teacher of the Roman church, Basilius letters to
Pope Clement.
great Basilius by the grace of God, lord, Emperor, and dominatour of all
Russia, and great Duke of Volodemaria, Moscouia, Nouogradia, Plescouia,
Smolenta, Ifferia, Iugoria, Periunia, Vetcha, Bolgaria, etc. Dominator and
great prince of Nouogradia, in the lower country: also of Ceruigouia, Razania,
Volotchia, Rezeuia, Belchia, Rostouia, Iarostauia, Belozeria, Vdoria, Obdoria,
and Condiuia, etc. You sent unto us Paulus Centurio, a citizen of Genua, with
letters, whereby you do exhort us to join in power and counsel with you,
and other Princes of Christendom, against the enemies of the christian faith:
and that a free passage and ready way may be opened for both your Ambassadors
and ours, to come and go to and fro, whereby by mutual duty and endeavor on
both parties, we may have knowledge of the state of things parteynyng to the
wealth of us both. We certes, as we have hitherto happily by the aid and
help of almighty God constantly and earnestly resisted the cruel and wicked
enemies of the christian faith, so are we determined to do hereafter: and are
likewise ready to consent with other christian princes, and to grant free
passage into our dominions. In consideration whereof, we have sent unto you our
faithful servant Demetrius Erasmus, with these our letters: and with him have
remitted Paulus Centurio, desiring you also shortly to dismiss Demetrius, with
safeguard and indemnitie unto the borders of our dominions. And we will likewise
do the same, if you send your Ambassador with Demetrius, whereby both by
communication and letters, we may be better certified of thorder and
administration of such things as you require: so that being advertised of the
minds and intent of all other christian princes, we may also consult what is
best to be done herein. Thus fare ye well. Given in our dominion in our city of
Moscouia, in the year from the creation of the world.vii. thousand and.300.
the third day of April.

But Demetrius, as he is expert in divine and humane things, and especially
of holy scripture, seemed to have secret commandment of greater matters,
which we think he will shortly declare to the senate in private
consultations. For he is now delivered of the fever, into the which he fell by
change of air, and has so recovered his strength and native color, that
being a man of.lx. years of age, he was not only present at the Popes mass,
celebrated with great solemnity in the honor of S. Cosmus and Damian, but
came also into the Senate, Cardinal. Campegius.
at such time as Cardinal Campegius, coming first from the legacy of
Pannonia, was received of the Pope and all the nobility of the court: And
furthermore also viewed the Temples of the holy city, The ruynes of Rome.
with the ruins of the Roman magnificence, and with woondring eyes beheld the
lamentable decay of the ancient buildinges. So that we think that shortly
after he has declared his message, he shall return to Moscouia, with the bishop
of Scarense the Popes legate, not vnrecompensed with just rewards at the
hands of his holiness.

The name of the Moscouites is now new, The description of Moscouia.
although the Poet Lucane makes mention of the Moschos confynyng with the
Sarmatians: and Pliny also places the Moschos at the sprynges of the great
river of Phasis, in the region of Colchos, above the sea Euxinus, toward the
East. The Aultars of great Alexander.
Their region has very large bounds, and is extended from the Aultars of
great Alexander about the sprynges of Tanais, to the extreme lands and North
Ocean, in manner under the North stars, called charles wayne, or the great
Bear, being for the most part plain, and of fruitful pasture, but in summer
in many places full of marshes. For whereas all that land is replenyshed with
many and great ryuers, which are greatly increased by the winter, snow, and
Ise, resolved by the heat of the sun, the playnes and fields are thereby
overflowed with marshes, Marshes in summer.
and all iourneys incombred with continual waters and myrie slabbynesse,
until by the benefit of the new winter the ryuers and marshes be frosen
again, and give safe passage to the sleades that are accustomed to journey by
the same. The wood or forest of Hercynia (and not Hyrcania, The forest of
Hercynia.
as is red in some false copies) occupyeth a great part of Moscouia, and is
here and there inhabited, with houses builded therein, and so made thinner by
the long labor of men, that it does not now show that horror of thick and
impenetrable woods and lands, as many think it to have. But being replenished
with many wild beasts, Wild beasts.
is so far extended through Moscouia, with a continual tract between the East
and the North, toward the Scythian Ocean, that by the infinite greatness
thereof, The Scythian Ocean.
it has deluded the hope of such as have curiously searched the end of the
same. In that part that reaches toward Prussia, The beasts called Vri, or
Bisontes.
are found the great and fierce beasts called Vri, or Bisontes, of the kind
of Bu^les: Also, Alces like unto Hearts, which the Moscouites call Lozzi, and
are called of the Germaynes Helenes. Helenes.


On the East side of Moscouia are the Scythians, which are at this day called
Tartars, Of the Scythians and Tartars. Amaxouii.
a wandryng nation, and at all ages famous in wars. In the stead of houses
they use wagons, covered with beasts hydes, whereby they were in old time
called Amaxouii. For cities and towns, they use great tents and pauilions,
not defended with trenches or walls of timber or stone, but enclosed with an
innumerable multitude of archers on horsbacke. The Tartars are divided by
companyes, which they call Hordas, which word in their tongue signifies a
consentyng company of people, Horda.
geathered together in form of a city. Every Horda is governed by an
Emperor, whom either his parentage or warlyke prowes has promoted to that
dignity. For they oftentimes keep war with their borderers, and contend
ambiciously and fiercely for dominion. The large dominion of the Tartars.
Cathay.
It does hereby appear, that they consist of innumerable Hordas, in that the
Tartars possess the most large desartes, even unto the famous city of Cathay,
in the furdest Ocean in the East. They also that are nearest to the Moscouites,
are known by their trade of marchaundies, and often incursions. In Europe,
near unto the place called Dromon Achillis, in Taurica Chersoneso, The Tartars
of Europe.
are the Tartars called Precopites, the daughter of whose prince, Selymus the
Emperor of the Turks took to wife. These are most infest to the Polones, and
waste the regions on every side, between the ryuers of Boristhenes and Tanais.
They that in the same Taurica possess Caffam, a colonie of the Ligurians
(called in old time Theodosia) do both in religion and all other things
agree with the Turks. But the Tartars that inhabit the regions of Asia,
between Tanais and Volga, The Tartars of Asia are subject to the Duke of
Moscouia.
are subject to Basilius the king of the Moscouites, and choose them a
governor at his assignement. Among these, the Cremii afflicted with civil
seditions, where as heretofore they were rich and of great power, have of
late years lost their dominion and dignity. The Tartars that are beyond the
river of Volga, do religiously observe the friendship of the Moscouites, The
Tartars beyond the river of Volga.
and profess them selves to be their subjects. Beyond the Cassanites, toward
the North, are the Sciambani, rych in heardes of cattaylle, and consistyng of a
great multitude of men. After these, are Nogai, Nogai. Sigismundus calls them
Nogay^ri.
which obtain at this day the chief fame of riches and warly affairs. Their
Horda, although it be most ample, yet has it no Emperor, but is governed by
the wisdom and virtue of the most ancient and valiant men, after the manner
of the common wealth of Uenece. Beyond the Nogais, somewhat toward the South
and the Caspian sea, the noblest nation of the Tartars, called Zagathai,
inhabit towns builded of stone, The noblest nation of the Tartars. The river
Taxartes.
and have an exceedyng great and fair city, called Samarcanda, which
Iaxartes, the great river of Sogdiana, runs through, and passing from thence
about a hundred miles, falls into the Caspian sea. With these people in our
days, Ismael the Sophi and king of Persia, has oftentimes kept war, Ismael
the Sophi king of Persia.
with doubtful success. Insomuche that fearyng the greatness of their power,
which he resysted with all that he might, he left Armenia and Taurisium the
chief city of the kingdom, for a pray to Selimus the victourer of one wyng
of the battle. From the city of Samarcanda, The city of Samarcanda.
descended Tamburlanes the mighty Emperor of the Tartars, whom some call
Tanberlanis: But Demetrius says that he should be called Themircuthlu. This
is he that about the year of Christ M.CCC.xcviii. subdued almost all the East
parts of the world: And lastly, Tanburlanes, the myghtie Emperor of the
Tartars. The conquestes of Tamburlanes.
with an innumerable multitude of men, invaded the Turks dominions, with whom
Baiasetes Ottomanus their king, (and father to the great grandfather of this
Solomon that now lives) meetyng at Ancira in the confines or marches of
Galatia and Bythinia, gave him a sore battle, in the which fell on the
Turks part.20000 men, and Baiasetes him self was taken prisoner, whom
Tamburlanes caused to be locked in an Iron cage, Baiasetes.
and so carried him about with him through all Asia, which he also conquered
with a terryble army. He conquered all the lands between Tanais and Nilus, and
in fine vanquished in battle the great Soltane of Egypt, whom he chased
beyond Nilus, and took also the city of Damascus.

From the region of these Tartars called Zagathei, is brought great plenty of
sylken apparel to the Moscouites. But the Tartares that inhabit the mydlande
or inner regions, This apparel they have of the Persians.
bring none other wares then trucks or droues of swift runnyng horses, and
clokes made of white feltes: also hales or tents, to withstand the injuries
of cold and rain. These they make very artificially, and apt for the purpose.
They receive again of the Moscouites, coats of cloth, and Silver money,
conteynyng all other bodyly ornaments, The Tartars traffic with the
Moscouites.
and the furnyture of superfluous household stuff. For being defended against
the violence of wether and tempests, only with such apparel and couerture
whereof we have spoken, they trust only to their arrows, which they shoot
as well backwarde flying, as when they assail their enemies face to face:
Albeit, when they determined to invade Europe, their princes and captains had
helmets, coats of fence, and hooked swoordes, The Tartars of the South side of
Moscouia.
which they bought of the Persians. Toward the South, the bounds of Moscouia
are termined by the same Tartars which possess the plain regions near unto
the Caspian sea, above the maryshes of Meotis in Asia, and about the ryuers of
Boristhenes and Tanais in part of Europe. The people called Roxolani, Get, and
Bastarne, inhabited these regions in old time, of whom I think the name of
Russia took original. Get and Roxolani. Russia.
For they call part of Lituania, Russia the lower, whereas Moscouia it self is
called white Russia. Lituania therefore, lies on the Northwest side of
Moscouia. But toward the full West, Moscouia called white Russia. Lituania.
Prussia. Liuonia. Denmark. Norway. Suecia. The people of Laponia.
the main lands of Prussia and Liuonia are joined to the confines or marches
of Moscouia, where the Sarmatian sea breakyng forth of the streightes of
C^mbrica Chersonesus (now called Denmark) is bended with a crooked gulf
toward the North. But in the furthest banks of that Ocean, where the large
kingdoms of Norway and Suecia are joined to the continent, and almost
environed with the sea, are the people called Lapones: a nation exceedyng rude,
suspicious, and fearful, flying and astonyshed at the sight of all strangers
and ships. They know neither fruits nor apples, nor yet any benignity
either of heaven or earth. They provide them meat only with shootyng, and are
appareled with skynnes of wild beasts. They dwell in caves filled with dry
leaves, and in holow trees, cnosumed within either by fire, or rotten for age.
Such as dwell near the sea side, fyshe more luckelye then cunnyngly, and in
the stead of fruits, reserve in store fyshes dried with smoke. They are of
small stature of body, with flat visagies, pale and wannie color, and very
swyft of foot. Their wits or dispositions, are not known to the Moscouites
their borderers, who think it therefore a madness to assail them with a small
power, and judge it neither profitable nor glorious, with great armies to
invade a poor and beggarly nation. They exchange the most white furs, which
we call Armelines, Armeline furs.
for other wares, of diverse sorts: Yet so, that they fly the sight and
company of all merchantes. Bargaynyng without words.
For comparyng and laying their wares together, and leauyng their furs in a
mydde place, they bargayne with simple faith, with absent and unknown men.
Some men of great credit and authority, do testify that in a region beyond
the Lapones, between the West and the North, The dark region by this dark
region and pigmei, is the way to Chathay by the North sea.
oppressed with perpetual darkness, is the nation of the people called
Pigmei, who being grown to their full grought, do scarcely excede the stature
of our children of ten years of age. It is a fearful kind of men, and
express their words in such chatteryng sort, that they seem to be so much
the more like unto Apes, in how much they differ in sense and stature from
men of just heyght.

Toward the North, innumerable people are subject to the Empire of the
Moscouites. The Scythian Ocean.
Their regions extend to the Scythian Ocean for the space of almost three
months journey.

Next unto Moscouia, is the region of Colmogora, The region of Colmogora. The
river of diuidna.
aboundyng with fruits. Through this runs the river of Diuidna, being one
of the greatest that is known in the North parts, and gave the name to an
other less river, which breaks forth into the sea Baltheum. This encreasyng
at certain times of the year, as does the river Nilus, ouerfloweth the
feeldes and playnes, and with his fat and nourishyng moisture, does
marueylouslye resist the injuries of heaven, and the sharp blastes of the North
wind. When it rises by reason of molten snow, and great showers of rain, it
falls into the Ocean by unknown nations, and with so large a Trenche, like
unto a great sea, that it can not be sailed over in one day with a prosperous
wind. But when the waters are fallen, they leave here and there large and
fruitful Islands: For corn there cast on the ground, grows without any
help of the Plowe, and with meruaylous celeritie of hasting nature, fearyng
the new injury of the proud river, does both spryng and ripe in short space.

Into the river Diuidna, runs the river Iuga: and in the corner where they
join together, The river of Iuga or Iug. Vstiuga.
is the famous Mart Town called Vstiuga, distant from the chief city
Mosca.vi. hundred miles.

Note that whereas Paulus Iouius writes here that the river of Diuidna,
otherwise called Duina, The river of Diuidna of Duina.
runs through the region of Colmogor, it is to be understood that there are
two ryuers of that name, the one on the Northeast side of Moscouia, toward the
frosen sea, and the other on the Southwest side, falling into the sea Baltheum,
or the gulf of Finnonia, by the city of Riga in Liuonia. And forasmuch as
the true knowledge of these and certain other is very necessary for all such
as shall trade into Moscouia, or other regions in those coasts by the North
sea, I have thought good to make further declaration hereof, as I have found
in the history of Moscouia, most faithfully and largly written by Sigismundus
Liberus, who was twyse sent Ambassador into Moscouia, as first by Maximilian
the Emperor, and then again by Ferdinando king of Hungary and Boheme. This
have I done the rather, for that in all the mappes that I have seen of
Moscouia, there is no mention made of the river of Duina, that runs through
the region of Colmogor, and by the city of the same name, although the
province of Duina, be in all cards placed Northwarde from the river of Vstiug
or Succana, which is the same Duina, whereof we now speak, and whereof Paulus
Iouius writes, although it be not so named but from the angle or corner, The
river of Suchana.
where ioynyng with the river of Iug and Succana, it runs Northwarde toward
the city of Colmogor: and from thence falls into the North or frosen sea, as
shall hereafter more plainly appear by the words of Sigismundus, that the
one of these be not taken for the other, being so far distant, The frosen sea.
that great error might ensue by mistaking the same, especially because this
whereof Paulus Iouius writes, is not by name expressed in the cards, but only
in the other, whereby the error might be the greater. Of that therefore that
runs by the confines of Liuonia, and the city of Riga, Sigismundus writes
in this manner.

The Lake of Duina, is distant from the sprynges of Boristhenes, almost ten
miles, and as many from the marishe of Fronovvo. From it a river of the same
name toward the West, distant from Vuilna twenty miles, runs from thence
toward the North, where by Riga, the chief city of Liuonia, it falls into
the Germane sea, which the Moscouites call Vuare^zkoie morie. It runs by
Vuitepso, Polotzo, and Dunenburg, and not by Plescouia, as one has written.
This river, being for the most part nauigable, the Liuons call Duna.

Of the other Duina, whereof Poulus Iouious speaks, he wrytteth as follows.

The province of Duina and the river of the same name, is so named from the
place where the ryuers of Suchana and Iug meetyng together, Duina and Suchana.
make one river so called. For Duina in the Moscouites tongue, signifies two.
This river by the space of two hundred miles, enters into the North Ocean, on
that part where the said sea runs by the coasts of Suecia and Norway, and
divides Engreonland from the unknown land. This province situate in the full
North, perteyned in time past to the segniorie of Nouogorode. From Moscouia to
the mouths of Duina, are numbered.CCC. miles: Albeit as I have said, in the
regions that are beyond Volga, Greonlande or Engreonland.
the account of the journey can not be well observed, by reason of many
maryshes, ryuers, and very great wooddes that lie in the way. Yet are we led by
conjecture to think it to be scarsely two hundred miles: forasmuch as from
Moscouia to Vuolochda, from Vuolochda to Vstiug somewhat into the East, and
last of al, from Vstiug by the river Duina, is the right passage to the North
sea. This region, beside the Castle of Colmogor and the city of Duina,
Understand miles of Germany, that is leagues.
situate almost in the mydde way between the sprynges and mouths of the river,
and the Castle of Pi^nega standing in the very mouths of Duina, is utterly
without towns and Castles: Yet has it many vyllages which are far in
sunder, by reason of the barennesse of the soil. etc.

In an other place he writes, that Suchana and Iug, after they are joined
together in one, loose their first names, and make the river Duina. etc. But
let us now return to the history of Paulus Iouius.

Unto Vstiuga, from the Permians, Pecerrians, Inugrians, Vgolicans, and
Pinnegians, people inhabytyng the North and Northest provinces, Rych furs.
are brought the precious furs of Marterns and Sables, also the cases of
Woulfes and Foxes both white and black: And likewise the skynnes of the
beasts called Ceruari^ Lupi (that is) heart Woolfes, being engendered either of
a Woolfe and a Hynde, or a Heart and a bitch Woolfe. Lupi Ceruarii.
These furs and skynnes, they e^chaunge for diverse other wares. The best
kind of Sables, and of the ^inest hear, wherewith now the vestures of
princes are lived, Sables.
and the tender necks of delicate dames are covered, with the express
similitude of the living beast, are brought by the Permians and Pecerrians,
which they them selves also receive at the hands of other that inhabit the
regions near unto the North Ocean. The Permians and Pecerrians, a little before
our time, did sacrifice to I^ols, after the manner of the Gentyles: but do now
acknoweledge Christ their God. The passage to the Inugrians, and Vgolicans, is
by certain rough mountains, The mountayn^s called Hiperborei.
which perhaps are they that in old time were called Hiperborei. In the
tops of these, are found the best kinds of Falcons: whereof one kind
(called Herodium) is white, with spotted feathers. Hawks of diverse kinds.


There are also Ierfalcons, Sakers, and Peregrines, which were unknown to the
ancient princes in their excessive and nise pleasures.

Beyond those people whom I last named (being all trybutaries to the kings of
Moscouia) are other nations, the last of men, not known by any voyages of the
Moscouites, forasmuch as none of them have passed to the Ocean, The passage
from Moscouia to Cathay.
and are therefore known only by the fabulous narrations of merchauntes. Yet
it is apparante that the river Diuidna or Duina, draweyng with it innumerable
other ryuers, runnneth with a vehement course toward the North, and that the
sea is there exceedyng large: so that saylyng by the coaste of the right hand,
ships may have passage from thence to Cathay, as it is thought by most lykely
conjecture, Cathay.
except there lie some land in the way. For the region of Cathay perteyneth to
thextreme and furthest parts of the East, situate almost in the parallel of
Thracia, Master Eliot calls Cathay the region of Sinarum.
and known to the Portugales in India when they sailed near thereunto by the
regions of Sinara and Malacha to Aurea Chersonesus, and brought from thence
certain vestures made of Sables skynnes, by which only argument it is
apparente that the city of Cathay is not far from the coasts of Scithia.

But when Demetrius was demanded whether either by the monuments of letters,
or by fame left them of their predicessours, The Goths subverted the roman
Empire.
they had any knowledge of the Goths, who now more then a thousand years
since, subverted Thempire of the Roman Emperors, and defaced the city of
Rome: He answered, that both the nation of the Goths of the name of king
Totila^ their chief captain, The north region conspired against the Romans.
was of famous memory among them: And that diverse nations of the North regions
conspired to that expedition, and especially the Moscouites: Also that that
army increased of the confluence of the Barbarous Liuons and wandryng Tartars:
But that they were all called Goths, forasmuch as the Goths that inhabited
Scondania and Iselande, were the auctours of that invasion. Moscouia.


And with these bounds are the Moscouites enclosed on every side, whom we
think to be those people that Ptolome called Modocas: but have doubtless at
this day their name of the river Mosco, which runs through the chief city
Mosca, named also after the same. This is the most famous city in Moscouia,
as well for the situation thereof, The city of Mosca.
being in manner in the myddest of the region, as also for the commodious
opportunity of rivers, multitude of houses, and strong fence of so fair and
goodly a Castle. For the city is extended with a long tract of buildings by
the banks of the river for the space of five miles. The houses are made all of
timber, and are divided into Parlours, Chambers, and Rytchyns, of large rooms:
yet neither of unseemly heyght, or to low, but of decent measure and
proportion. Richard Chaunceler told me that these masts are smo^ what hollow on
the one side, and that the whole side of the next enters into ye same,
whereby they lie very close.
For they have great trees apt for the purpose brought from the forest of
Hercinia: Of the which, made perfectly round like ye mastes of shyps, and so
laid one upon an other, that they join at the ends in right angles, where
being made very fast and sure, they frame their houses thereof, of meruaylous
strength with small charges, and in very short time. In manner all the houses
have pryuate gardens, as well for pleasure as commodity of herbs, whereby the
circuit of the dispersed city appears very great. All the wards or quarters
of the city, have their peculiar Chapels. But in the cheifest and highest
place thereof, is the Church of our Lady, of ample and goodly workemanshyppe,
which Aristoteles of Bononie, a man of singular knowledge and experience in
Architecture, builded more then threescore years since. At the very head of
the city, a little river, called Neglinia which dryueth many corn mylles, The
castle of Mosca.
enters into the river Moscus, and makes almost an Island, in whose end is
the Castle, with many strong towers and bulwarks, builded very fair by the
device of Italian Architecturs that are the masters of the kings works. In
the fields about the city, is an incredible multitude of Hares, and Roe
Buckes, the which, White Hares and Roe buckes.
it is lawful for no man to chase or pursue with dogs or nets, except only
certain of the kings familiars, and strange Ambassadors, to whom he gives
license by special commandment. Almost three parts of the city is
environed with two rivers, and the residue with a large Mote, that receives
plenty of water from the said ryuers. The city is also defended on the other
side with an other river named Iausa, which falls also into Moscus a little
beneath the city. Furthermore, Moscus runnyng toward the South, falls into
the river Ocha or Occa, much greater then it self at the town Columna: The
river Ocha.
and not very far from thence, Ocha it self, increased with other ryue^s,
vnladeth his streams in the famous river Volga, where at the place where they
join, Volga. Nouogradia.
is situate the city of Nouogradia the less, so named in respect of the
greater city of that name, from whence was brought the first colonie of the
less city. Volga, called in old time Rha, Rha.
has his original of the great marshes, named the white Lakes. These are
above Moscouia, between the North and the West, The white Lakes.
and send forth from them almost all the ryuers that are dispersed into diverse
regions on every side, as we see of the Alps, from whose tops and sprynges
descend the waters, of whose concourse the ryuers of Rhene, Po, and Rodanum,
have their increase. For these maryshes, in the stead of mountains full of
sprynges, minister abundant moisture, forasmuch as no mountains are yet
found in that region by the long trauayles of men, insomuche that many that
have been studious of the old Cosmographie, The Riphean and Hiperborcan
mountains.
suppose the Riphean and Hiperborean, mountains so often mentioned of the
ancient writers, to be fabulous. From these maryshes therefore, the rivers of
Duina, Ocha, Moscus, Volga, Tanais, and Boristhenes, have their oryginall. The
Tartares call Volga Edel: Tanais and Borysthenes.
Tanais they call Don: And Boristehenes, is at this time called Neper. This, a
little beneath Taurica, runs into the sea Euxinus. Tanais is received of the
maryshes of Meotis at the noble Mart Town Azoum. The sea Euxinus.
But Volga, leauyng the city of Mosca toward the South, and runnyng with a
large circuit, and great Wyndynges, and Creekes first toward the East, then
to the West, and lastly to the South, The Caspian sea. Astrachan. Media.
Armenia. Persia.
falls with a full stream into the Caspian or Hircan sea. Above the mouth of
this, is a city of the Tartars called Citrachan, which some call Astrachan,
where Martes are kept by the Merchauntes of Media, Armenia, and Persia. On the
further bancke of Volga, there is a town of the Tartars called Casan, Casan.
of the which the Horda of the Casanite Tartars took their name. It is
distant from the mouth of Volga and the Caspian sea.500. miles. Above
Casan.150. miles, at the entrance of the river Sura, Basilius that now
reigns, builded a town called Surcium, to the intent that in those desartes,
Sura. Surcium.
the marchantes and traueylers which certify the governors of the marches of
the doings of the Tartars, and the manners of that unquiet nation, may have a
^afe mansion among their customers.

The Emperors of Moscouia at diverse times, either moved thereto by occasion of
things present, or for the desire they had to nobilitate new and obscure
places, have kept the seat of their court and Empire in diverse cities. For
Nouogrodia, Nouogrodia.
which lies toward the West, and the Lyuon sea, not many years past, was the
head city of Moscouia, and obtained ever the chief dignity, by reason of the
incredible number of houses and edifies, with the opportunity of the large lake
replenyshed with fyshe, and also for the fame of the most ancient and
venerable Temple, which more then four hundred years since, was dedicated to
Sancta Sophia, Christ the son of God, The Temple of Sancta Sophia.
according to the custom of the Emperors of Bizantium, now called
Constantinople. Nouogrodia, is oppressed in manner with continual winter, and
darkness of long nyghtes. For it has the pole Artike eleuate above the
Horizon threescore and four degrees: The elevation o^ the pole at Nouogrodia,
and Moscouia. Heat by reason of short nyghtes.
and is further from the Equinoctial then Moscouia, by almost six degrees. By
which dyfference of heaven, it is said, that at the summer steye of the Sun,
it is burnt with continual heat, by reason of the short nyghtes.

The city also of Volodemaria, The city of Volodemaria.
being more then two hundred miles distant from Mosca toward the East, had
the name of the chief city and kings town, whyther the seat of the Empire
was translated by the valiant Emperors for necessary considerations, that
such aid, furniture, and requisites, as appertain to the wars, might be
near at hand, at such time as they keep continual war against the
Tartars their borderers. For it is situate without Volga, on the banks of the
river Clesma, which falls into Volga. But Moscha, The city of Moscha.
as well for those gifts and commodities whereof we have spoken, as also that
it is situate in the myddest of the most frequented place of all the region and
Empire, and defended with the river and Castle, has in comparyson to other
cities been thought most worthy to be esteemed for the chief. Moscha is
distant from Nouogrodia five hundred miles: Ottoferia. Volga.
and almost in the myd way is the city of Ottoferia (otherwise called Otwer,
or Tuwer) upon the river of Volga. This river, near unto the fountaynes and
sprynges of the same, not yet increased by receyuyng so many other ryuers,
runs but slowly and gentelly, and passes from thence to Nouogrodia, through
many woods and desolate playnes. Furthermore from Nouogrodia to Riga, Riga.
the next port of the Sarmatian sea, is the journey of a thousand miles,
little more or less. This tract is thought to be more commodious then the
other, because it has many towns, The city of Plescouia.
and the city of Plescouia in the way, being imbrased with two ryuers. From
Riga (perteynyng to the dominion of the great master of the wars of the
Liuons) to the city of Lubecke, The city of Lubecke.
a port of Germany, in the gulf of Cymbrica Chersonesus (now called
Denmark) are numbered about a thousand miles of dangerous saylyng.

From Rome to Moscouia.
From Rome to the city of Moscha, the distance is known to be two thousand
and six hundred miles, by the nearest way, passing by Rauenna, Taruisium, the
Alps of Carnica: Also Villacum, Noricum, and Vienna of Pannouie: and from
thence (passing over the river of Danubius) to Olmutium of the Marouians, and
to Cracouia the chief city of Polonie, are compted.xi. hundred miles. From
Cracouia to Vilna, the head city of Lithuania, are compted five hundred miles:
and as many from that city to Smolenzko, situate beyond Boristhenes, from
whence to Moscha, are compted six hundred miles. The journey from Vilna by
Smolenzko to Moscha, is traueyled in winter with expedite sleades, Winter
travail by Ise and snow.
and incredible celeritie upon the snowes, hardened with long frost, and
compacte like Ise, by reason of much wearyng. But in summer, the playnes can
not be ouerpassed but by difficulte and laborious travail. For when the
snowes by the continual heat of the Sun begin to melte and dissolve,
Maryshes in summer.
they cause great maryshes and quamyres, able to entangle both horse and man,
were it not that ways are made through the same, with brydges and causes of
wood, and almost infinite labor.

Other writers deny this.
In all the region of Moscouia, there is no vain or mine of gold or silver, or
any other common metal, except Iron, neither yet is there any token of
precious stones: and therefore they buy all those things of strangers.
Nevertheless, this injury of nature is recompensed with abundance of rich
furs, Rych furs.
whose price, by the wanton nysenesse of men, is grown to such excess, that
the furs parteynyng to one sort of apparel, The price of furs.
are now sold for a thousand crowns. But the time has been that these have
been bought better cheap, when the furthest nations of the North, being
ignorant of our nyse finenesse, and breathyng desire toward effeminate and
superfluous pleasures, exchaunged the same with much simplicity, oftentimes
for trifles and things of small value: Insomuche that commonly the Permians
and Pecerrians, How many Sables skynnes for an Axe.
were accustomed to give so many skins of Sables for an Iron Axe or Hatchet,
as being tied hard together, the marchantes of Moscouia could draw through
the hole where the hafte or handle enters into the same. But the Moscouites
send into all parts of Europe the best kind of flax to make lynnen cloth,
and hemp for ropes: Also many Ox hydes, Flax. Ox hydes. Wax.
and exceedyng great masses of wax.

They proudely deny, But truly.
that the Roman church obteyneth the principate and preeminent authority of
all other.

They so abhor the nation of the Jews, They abhor the Jews.
that they detest the memory of them, and will in no condition admyt them to
dwell within their dominions: esteemyng them as wicked and mischievous people,
that have of late taught the Turks to make gunnes. Their books and religion.
Beside the books that they have of the ancient Greek doctors, they have
also the commentaries and homelies of saint Ambrose, Augustine, Jerome, and
Gregory, translated into the Illyrian or Slauon tongue, which agrees with
theyrs: For they use both the Slauon tongue and letters, as do also the
Sclauons, Dalmates, Bohemes, Pollones, and Lithuanes. The Slauon tongue spread
further then any other.
This tongue is spredde further then any other at this day: For it is familiar
at Constantinople, in the court of the Emperors of the Turks, and was of late
heard in Egypt among the Mamalukes, in the court of the Soltane of Alcayre,
otherwise called Memphis, or Babylon in Egypt. A great number of books of holy
scripture are translated into this tongue by the industry of Saint Jerome and
Cyrillus. Furthermore, beside the hystories of their own countries, they have
also books, containing the facts of great Alexander, Saint Jerome was borne
in Dalmatia, now called Sclauonia.
and the Roman Emperors, and likewise of Marcus Antonius, and Cleopatra. They
have no manner of knowledge of philosophy, Astronomy, or speculatiue physic,
with other liberal sciences: But such are taken for Physicians, as profess
that they have oftentimes observed the virtue and quality of some unknown
herb.

How they number the years.
They number the years, not from the birth of Christ, but from the beginning of
the world. And this they begin to account, not from the month of January, but
from September.

They have few and simple laws throughout all the kingdom, Few and simple
laws.
made by the equity and conscience of their princes, and approved by the
consent of wise and good men, and are therefore greatly for the wealth and
quietness of the people, forasmuch as it is not lawful to peruerte them with
any interpretations or cauillations of lawyers or Atturneys. They punysh
thieves, rouers, privy pyckers, and murderers. When they examyne
malefactors, they power a great quantity of cold water upon such as they
suspecte, which they say to be an intolerable kind of torment. But sometimes
they manacle such as are stubborn, and will not confess apparent crimes.

Their youth is exercised in diverse kinds of games and plays, The exercise of
youth.
resemblyng the wars, whereby they both practice policy, and increase their
strength. They use runnyng both on horseback and a foot. Also runnyng at the
tylt, wrestlyng, and especially shootyng. Shootyng.
For they give rewards to such as excel therein.

The Moscouites are universally of mean stature, yet very square set, The
corporature of the Moscouites.
and myghtyly brawned. They have all gray eyes, long beardes, short legs,
and bygge bellyes. They ride very short, and shoot backewarde very cunnyngly,
even as they fly. Their fare.
At home in their houses, their fare is rather plentiful then deyntie: For
their tables are furnyshed for a small price, with all such kinds of meats
as may be desired of such as are given to most excessive gluttony. Hens and
Duckes are bought for little silver pence the piece. There is incredible plenty
of beasts and cattayle, both great and small. The flesh of beef that is
killed in the myddest of winter, is so coniealed and frosen, Flesh preserved
long, by reason of cold. Haukyng and huntyng.
that it putrifieth not for the space of two months. Their best and most
delicate dyshes, are gotten by huntyng and haukyng, as with us: For they take
all sorts of wild beasts with Hounds, and diverse kinds of nets. And with
Faulcons and Erens, or Eagles, of a marvelous kind, which the region of
Pecerra brings forth unto them, they take not only Fesantes and wild
Duckes, but also Cranes and wild Swannes. They take also a foul of dark
color, about the bygnesse of a Goose, with read ouerbrowes, whose flesh in
taste passes the pleasantness of Phesauntes: These in the Moscouites tongue
are called Tetrao, which I suppose to be the same that Pliny calls
Erythratao, known to the people of the Alps, and especially to the Rhetians
which inhabit the lands about the sprynges of the river Abdua. Plenty of
fyshe.
The river of Volga ministers unto them great fyshes, and of pleasant taste,
especially Sturgions, or rather a kind of fyshe like unto Sturgions: which in
the winter season being enclosed in Ise, are long reserved fresh and
incorrupt. Of other kinds of fyshes, Fyshe long reserved in Ise.
they take in manner an incredible multitude in the white lakes whereof we have
spoken before. And whereas they utterly lack natyue wynes, Wine.
they use such as are brought from other places. And this only in certain
feasts and holy mysteryes, Maluasie.
especially the pleasant Maluasies of the Island of Creta, now called Candy,
are had in most honor: and used either as medicines, or for a show of
excessive abundance, forasmuch as it is in manner a miracle that wines brought
from Candy by the streightes of Hercules pyllers, All the North part of the
fyrme land was called Scythia, and the people Scythians.
and the Islands of Gades, and tossed with such fluddes of the enclosed Ocean,
should be droonke among the Scythian snowes in their native purity and
pleasantness.

The common people drink meade, made of honey and hoppes sodden together,
which they keep long in pitched barrelles, where the goodness increases
with age. They use also beer and ale, as do the Germans and Polones. They
are accustomed for delicateness in summer, Drink cooled with Ise.
to cool their beer and meade with putting Ise therein, which the noble men
reserve in their sellars in great quantity for the same purpose. Wine of
Cherryes.
Some there are that delight greatly in the iuise that is pressed out of
Cherries before they be full ripe, which they affirm to have the color of
clear and ruddy wine, with a very pleasant taste.

Their wives and women, are not with them in such honor as they are in other
nations: Their women.
for they use them in manner in the place of servants. The noble women and
gentelwomen, do diligently observe their walks, and have an eye to their
chastity. They are sildome bydden forth to any feasts: neither are permitted
to resort to churches far of, or to walk abroad without some great
consideration. But the common sort of women, are easily and for a small price
allured to lechery, even of strangers: by reason whereof, the Gentlemen do
little or nothing esteem them.

John the father of king Basilius, dyed more then.xx. years since. Thomas
Paleologus.
He married Sophia, the daughter of Thomas Paleologus, who reigned far in
Peloponnesus (now called Morea) and was brother to The Emperor of
Constantinople: She was then at Rome when Thomas her father was driven out of
Grecia by the Turks. The conquest of the Turks in Grecia.
Of her were five children borne, as Basilius him self, George, Demetrius,
Symeon, and Andreas. Basilius took to wife Salomonia, the daughter of George
Soborouius, a man of singular fidelity and wisdom, and one of his counsel:
the excellent virtues of which woman, only barennesse obscured.

When the Princes of Moscouia deliberate to marry, their custom is to have
choice of all the vyrgins in the realm, How the princes choose their wives.
and to cause such as are of most fair and beautiful vysage and personage,
with manners and virtues according, to be brought before them: Which
afterward they commyt to certain faithful men, and grave matrones to be
further viewed, insomuche that they leave no part of them unsearched. Of
these, she whom the Prince most lyketh, is pronounced worthy to be his
wife, not without great and careful expectation of their parents, living for
that time between hope and fear. The other virgins also which stood in
election, and contended in beauty and integrity of manners, are oftentimes the
same day, to gratify the Prince, married to his noble men, Gentelmen, and
Captains: whereby it sometimes comes to pass, that while the Princes
contemn the lynage of royal descent, such as are borne of humble parentage,
are exalted to the degree of princely estate, in like manner as the Emperors of
the Turks were accustomed to be chosen, by comeliness of personage, and warly
prowess.

Basilius was under the age of forty and seven years, Duke Basilius.
of comely personage, singular virtue, and princely qualities, by all means
studious for the prosperity and commodities of his subjects: furthermore, in
benevolence, liberality, and good success in his doings, to be preferred
before his progenitors. For when he had vi. years kept war with the
Lyuons, that moved.lxxii. confetherate cities to the cause of that war, he
obtained the victory, and departed with few conditions of peace, rather given
then accepted. Also at the beginning of his reign, he put the Polones to
flight, War between the Polones and Moscouites.
and took prisoner Constantine, the Captain of the Ruthens, whom he brought
to Moscouia tied in chains: But shortly after, at the river of Boristhenes,
above the city of Orsa, he him self was overcome in a great battle, by the
same Constantine whom he had dismissed: Yet so, that the town of Smolenzko,
which the Moscouites possessed before, and was new won by the Polones, should
still parteyne to the dominions of Basilius. But against the Tartars, War
between the Moscouites and Tartars.
and especially the Tartars of Europe, called the Precopites, the Moscouites
have oftentimes kept war with good success, in revenge of the iniuryes done
to them by their incursions.

Basilius is accustomed to bring to the field more then a hundred and fifty
thousand horsemen, divided into three bands, The Moscouites army.
and following the banners or ensigns of their Captains in order of battle.
On the banner of the kings wyng, is figured the Image of Iosue the Captain of
the Hebrews, Their banner.
at whose prayer the Sun prolonged the day, and stayed his course, as
witness the hystories of holy scripture. Armies of footmen are in manner to no
use in those great wyldernesses, as well for their apparel being loose and long,
as also for the custom of their enemies, who in their wars trust rather to
the swyftnesse of their light horses, then to try the matter in a pyght field.

Their horses are of less then mean stature: Their horses and horsemen.
but very strong and swyfte. Their horsemen are armed with pykes, Ryuettes,
Mases of iron, and arrows. Few have hooked swoordes. Their bodies are
defended with round Targets, Their armure.
after the manner of the Turks of Asia, or with bendyng and cornarde Targettes
after the manner of the Greeks: Also with coats of mayle, Brygantines, and
sharp Helmets. Basilius did furthermore instytute a band of Hargabusiers on
horseback, Hargabusiers.
and caused many great brazen pieces to be made by the workemanshyp of certain
Italians: Gunnes.
and the same with their stocks and wheels to be placed in the Castle of
Mosca.

The king him self with princely magnificence and singular familiarity
(wherewith nevertheless no part of the majesty of a king is violate) is
accustomed to dyne openly with his noble men, The Prince dines openly.
and strange Ambassadors in his own chamber of presence, where is seen a
marvelous quantity of silver and gylt plate, standing upon two great and high
cubbardes in the same chamber. Sigismundus says that much of this is gold.
He has not about him any other guard for the custody of his person, saving
only his accustomed family. For watch and ward is diligently kept of the
faithful multitude of the citizens: Insomuch that every ward or quarter of the
city is enclosed with gates, The custody of of the city.
rayles, and bars: neither is it lawful for any man rashely to walk in the
city in the night, or without light. All the cour^e consists of noble men,
The Dukes court.
Gentlemen, and choice souldyers, which are called out of every region by their
towns and vyllages, and commanded to wait course by course at certain
months appointed. Furthermore when war is proclaimed, all the army is
collected both of the old souldyers, and by musteryng of new in all
provinces. For the Lieuetenantes and Captains of the army, are accustomed in all cities to muster the youth, and to admyt to the order of souldyers such as
they think able to serve the turn. Their wages is paid them of the common
treasury of every province, Souldyers wages of the common treasury.
which is geathered, and partly paid also, in the time of peace, although it
be but little. But such as are assigned to the wars, are free from all
tributes, and inioye certain other priuilegies, whereby they may the more
gladly and cheerfully serve their king, and defend their country. For in the
time of war, occasion is mynistred to show true virtue and manhood, where in
so great and necessary an institution, every man according to his approved
actiuitie and ingenious forwardenesse, may obtain the fortune either of
perpetual honor, or ignominy.

Vix olim vlla fides referrentibus horrida regna
Moschorum, and Ponti, res glacialis erat.
Nunc Iouio autore, illa oculis lustramus, et vrbes,
Et nemora, et montes cernimus et fluuios.
Moschouiam, monumenta Ioui, tua culta reuoluens,
Caepi alios mundos credere Democriti.
Other notable things as concerning Moscouia, geathered out of the books of
Sigismundus Liberus. Note that when he says miles, he means leagues.
FRom whence Russia had the name, there are diverse opinions. Russia.
Some think that it was so named of one Russus the son or neuiew of Lech the
king of the Polons. Other affirm that it was so called of a certain old
town, named Russus, not far from Nouogoroda or Nouogradia the more. Some
also think that it was so called of the brown color of the nation. The
brown color of the Russes.
But the Moscouians confute all these opinions as untrue, affirmyng that this
nation was in old time called Rosseia, as a nation dispersed, as the name it
self does declare. For Rosseia in the Ruthens tongue, does signify dispersed,
Russeia.
or scattered. The which thing to be true, diverse other people commyxt with
thinhabitauntes, and diverse provinces lying here and there between diverse parts
of Russia do plainly declare. But whence soever they took their name,
doubtless all the people that use the Slauon tongue, and profess the faith of
Christ, The Slauon tongue spreads far.
after the manner of the Greeks (called in their common language Russi, and in
the Latin tongue Rutheni) are increased to such a multitude, that they have
either expulsed all the nations that lie between them, or drawn them to their
manner of living, in somuche that they are now called all Rutheni, by one
common name.

Furthermore the Slauon tongue (which at this day is somewhat corruptly
called Sclauon) runs exceedyng far, as used of the Dalmates, Bossuenser,
Croatians, Istrians, and by along tracte of the sea Adriatike unto Forum Iulij:
Of the Caruians also, whom the Venetians call Charsos: and likewise of the
Carniolans and Carinthians, unto the river Drauus: Furthermore of the Stirians
within Gretzium, and by Muera unto Danubius, and from thence of the Misians,
Seruians, Bulgarians, and other inhabityng, even unto Constantinople:
Furthermore of the Bohemians, Lusacians, Silesians, Morauians, and
thinhabitauntes near unto the river Vagus in the kingdom of Hungary: The
Polones also, and the Ruthenians, whose Empire reaches very far: likewise
the Circasians and Quinquemontanians, unto Pontus: and is from thence used in
the North parts of Germany, among the remnant of the Vandales inhabityng here
and there. Vandales.
All which nations, although they acknowledge them selves to be Sclauons, yet
the Germans taking the denomination only of the Vandales, call all them that
use the Slauon tongue, Vuenden, or Vuinden, or Vuindysh.

Of the Princes that now reign in Russia, the chief is the great Duke of
Moscouia, The princes of Russia.
who possesses the greatest part thereof. The second is the great Duke of
Lithuania: and the third the king of Polonie, who now obteyneth the dominion
of Polonie and Lithuania.

In authority and dominion over his subjects, the prince of Moscouie passes
all the monarkes of the world: The Duke of Moscouia.
For he depriueth all his noble men and gentelmen of all their holds and
munitions at his pleasure. He trusts not his own brethren, but oppresses
all with like servitude: Insomuch that whom so ever he commands either to
remain with him in the court, or to go to the wars, or sends on
embassage, they are compelled to be at their own charges, except the young
gentelmen the sons of the Boiarons, that is, the noble men of the lowest
degree. He usurps this authority as well over the spirituality as the
temporaltie, constituting what him lists of the goods and life of all men. Of
his counselors there is not one that dare dissent from him in any thing. They
openly confess, that the will of their prince is the will of God: and therefore
call him the key bearer and chamberlen of God, and believe him to be the
executor of Gods will. By reason whereof, the prince him self, when any
peticion is made to him for the delivery of any captive, is acaccustomed to
answer, when God commands, he shall be delivered. Likewise when any asks a
question of an uncertain or doubtful thing, their custom is to answer thus:
God knows, and the great Prince. It is uncertain whether the cruelty and
fyrcenesse of the nation do require so tyrannous a Prince, or whether by the
tyranny of the Prince, the nation is made so fierce and cruel.

Basilius the Son of John, was the first that took upon him the name and
title of a king, in this manner. The great lord Basilius, by the grace of God,
king and lord of all Russia, and the great Duke of Vuolodimaria, Moscouia,
Nouogradia. etc.

Furthermore, Why the Duke of Moscouia was called an Emperor.
whereas now this Prince is called Emperor, I have thought good to show the
title and cause of this error. Note therefore that Czar in the Ruthens tongue,
signifies a king, whereas in the language of the Slauons, Pollons, Bohemes,
and other, the same word Czar, signifies Caesar, by which name the Emperors
have been commonly called. For both they, and the Slauons that are under the
kingdom of Hungary, call a king by an other name: as some Crall, other
Kyrall, and some Korall: but think that only an Emperor is called Czar.
Whereby it came to pass that the Ruthene or Moscouite interpretours, hearing
their Prince to be so called of strange nations, began them selves also to name
him an Emperor, and th^nk the name of Czar to be more worthy then the name of
a king, although they signify all one thing. But who so will read all their
histories and books of holy scripture, shall find that a king is called Czar,
and an Emperor Kessar. By the like error the Emperor of the Turks is called
Czar, The great Turk.
who nevertheless of antiquity used no higher title then the name of a king,
expressed by this word Czar. And hereof the Turks of Europe that use the
Slauon tongue, call the city of Constantinople Czargard, (that is) the kings
city.

Some call the Prince of Moscouie the white king, which I think to proceed of
the white Cappes, The white king.
or other tyrementes they wear on their heads, like as they call the king of
Pertia Kisilpassa (that is) read head. He uses the title of a king when he
writes or sends to Rome, The Duke of Moscouia his title.
the Emperor, the Pope, the King of Suetia and Denmark, the great master of
Prusia and Liuonia, and also to the great Turk, as I have been credibly
enfourmed: but he is not called king of any of them, except perhaps of the
Liuons. Yet by reason of his later conquestes, some have thought him worthy the
name of a king, or rather of an Emperor, because he has kings under his
Empire.

To the king of Polone, he uses this title: The great lord Basilius by the
grace of God, lord of al Russia, and great Duke of Vuolodimeria, Moscouia,
Nouogradia. etc. leauyng out the title of a king. For none of them vouchsafes
to receive the letters of the other augmented with any new title, as I knew
by experience at my being in Moscouia, at which time Sigismundus the king of
Polone sent him his letters augmented with the title of the Duke of Moscouia,
wherewith he was not a little offended.

They glory in their histories that before Vuolodimeria and Olha, Russia
baptized by Saint Andrewe the Apostle.
the land of Russia was baptized and blessed of Saint Andrewe the Apostle of
Christ, affirmyng that he came from Grecia to the mouths of the river
Boristhenes: and that he sailed up the river to the mountains where as is now
Chiouia: and that there he blessed all the land and placed his cross,
prophesyng also that the grace of God should be great there, and that there
should be many churches of Christian men: Likewise, that he afterward came to
the sprynges of Boristhenes, unto the great Lake Vuolok, and by the river Louat
descended into the Lake Ilmer: from whence by the river Vuolcon, which runs
out of the same Lake, he came to Nouogradia: and passed from thence by the same
river to the Lake Ladoga, and the river Heua, and so unto the sea which they
call Vuarezkoia, being the same that we call the Germane sea, between
Vuinlandia or Finlandia and Liuonia, by the which he sailed to Rome, and was
at the last crucified for Christ his Gospel in Peloponnesus by the tirranie of
Agus Antipater, as their cronacles make mention.

The Prince every second or third year causes a muster to be taken of the
Sons of the Boiorons, The Moscouites wars.
and takes an account booth of their number, and how many Horses and men
every of them is able to make: and then appoynteth a certain stypende to such
as are able further to bear their own charges in the wars. They have
seldom any rest or quietness: For they either keep war with the
Lithuanians, Liuonians, Suetians, or Tartars of Casan. Or if it so chance that
the prince keep no war, yet does he yearly appoynte garrysons of.xx.
thousand men in places about Tanais and Occa, to repress the incursions and
robberyes of the European Tartars, called Precopites.

As in other matters, Diverse manners of diverse people in the wars.
even so in the order of warrefare there is great diversity among men. For the
Moscouian as soon as he begins to fly, thinks of none other succoure,
but puts all his confidence therein. Being pursued or taken of his enemy, he
neither defends him self, nor desires pardon.

The Tartar cast of from his horse, spoiled of all his armure and weapones, and
also sore wounded, defends him self with hands, feet, and teethe, and by
all means he may, until his strength and spirit fail him.

The Turk, when he sees him self destitute of all help and hope to escape,
does humbly desire pardon, castyng away his weapons and armure, and reaching
forth to the victourer his hands joined together to be bound, hopyng by
captivity to save his life.

The Moscouites in placeyng their army, choose them a large plain, where the
best of them pytch their tents, The Moscouites army.
and the other make them certain arbours of bows fyxt in the ground, bendyng
together the tops thereof, which they cover with their clokes to defend
them selves, their bows, arrows, saddels, and other their necessaries from
rain. They put forth their horses to pasture, and for that cause have their
tents so far in sunder, which they fortify neither with carts or trenches,
or any other impedyment, except perhaps the place be defended by nature, as
with wooddes, ryuers, and maryshes.

It may perhaps seem strange, How he maintayneth his army.
how he mayntayneth him and his so long with so small an army as I have
said. I will now therefore briefly declare their sparyng and frugalitie. He
that has six or sometimes more horses, uses one of them as a pack horse to
bear all their necessaryes. He has also in a bag of two or three spannes
long, the flower or meal of the grain called mill, and.viii. or.x. pounds
weight of Swines flesh poudred. He has likewise a bag of salt, myxt with
pepper, if he be rych. Furthermore every man caryeth with him a hatchet, a fire
box, and a brazen pot^e: so that if they chance to come to any place where
they can find no fruits, Garlyke, Onyons, or flesh, they kyndle a fire, and
fill their pottes with water, whereunto they put a spoonefull of meal, with a
quantity of salt, and make pottage thereof, wherewith the master and all his
servants live contented. But if the master be very hungrye, he eats all
alone, and the servants are sometimes enforced to fast for the space of two
or three days. And if the master intend to fare somewhat more delycately,
then he adds thereto a little portion of Swynes flesh. I speak not this of
the best of them, but of such as are of the mean sort. The governors and
captains of the army, do sometimes bydde the poorer sort to their tables:
where they feed them selves so well, that they fast two or three days after.
When they have fruits, Garlyke, and Onyons, they can well forbear all other
meats. Proceedyng forward to the battle, they put more confidence in their
multitude, and with what great armies they assail their enemies, then either
in the strength and valiantness of their soldiers, or in well instructyng
their army, and fight better a far of, then at hand: and therefore study how
to circumuent or enclose their enemies, and to assail them on the back half.
They have many trumpetters, Instruments of war.
the which while they blow al at once, after their manner, make a marvelous
strange noise. They have also another kind of instruments which they call
Szurna: these they blow without ceassyng for the space of an hour together,
so temperyng the same, and holdyng in the wind while they draw more, The
Moscouites and Tartars apparel.
that the noise seems continually without intermission.

They use all one manner of apparel: as long coats without pleyghtes, and
with narrow sleeves, after the manner of the Hungarians. These the Christians
use to butten on the right side: and the Tartars (vseyng the like) butten them
on the left side. They wear read and short buskyns that reach not to their
knees, and have the soles thereof defended with plates of Iron. In manner all
their shyrtes are wrought with diverse colors about the neck, and have the
Collars and Ruffes beset with little round Baules like Beads, of Silver, or
gylted Copper, and some time Pearls also. They gyrd them selves beneath the
belly, even as low as their pryuie members, that they may seem more burlye,
which they greatly esteem, as do at this day the Spanyardes, Italians, and
Almanes.

The province of Moscouia is neither very large nor fruitful, The province of
Moscouia.
forasmuch as the fertility is hindered with sandye ground, which either with
to much dryness or moisture kills the corn. Furthermore immoderate and
sharp vntemperatenesse of the air, while the cold of the winter overcomes
the heat of the Sun, sometimes does not suffer the corn to ripe. For the
cold is there sometimes so extreme, Extreme cold.
that like as with us in somer by reason of heat, even so there by extreme
cold, the earth has many great chinckes or breaches. Water also cast into the
air, and spytle falling from ones mouth, are frosen before they touch the
ground. I my self, when I came thither in the year 1526. saw the branches
of fruitful trees wythered by the cold of the winter be fore, which was so
extreme, that many of their wagoners and carriers (whom they call Gonecz) were
found frosen to death in their sleades. There were some that at the same time
leadyng and dryuing their cattayle from the next villages to Moscouia, died by
the way with their beasts, through the extremity of the cold. Furthermore
the same year many players that were accustomed to wander about the country
with daunsing Bears, were found dead in the high ways. Wild Bears also,
enforced thereto by famine, left the woods, and ran here and there into diverse
villages and houses: at whose coming while the men of the country forsook
their houses and fled into the fields, many of them peryshed through the
vehemency of the cold. Again it sometimes so chances that in Summer the
heat is as extreme: Extreme heat in cold regions.
as in the year.1525. in the which almost all kinds of pulse and grain were
scorched and burnt, and such a d^arth of corn followed that drought, that that
which before was bought for three Dengas, was afterward sold for twenty or
thyrtie. Furthermore also, many villages, woods, and stackes of corn, were set
on fire by the extreme heat: the smoke whereof so filled the region, that the
eyes of many were sore hurt thereby. There arose also as it were a dark and
thycke mist without smoke, which so molested the eyes, that many lost their
sight thereby. They sow and nouryshe the seeds of Melons with great diligence
in certain raised beds myxt with doung, whereby they find a remedy both
against extreme cold and heat. For if the heat exceed, they make certain
ryftes in the beds, as it were breathyng places, lest the seeds should be
suffocate with to much heat. And if the cold be extreme, it is tempered with
the heat of the mucke or doung.

Their beasts are much less then ours, yet not all without horns, Little
beasts.
as one has written: For I have there seen Oxen, Kine, Goats, and Rams, al
with horns.

The city of Moscouia or Mosca.
Not far from the city of Mosca, are certain monasteries, which a far of,
seem like unto a city. They say that in this city is an incredible number of
houses: and that the syxt year before my coming thither, the prince caused
them to be numbered, and found them to be more then one and forty thousand and
five hundred houses. The city is very large and wide, and also very slabby and
myrye: by reason whereof, it has many bridges and causeyes.

The air of the region is so wholesome, that beyond the spryngs of Tanais,
Wholesome air.
especially toward the North, and a great part also toward the East, the
pestilence has not been heard of since the memory of man: Yet have they
sometimes a disease in their bowelles and heads, not much unlike unto the
pestilence. This disease they call a heat: wherewith such as are taken, dye
within few days.

Some write that John the Duke of Moscouia, and Son of Basilius, A rich
spoil.
under the pretense of religion, sacked and spoiled the city of Nouogradia,
and carried with him from thence to Moscouia three hundred sleades laden with
gold, silver, and precious stones, of the gooddes of the Archbishop, the
merchauntes, citisins, and strangers. The Island of Solowki.
Solowki is an Island situate in the North sea, eight leagues from the
continent between Duina and the province of Corela. How far it is distaunt
from Moscouia, can not be well known, by reason of many Fennes. Marshes,
wooddes, and desolate places lying in the way. Albeit, some say that it is not
three hundred leagues from Moscouia, and two hundred from Bieloiesero.
Bieloiesero.
In this Island is made great plenty of salt: and it has in it a monastery,
into the which it is not lawful for any woman or virgin to enter. There is
also great fyshyng for herryng. They say that here the Sun at the summer
Equinoctial, The length of the day.
shyneth continually except two hours.

Demetriowe, is a city with a Castle, distante from Moscouia xii. leagues,
declinyng from the West somewhat toward the north. By this runs the river
Lachroma, that runs into the river of Sest. Sest also receives the river
Dubna, which vnladeth it self in Volga. And by the commodity of thus many
ryuers, many rich marchaundies are brought without great labor or difficulty
from the Caspian sea, by the river Volga to Moscouia, The trade from Moscouia
to the Caspian sea.

Bieloiesero or the white lakes.


and diverse other provinces and cities about the same.

Bieloiesero, a city with a Castle, is situate at a lake of the same name.
For Bieloiesero in the Moscouites tongue, signifies a white lake. The city
stands not in the lake, as some have said. Yet is it so environed with
maryshes, that it may seem to be inexpugnable: In consideration whereof, the
princes of Moscouia are accustomed to keep their treasure there. Bieloiesero
is from Moscouia, a hundred leagues, and as much from Nouogradia the great.
The lake it self, is.xii. leagues in length, and as much in breadth, and has
(as they say) three hundred ryuers falling into it. The inhabitauntes of this
place, have a peculyar language, although now in manner all speak the
Moscouites tongue. The longest day here in the summer Equinoctial, is said to
consist of.xix. hours. A man of great name and credit told me, that at the
beginning of the spryng, Diversity of temperame^t in small distance.
when the trees began now to be green, he went in post from Moscouia to
Bieloiesero: and passing over the river Volga, found the region there so
covered with Ise and snow, that he was feign to dispatche the residue of his
journey on steades. And although the winter be longer there, yet do the
fruits wax ripe and are geathered even at the same time that they are in
Moscouia. Within an arrowe shot of the lake, there is an other lake that
brings forth brymstone: A lake of brymstone.
which a certain river running out of the same, carries with it in great
quantity, flotyng above the water like a scomme, yet through the ignorance of
the people, they have no commodity thereby.

Exchange of furs for other ware.
The people that inhabit the regions, lying far North, and East from
Moscouia, exchange their furs for apparel, Knives, needles, Spoones,
Hatchets, and such other necessary wares: for they have not the use of gold
and silver.

The description of the regions, people, and rivers, lying North and East from
Moscouia: as the way from Moscouia to the river Petzora, and the province
Iugaria, or Iuhra, and from thence to the river Obi. Likewise the description
of other countries and regions, even unto thempire of the great Cham of Cathay.
THE dominion of the prince of Moscouia, reaches far toward the East and
North, unto the places which we will now describe. The dominion of the duke
of Moscouia.
As concerning which thing, I translated a book that was presented unto me in
the Moscouites tongue, and have here made a brief rehearsal of the same, I will
first therefore describe the journey from Moscouia to Petzora, and so to Iugaria
and Obi. Volochda. werste. Vstiug.
From Moscouia to the city of Vuolochda, are numbered fyftie werstes, one werst
conteynyng almost the space of an Italian mile. From Vuolochda to Vstiug,
toward the right hand, descending with the course of the river of Vuolochda
and Suchana with whom it joins, are compted five hundred werstes, where
within two werstes of the town called Strelze, and hard by the city of
Vstiug, Suchana joins: Iug which runs from the South, from whose mouth,
unto the sprynges of the same, are numbered five hundred werstes.

Note that whereas here before the aucthor numbreth but fyftie werstes from
Moscouia to Vuolochda, it seems that the place is corrupted by the Printers
mistakyng one word for an other, as, Quinquaginta, which is fyftie, for
Quingenta, which is five hundred. For the distance is no less from Moscouia
to Vuolochda, then is from Vuolochda to Vstiug, which is five hundred werstes.

But Suchana and Iug, after they join together, Suchana. Iug. So called of
his swift and pleasant stream.
lose their first names, and make both one river, named Dwina, by the which,
the passage to the city of Colmogor contains five hundred werstes, from
whence in the space of six days journey, Dwina enters into the North Ocean
at six mouths: and the greatest part of this journey consysteth by
Navigations: for by land from Vuolochda unto Colmogor, passing over the river
Vuaga, are a thousand werstes. Not far from Colmogor, the river Pienega,
runnyng from the East on the right hand, for the space of seven hundred wersts,
falls into Dwina. Pienega.
From Dwina by the river Pienega, by the space of two hundred werstes, they
come to a place called Nicolai, from whence within half a werst, Nicolai.
ships have passage into the river Kuluio, Kuluio.
which has his original from a lake of the same name toward the North, from
whose sprynges is eight days viage to the mouth of the same, where it enters
into the Ocean.

Sailing by the coasts of the right hand of the sea, they pass by the
regions of Stanuwische, Calunczscho, and Apnu: The regions by the North sea.
And sailing about the promontorie or cape of Chorogoski, Nosz, Stanuwische,
Camenckh, and Tolstickh, they come at the length into the river Mezen, and from
thence in the space of six days, to a village of the same name, standing in
the mouth of the river Pieza, Pieza.
by the which again ascendyng toward the left hand and Summer East, they
come to the river Piescoia: Piescoia.
from whence sailing for the space of five werstes, they come into two lakes,
in the which are seen two ways* whereof one on the right side, goes to the
river Rubicho, by the which they pass to the river Czircho. Other, by an
other and shorter way, Rubicho.
bring their ships from the lake directly into Czircho: from whence, Czircho.
except they be hyndered by tempest, they come in the space of three weeks to
the river and mouth of Czilma, flowyng into the great river Petzora, Czilma.
Petzora.
which in that place is two werstes in breadth. Saylyng from hence, they come
in the space of six days to the Town and castle of Pustoosero, near unto
the which, Pustoosero.
Petzora enters into the North Ocean at six mouths. The inhabitants of this
place, are men of simple wit: they received the faith of Christ, and were
baptized in the year.M.D.xviii.

From the mouth of Czilma unto the mouth of the river Vssa, going by Petzora,
Vssa.
is one months vyage. Vssa has his springes in the mountain Poyas Semnoi,
being on the left hand toward the summer East, and springs out of a great
stone of the same mountain, Cingulus mundi.
called Camen Bolschoi. From the sprynges of Vssa to the mouths of the same,
are numbered more then a thousand Werstes. Furthermore, Petzora runs from
this south winter part, from whence ascending from the mouths of Vssa, unto
the mouths of the river Stzuchogora, is three weeks vyage. They that
described this vyage, said that they rested between the mouths of the ryuers
of Stzuchogora and Potzscheriema, Stzuchogora.
and left their victualles there which they brought with them from Russia.
Potzscheriema.
Beyond the ryuers of Petzora and Stzuchogora toward the mountain
Camenipoias, Camenipoias.
and the sea with the Islands there about, and the Castle of Pustoosero, are
diverse and innumerable nations, Samoged.
which by one common name are called Samoged (that is) such as eat them
selves. Fowls and beasts.
They have great increase of fowls, birds, and diverse kinds of beasts: as
Sables, Marternes, Beuers, Otters, Hermelines, Squirrels: and in the Ocean the
beast called Mors: Also Uesse, white Bears, Wolves, Hares, Equiwoduani, great
Whales, and fysh called Semfi, with diverse other. Wild people.
The people of these nations come not to Moscouia: For they are wild, and flee
the company and society of other men.

From the mouths of Stzuchogora, saylyng up the river unto Poiassa, Poiassa.
Artawische, Cameni, and Poiassa the greater, is three weeks vyage.
Furthermore, the ascendyng to the mount Camen, is three days journey: from
the which, descendyng, Camen. Artawischa. Sibut. Lepin.
they come to the river Artawischa, and from thence to the river Sibut, from
whence they pass to the Castle of Lepin, and from Lepin to the river Sossa.
The people that inhabit the region by this river, are called Vuogolici.
Leauyng Sossa on the right hand, Sossa. Obi. Kitaisko.
they come to the great river Obi, that spryngeth out of the lake Kitaisko, the
which with all the haste they could make, they could scarcelye pass over in
one day, the river being of such breadth that it reaches fourscore Werstes.
The people also that dwell about this river, Vuogolici.
are called Vuogolici and Vgritzschi. From the Castle of Obca, ascendyng by the
river of Oby, unto the river Irtische, into the which Sossa enters, is three
months journey. In these places are two Castles named Ierom and Tumen,
Irtische. Ierom. Tumen.
kept by certain Lords called Knesi Iuhorski, being tributaries to the great
Duke of Moscouia, as they say. Here are diverse kinds of beasts and furs.

From the mouth of the river Irtische to the Castle of Grustina, is two
months journey: from whence to the lake Kitai, Grustina.
Kitai.
by the river Oby (which I said to have his springes in this lake) is more
then three months journey. From this lake come many black men, lackyng the
use of common speech. Black men without speech.
They bring with them diverse wares, and especially pearls and precious stones,
which they sell to the people called Grustintzi and Serponowtzi. These have
their name of the Castle Serponow, Serponow. Lucomorya.
situate in the mountains of Lucomorya, beyond the river Obi. They say that
to the men of Lucomorya, chances a marvelous thing and incredible: For they
affirm, Men that yearly dye and reuyue.
that they dye yearly at the.xxvii. day of November, being the feast of Saint
George among the Moscouites: and that at the next spryng about the.xxiiii. day
of April, they reuyue again as do Frogs.

With these also, the people of Grustintzi and Serponowtzi, A strange trade of
marchaundies.
exercise a new and strange kind of trade: For when the accustomed time of
their dying, or rather of sleapyng, approaches, they leave their wares in
certain places appointed, which the Grustintzi and Serponowtzi carry away,
leauyng other wares of equal value in their places: which if the dead men at
the time of their reuyuyng perceive to be of unequal price, they require their
own again: by reason whereof, much strife and fighting is between them.

From the river of Obi descendyng toward the left hand, Obi. Calami,
are the people called Calami, which came thither from Obiowa and Pogosa.
Beneath Obi, about Aurea Anus (that is, the golden old wife) are the ryuers
Sossa, Beres, Vua, and Danadim, Ryuers*
all which spryng out of the mountains Camen, Bolschega, Poiassa, and the
rocks ioynyng to the same. All the nations that inhabit from these ryuers to
Aurea Anus, are subject to the prince of Moscouia.

Aurea Anus.
Aurea Anus. called in the Moscouites tongue, Slata Baba, is an idol, Obdora.
at the mouths of Obi in the province of Obdora, standing on the furthest
bank toward the sea. Along by the banks of Obi, and the rivers near there
about, are here and there many castles and fortresses: all the lords whereof,
are subject to the prince of Moscouia, as they say. They say also, or rather
fable, that the idol called Aurea Anus, is an image like unto an old wife,
having a child in her lap, and that there is now seen another infant,
which they say to be her nephewe: Also, that there are certain instruments
that make a continual sound like the noise of Trumpettes, the which, if it
so be, I think it to be by reason of the wind, blowing continually into the
holowe places of those instruments.

Cossin.
The river Cossin falls out of the mountains into Lucomoria: In the mouth of
this is a castle, whither from the springes of the great river Cossin, Cassima.
is two months viage. Furthermore, from the springes of the same river, the
river Cassima has his original, which runnyng through Lucomoria, Tachnin.
falls into the great river Tachnin, beyond the which (as is said) dwell
men of prodigious shape, of whom, some are ouergrowen with hear like wild
beasts, People of monstrous shape.
other have heads like dogs, and their faces in their breasts, without
necks, and with long hands also, and without feet. A fyshe like a man.

Pliny writes of the like fysh.


There is likewise in the river Tachnin, a certain fysh, with head, eyes,
nose, mouth, hands, feet, and other members utterly of humane shape, and yet
without any voice, and pleasant to be eaten, as are other fyshes.

All that I have hitherto rehearsed, I have translated out of the said journey
which was delivered me in the Moscouites tongue: In the which, perhaps some
things may seem fabulous, and in manner incredible, as of the dombe men, and
the dead, reuiuyng, the Aurea Anus also, and the monstrous shapes of men, with
the fyshe of humane form: whereof, although I have made diligent inquisition,
yet could I know nothing certain of any that had seen the same with their
eyes: nevertheless, to give further occasion to other to search the truth of
these things, I have thought good to make mention hereof.

Noss in the Moscouites tongue signifies a Nose, and therefore they call all
capes or points, that reach into the sea, by the same name.

The mountains about the river of Petzora, Mountains.
are called Semnoi Poyas, or Cingulus mundi, that is, the gyrdle of the world,
or of the earth.

Kithai is a lake, of whom the great Cane of Cathay, The great Chane of Cathay.
whom the Moscouians call Ezar Kithaiski, has his name: For Chan in the
Tartars language signifies, A King.

The places of Lucomoria, near unto the sea, are saluage, full of woods, and
inhabited without any houses. And albeit, that the aucthor of this journey,
said, Lucomoria.
that many nations of Lucomoria are subject to the prince of Moscouia, yet
for as much as the kingdom of Tumen is near thereunto, Tumen.
whose prince is a Tartar, and named in their tongue, Tumenski Czar, that is, a
king in Tumen, and has of late done great damage to the prince of Moscouia:
it is most like that these nations should rather be subject unto him.

Near unto the river Petzora (whereof mention is made in this journey) is the
city and castle of Papin, or Papinowgorod, Petzora. Papin.
whose inhabitants are named Papini, and have a private language, differyng
from the Moscouites. High mountains, supposed to be Hyperborei and Rhiphei.
Beyond this river are exceedyng high mountains, reachyng even unto the
banks, whose rydges or tops, by reason of continual wyndes, are in manner
utterly barren without grass or fruits. And although in diverse places they
have diverse names, yet are they commonly called Cingulus mundi, that is, the
world. In these mountains do Ierfalcons breed, whereof I have spoken
before. There grow also Cedar trees, among the which are found the best and
blackest kind of Sables: and only these mountains are seen in all the
dominions of the prince of Moscouia, which perhaps are the same that the
old writers call Rhipheos, or Hyperboreos, so named of the Greek word,
Hyper, that is, Under, and Boreas, that is, the North: for by reason they are
covered with continual snow and frost, they can not without great difficulty
be trauayled, and reach so far into the North, that they make the unknown
land of Engreonland. The Duke of Moscouia, Basilius the son of John,
Engreonland.
sent on a time two of his captains, named Simeon Pheodorowitz Kurbski, and
Knes Peter Vschatoi, to search the places beyond these mountains, and to
subdue the nations thereabout. Kurbski was yet alive at my being in Moscouia,
and declared unto me that he spent.xvii. days in ascending the mountain, and
yet could not come to the top thereof, which in their tongue is called Stolp
(that is) a pyller. Stolp.
This mountain is extended into the Ocean unto the mouths of the ryuers of
Dwina and Petzora. But now having spoken thus much of the said journey, I will
return to the dominions of Moscouia, with other regions lying Eastwarde and
South from the same, toward the myghtie Empire of Cathay. Cathay.
But I will first speak somewhat briefly of the province of Rezan, and the
famous river of Tanais.

The fruitful province of Rezan. Iaroslaw.
The province of Rezan, situate between the ryuers of Occa and Tanais, has a
city builded of wood, not far from the bank of Occa: there was in it a Castle
named Iaroslaw, whereof there now remains nothing but tokens of the old
ruin. Not far from that city, the river Occa makes an Island named Strub,
which was sometime a great Dukedom, whose prince was subject to none other.
This province of Rezan, is more fruitful then any other of the provinces of
Moscouia: Insomuche that in this (as they say) every grain of wheat brings
forth two, and sometimes more ears: whose stalks or strawes grow so thick
that horses can scarsly go through them, or Quayles flee out of them. Honey.
There is great plenty of honey, fyshes, fowls, birds, and wild beasts. The
fruits also do far exceed the fruits of Moscouia. The people are bold
and warlyke men.

Of the famous river of Tanais.
FRom Moscouia unto the Castle of Iaroslaw, and beyond for the space of almost
xxiiii. leagues, runs the river of Tanais, at a place called Donco, where
the merchants that trade to Asoph, Donco. Asoph. Capha. Constantinople.
Capha, and Constantinople, freight their ships: and this for the most part
in Autumpe, being a rayney time of the year. For Tanais here at other times
of the year, does not so abound with water, as to bear ships of any
burden. This famous river of Tanais, dyuydeth Europe from Asia, Tanais divides
Europe from Asia. The sprynges of Tanais.
and has his orygynall or sprynges almost.viii. leagues from the city of
Tulla, toward the South, inclynyng somewhat toward the East, and not out of
the Riphean mountains, as some have written: But out of a great lake named
Iwanwosero (that is) the lake of John, A great lake.
being in length and breadth about.1500. Werstes, in a wood which some call
Okonitzkilles, and other name it Iepipbanoulies. And out of this lake, spryng
the two great ryuers of Schat and Tanais. Schat toward the West receyuyng into
it the river of Vppa, The river Schat.
runs into the river of Occa between the West and the North: But Tanais at
the first runs directly East, and continues his course between the
kingdoms of Casan and Astrachan within six or seven leagues of Volga, Casan.
Astrachan.
and from thence bendyng toward the South, makes the fennes or maryshes of
Meotis. Meotis. Tulla.
Furthermore, next unto his sprynges, is the city of Tulla: and upon the
bank of the river, almost three leagues above the mouths of the same, is the
city of Asoph, which was first called Tanais. Four days journey above this,
is a town called Achas, situate hard by the same river, which the Moscouites
call Don. Achas. Fruitful regions about Tanais.
I can not sufficiently praise this river for the exceedyng abundaunce of good
fyshes, and fayrenesse of the regions on both sides the banks, with plenty of
wholesome herbs and sweet roots, beside diverse and many fruitful trees,
growyng in such coomly order as though they had been set of purpose in gardens
or orchardes. There is also in manner every where such plenty of wild beasts,
Plenty of wyld beasts.
that they may easily be slain with arrows: Insomuch that such as travail by
those regions, shall stand in need of none other thing to maintain their
life, but only fire and salt. In these parts, Fire and salt.
is no observation of miles, but of days journeys. But as far as I could
conjecture, from the fountaynes or sprynges of Tanais, Where Tanais is first
nauigable.
unto the mouths of the same, iorneying by land, are almost fourscore
leagues. And sailing from Donco (from whence I said that Tanais was first
nauigable) in scarsely.xx. days voyage, they come to the city of Asoph,
tributarie to the Turks: Asoph.
which is (as they say) five days journey from the straight of Taurica,
otherwise called Precop. In this city is a famous mart town, unto the which
resort many merchauntes of diverse nations, and from diverse parts of the
world. The mart of Asoph.
For, that all nations may the gladlyer have recourse thither, free liberty of
bying and sellyng is granted unto all: Liberty allureth strangers.
and that without the city every man may freely use his own and accustomed
manner of living, without punyshement.

The altars of Alexander and Caesar.
Of the alters of great Alexander and Julius Caesar, which many writers make
mention of in this place, or of their ruins, I could have no certain
knoweledge of thinhabitauntes or any other that had oftentimes trayuayled these
places. Furthermore, the souldyers which the prince of Moscouia mayntayneth
there yearly to oppress thincursions of the Tartars, being of me demanded
hereof, answered yt they never saw or heard of any such thing. Nevertheless
they said, that about ye mouths of Tanais the less, four days journey from
Asoph, near unto a place called Sewerski, by the holy mountains, they saw
certain images of stone and marble. The holy mountains. Tanais the less.
Tanais the less, has his springes in the Dukedom of Sewerski, whereof it is
called Donetz Sewerski, and falls into Tanais, three days journey above
Asoph. But such as journey from Moscouia to Asoph by land, From Moscouia to
Asoph.
they, passing over Tanais about the old and ruinate town of Donco, do
somewhat turn from the South to the East: In the which place, if a right line
be drawn from the mouths of Tanais to the sprynges of the same, Moscouia in
Asia and not in Europe.
Moscouia shall be found to be in Asia, and not in Europe.

More directly from Moscouia to Cathay.
THe great and large province of Permia, is distant from Moscouia two hundred
and fyftie, The province of Permia.
or (as some sai) three hundred leagues, directly between the East and North:
and has a city of the same name by the river Vischora, which runs.x.
leagues beneth Camam. The journey by land can scarsely be travailed thither but
in winter, Maryshes in summer.
by reason of mani rivers, marshes* and fens. But in summer, this journey is
dispatched with more facility in boats or small ships by Vuolochda Vstiug, and
the river Vitzechda, which runs into Duina.xii. leagues from Vstiug. But
they that go from Permia to Vstiug, Duina. Vstiug,
must sail up the river Vischora against the course of the stream: and
passing over certain ryuers, sometimes also conueying their boats into other
ryuers by land, they come at the length to Vstiug, three hundred leagues
distant from the city of Permia.

There is small use of bread in this province. Tribute Furs and Horses.
For their yearly tribute, they pay to the Prince furs and horses. They have
a private language, and letters of their own, which one Stephen a Bishop (who
confirmed them yet waueryng in the faith) did invent. For before, being yet
infantes in the faith of Christ, they slew and fleyde an other Bishop that was
appointed to instruct them. This Stephen afterward when Demetrius the son of
John reigned, was taken for a Saint among the Ruhens. Of these people there
yet remain many Idolatours here and there in the woods, Munkes and Heremites.
whom the Munkes and Heremites that go thither, do not cease to convert from
their vain error. In the winter they journey to Artach, as they do in many
places of Russia. Artach, Patentes.
are certain long patentes of wood of almost six handfulles in length, which
they make fast to their feet with Latchets, and therewith perform their
iorneis with great celeritie. Marcus Panlus writes that these dogs are almost
as byg as Asses: and that they use six to one sleade.
They use for this purpose great Dogs in the stead of other beasts, with
the which they carry their fardels on sleades, as other do with Hearts in other
places, as we will further declare hereafter. They say that the province toward
the East confineth with the province called Tumen, parteining to the Tartars.

The situation of the province of Iugaria, is apparent by that which we have
said before. Iugaria.
The Moscouites call it Iuhra with an aspiration: and call the people Iuhrici.

This is that Iugaria from whence the Hungarians came in time past, possessed
Pannonia, Hungaria. Pannonia. Attila.
and under the conduct of Attila, subdued many provinces of Europe: wherein the
Moscouites do greatly glory, that a nation subject to them, invaded and
wasted a great part of Europe. Georgius Paruus, a Greek borne, and a man of
reputation with the Prince of Moscouia, wyllyng to ascribe to the right of his
Prince the great Dukedom of Lithuania, and the kingdom of Polonie* with
certain other Dominions, told me that the Iuhgarici or Iuhgarie, being
subjects to the great Duke of Moscouia, came forth of their own country, and
first inhabited the regions about the Fennes of Meotis, The higher or (...)
called Au^tria. Polonie.
and then Pannonie. which was afterward called Hungary, by the river of
Danubius: Also that in fine they possessed the region of Morauia, so named of
the river: and likewise Pollonie, so called of Polle, which signifies a
plain. Furthermore that Buda was so called after the name of the brother of
Attila. Buda.
They say also that the Iuhgarie use the same tongue that do the Hungarians:
the which whether it be true or not, I do not know. For although I have made
diligent inquisition to know the truth hereof, yet could I find no man of
that region with whom my servant, being expert in the Hungarian tongue, might
speak. They also pay furs for their tributes to the Prince of Moscouia.
Furs. Pearls, and precious stones.
And albeit that pearls and precious stones, are brought from thence to
Moscouia, yet are they not geathered in their Ocean, but in other places:
especially about the coast of the Ocean, near unto the mouths of Duina.

The province of Sibier, confineth with Permia, and Vuiathka: the which,
Sibier.
whether it have any castles or cities, I do not yet certaynely know: In
this, the river Iaick has his original, and falls into the Caspian sea.
They say that this region is desert, because it lies so near the Tartars: or
that if it be in any part inhabited, Aspreolos, I think to be Marternes: yet
some think them to be Squirels, Gesnerus writes that the kings of the
Tartars, have their tents covered without with the skimes of Lions: and
within, with the skynnes of Sables and Ermines.
the same to be possessed of the Tartar Schichmamai. Thinhabitantes have a
peculiar language: and have their chief gaynes by the furs of Marternes,
which in fairness and greatness, excel all the furs of that kind that are
found in any other provinces. Yet could I have no great plenty of them in
Moscouia at my being there.

Note that long after the writing of this history, at Richard Chaunceler his
first bring in Moscouia, Duke John Vasiliuiche that now reygneth, subdued all
the Tartars with their regions and provinces, even unto the great city and
mart town of Astrachan and the Caspian sea. At the same time also, there was
in the Dukes Court an ambassador that came from this province of Sibier, who
declared that his father had been sent Ambassador to the great Chan of Cathay,
and that the great city of Cambalu, where the great Chan keeps his Court in
winter, was in manner distroyed by Nigromancie and Magical Arts, wherein the
Cathyans are very expert as writes Marcus Paulus Venetus.

There was also at the same time thambassadour of the king of Pertia called the
great Sophie. This Ambassador was apparelled al in Scarlet, and spoke much to
the Duke in the behalf of our men, of whose kingdom and trade he was not
ignorant.

The people called Czeremisse, Czeremisse.
dwell in the wooddes beneth Nouogradia the lower. They have a peculiar
language, and are of the sect of Machumet. They were sometime subject to the
king of Casan: but the greater part of them are now subject to the prince of
Moscouia. Many of them at my being there, were brought to Moscouia, as
suspected of rebellion. This nation does inhabit a large region without houses
from Vuiathka and Vuolochda, to the river of Rama. All the nation, Habitation
without houses.
as well women as men, are very swifte of foot, and expert archers: wherein they
so delyght, that their bows are in manner never out of their hands: and give
their children no meat until they hit the mark they shoot at. Two leagues
distaunt from Nouogradia the lower, were many houses to the similitud of a
city or town, where they were accustomed to make salt. Salt.
These a few years since being burnt of the Tartars, were restored by the
commandment of the prince.

Mordwa, are people inhabytyng by the river of Volga on the south bank beneth
Nouogradia the lower, and are in all things like unto the Czeremisses, but that
they have more houses. And here ends Thempire of the Moscouites.

Note here that Matthias of Michou, in his book of Sarmatia Asiatica, writes
that the dominion of the Duke of Moscouia reaches from the northwest to the
southeast five hundred miles of Germany, which are more then leagues: For
they affirm that a German mile is more then three English miles.

Of the Tartars.
WE will now add hereunto somewhat of the people confinyng with the
Moscouites toward the East: The Tartars of Casan.
of the which the Tartars of Casan are the first. But before we speak of them
perticularly, we will first rehearse somewhat of their manners and customs in
general.

The Tartars are divided into companies, which they call Hordas, Horda.
of the which the Horda of the Sauolhenses is the chief in fame and
multitude: For it is said that the other Hordas had their offspring and
original of this. And albeit that every Horda has his peculiar name, as the
Sauolhenses, Precropenses, and Nahais, with diverse other, being all
Machumetans, yet do they take it evil, and count it reproach to be called
Turks: but will them selves to be called Besermani, by the which name also the
Turks desire to be called. Besermani.


And as the Tartares inhabit many provinces reachyng far on every side, even
so in manners and order of living do they not agree in all things. The stature
of the Tartars.
They are men of mean stature, with broad and fat faces, holowe eyde, with
rough and thycke beardes, and poulde heads. Only the noble men have long
hear, and that exceedyng black, which they wreath on both sides their ears.
They are strong of body, and stout of mind, prone to leacherye, and that
unnatural. They eat the flesh of Horses, Camelles, and other beasts, except
Hogs, from which they absteyne by a law. They abstain from hogs flesh.

Abstinence.


They can so abide fasting and hunger, that they sometime forbear meat and
sleep for the space of four days, occupied nevertheless about their
necessary affairs. Again, when they get any thing to devour, they ingorge
them selves beyond measure, Voracitie.
and with that surfect in manner recompense their former abstinence. And being
thus oppressed with labor and meat, they sleep continually for the space of
three or four days, without doing any manner of work or labor: during which
time the Liuons and Moscouites, into whose dominions they are accustomed to
make their incursions, assail them unawares, thus oppressed with meat and
sleep, lying scattered here and there out of order without watch or ward. Also
if when they ride, they be molested with hunger and thyrst, they use to let
their horses blood, So do the Turks.
and with drynkyng the same, satisfye their present necessity, and affirm
their horses to be the better thereby. And because they all wander in unknown
places, Iorneing by the pole star.
they use to dyrect their journeys by thaspect of the stars, and especially of
the pole star, which in their tongue they call Selesnikoll, Mares milk.
(that is) an Iron nail. They greatly delyght in Mares milk, and believe that
it makes men strong and fat. They eat herbs very much, and especyally
such as grow about Tanais. Horse flesh eaten.
Few of them use salt. When their kings distribute any vytayles among them,
they are accustomed to give one horse or cow to forty men. Of the slain
beast, the bowels and tripes are reserved for the chief men and captains.
Clenly.
These they heat at the fire, until they may shake out the doong, and then
devour them gredyly. They suck and lycke, not only their fingers imbrued with
fat, but also their knives, and styckes wherewith they scrape the doong from the
guts.

The heads of horses are counted delicate dyshes with them, as are Boores
heads with us, Horse heads deyntie meats The Tartars horses.
and are reserved only for the cheef men. Their horses (whereof they have great
abundance) are but small, and with short necks: but very strong, and such as
can well away with labor and hunger. These they feed with the branches and
barks or ryndes of trees, and the roots of herbs and weeds, whereby they
accustom them to hard feedyng, and exercise them to contynuall labor: by
reason whereof (as say the Moscouites) their horses are swyfter and more
durable then any other: these kind of horses, they call Pachmat. They have
none other saddels and styrrops then of wood, Saddels and styrrops of wood.
except such as they either bye of the Christians, or take from them by
violence. Lest their horse backs should be hurt with their saddelles, they
underlay them with grass and leaves of trees. They also pass over rivers on
horsbacke. But if when they flee, they fear the pursuyng of their enemies,
then castyng away their saddels, apparel, and all other impedimentes,
reseruyng only their armor and weapons, they flee amayne, and with great
celeritie.

Their women use the same kind of apparel that do the men, without any
difference, The Tartars women.
except that they cover their heads with lynnen vayles, and use lynnen hose
much like unto mariners slops. When their queens come a broad, they are
accustomed to cover their faces. The other multitude of the common sort that
lives here and there in the fields, have their apparel made of sheep
skynnes, which they change not until they be worn and torn in fytters. They
tarrye not long in one place, iudgyng it a great misery so to do. Insomuch
that when they are angry with their children, the greatest curse that they can
give them, is that they may remain perpetually in one place, The Tartars curse.
and draw the styntch of their own fylthynesse as do the Christians. When
they have consumed the pasture in one place, they go to an other with their
droues of cattaile, and their wives and children, whom they ever carry about
with them in Wagons: albeit the Tartars that dwell in cities and towns, use an
other order of living.

If they be enclosed with any dangerous war, No justice among the Tartars.
they place their wives, children, and old folks, in the sauest places. There
is no Justice among them. For if any man stand in need of any thing, he may
without punishment take it a way from an other. If any complain to the Judge
of the violence and wrong done unto him, the offender denies not the crime,
but says that he could not lack that thing. Then the Judge is wont to give
this sentence: If thou also shall have neade of any thing, do the like to
other. Some say they do not steal: But whether they steal or not, let other
judge. They are surely a theeuyshe kind of people, The Tartas are thieves and
poor.
and very poor, living only by robbyng of other, and stealyng away other men's
cattayle, and violently also carrying away the men them selves, whom either
they sell to the Turks, or proffer them to be redeemed by ransom, They
rejoice in spoylyng.
reseruyng only the young wenches. They seldom assault cities or castles, but
burn and waste towns and villages: Insomuch that they so please them selves
herein, that they think they have so much the more enlarged their Empire, in
how much they have wasted and made desolate many provinces. And although they
be most impacient of rest and quietness, yet do they not kill or destroy one
an other, except their kings be at dissension between them selves. If any man
be slain in any fray or quarrel, and the autchours of the mischefe be taken,
only their horse, harness, weapons, and apparel, are taken from them, and
they dismissed. So that the murderer by the loss of a vile Horse or a Bow, is
discharged of the Judge with these words: Get thee hence, and go about thy
business. They have no use of gold and silver, except only a few merchauntes:
but exercise exchange of ware for ware. And if it so chance that by sellyng
of such things as they have stolen, they get any money of their borderers,
they bye therewith certain apparel and other necessaries of the Moscouites.
The regions of their habitations (the feelde Tartars I mean) are not lymitted
with any bounds or borders. The feelde Tartars.
There was on a time a certain fat Tarter taken prisoner of the Moscouites:
A meery tale.
to whom, when the Prince said, how art thou so fat thou dog, sith thou
have not to eat? the Tartar answered, Why should not I have to eat, sith I
possess so large a land from the East to the West, whereby I may be
abundantly nouryshed? But thou may rather seem to lack, sith thou
inhabytest so small a portion of the woorlde, and dooest daily strive for the
same.

Casan is a kingdom, also a city and a castle of the same name, situate by
the river Volga, on the further bank, Casan.
almost threescore and ten leagues beneath Nouogradia the lower. Along by
the course of Volga toward the East and South, it is termined with desert
feeldes: toward the Summer East, it confineth with the Tartars, called
Schibanski* and Kosatzki. The king of this province is able to make an army of
thyrtie thousand men, especially footmen, of the which, The king of Casan.
the Czeremisse and Czubaschi are most expert Archers. Archers. Waryners.
The Czubaschi are also cunnyng Mariners. The city of Casan is threescore
leagues distant from the principal castle Vuiathka. Furthermore, Casan in the
Tartars language, signifies a brazen pot boylyng. The town Tartars.
These Tartars are more civil then the other, for they dwell in houses, till
the ground, and exercise the trade of marchandies: They were of late subdued
by Basilius the great Duke of Moscouia* and had their King assigned them at his
arbitrament: But shortly after they rebelled again, and associate with other
Tartars, invaded the region of Moscouia, Moscouia invaded by the Tartars.
spoiled and wasted many cities and towns, and led away innumerable
captives, even from the city of Moscouia, which they possessed for a time, The
prince of Moscouia tributary to the Tartars.
and had utterly destroyed the same, if it had not been for the valeauntnesse
of the Almaine Gunnners, which kept the castle with great ordinance. They
also put Duke Basilius to flight, and caused him to make a letter of his own
hand to Machmetgirei their King, to acknowledge him self for a perpetual
tributarie to them: whereupon they dissolved the siege, and gave the Moscouites
free liberty to redeem their captives and goods, and so departed. But
Basilius not long able to abide this contumely and dishonor, Duke Basilius
army against the Tartars.
after that he had put to death such as by flying at the first encountryng
were the cause of this overthrow: assembled an army of an hundred and
fourscore thousand men shortly after, in the year.1523. and sent forward
his army, under the conduct of his Lieuetenant, and therewith an Heralde at
arms to bydde battle to Machmetgirei the King of Casan, with words in this
effect. The last year, like a thief and robber, without byddyng of battle,
thou dyddest privily oppress me, wherefore I now challenge thee, once again
to prove the fortune of war, if thou mystruste not thine own power. To this
the King answered, that there were many ways open for him to invade Moscouia:
and that the wars have no less respect to the commodity of time and place,
then of armure or strength: and that he would take the advantage thereof,
when and where it should seem best to him, and not to other. With which
words Basilius being greatly accensed, and burning with desire of revenge,
invaded the kingdom of Casan: whose King being stryken with sudden fear at
the approach of so terrible an army, assigned the governance of his kingdom
to the young King of Taurica his N^uie, while he him self went to require aid
of the Emperor of the Turks. The king of Casan submits him self.
But in ^ine, the King of Casan submytted him self upon certain conditions
of peace, which the Moscouites did the gladlyer accept for that time, because
their victualles failed them to mayneteyne so great a multitude. But whereas
Duke Basilius him self was not present at this last expedition, he greatly
suspected Palitzki the Lieuetenant of the army to be corrupted with brybes, to
proceed no further. In this mean time, the King of Casan sent Ambassadors to
Basilius to entreat of peace, whom I saw in the Dukes court at my being
there: but I could perceive no hope of peace to be between them. For even
then, Basilius to endomage the Casans, The Island of merchants
translated the mart to Nouogradia, which before was accustomed to be kept
in the Island of merchants, near unto the city of Casan: Commanding also
under pain of grievous punyshement, that none of his subjects should resort
to the Island of merchants: thynkyng that this translation of the mart
should greatly have endomaged the Casans: and that only by taking away their
trade of salt (which they were accustomed to buy of the Moscouites at that
mart) they should have been compelled to submission. But the Moscouites them
selves felt no less inconvenience hereby then did the Casans, by reason of
the dearth and scarsenesse that followed hereof, of all such things as the
Tartars were accustomed to bring thither by the river of Volga, from the
Caspian sea, The Caspian sea.

Persia. Armenia. Astrachan.


the kingdoms of Persia and Armenia, and the mart town of Astrachan:
especially the great number of most excellent fyshes that are taken in Volga,
both on the hither and further side of Casan.

But having said thus much of the wars between the prince of Moscouia and
the Tartars of Casan, we will now proceed to speak somewhat of the other
Tartars, inhabiting the regions toward the Southeast, and the Caspian sea.

Next beyond the Tartars of Casan, The Tartars near to the Caspian sea. Nogai.
are the Tartars called Nagai or Nogai, which inhabit the regions beyond
Volga, about the Caspian sea at the river Iaick, runnyng out of the province of
Sibier. These have no kings but Dukes. In our time, three brethren deuydyng
the provinces equally between them, The possession of three brethren.
possessed those Dukedomes. The first of them named Schidack, possesses the
city of Scharaitzick, beyond the river of Rha or Volga, toward the East, with
the region confinyng with the river Iaick. The second called Cossum, enjoys
all the land that lies between the ryuers of Kaman, Iaick, and Volga. The
third brother named Schichmamai, possesses part of the province of Sibier,
and all the region about the same. Schichmamai, is as much to say by
interpretation, as holy or myghtie. And in manner all these regions are full of
woods, except that that lies toward Scharaitz, which consists of playnes and
fields.

Between the rivers of Volga and Iaick, about the Caspian sea, there sometimes
inhabited the kings called Sawolhenses. The kings called Sawolhenses.
Demetrius Danielis (a man among these Barbarians of singular faith and
gravity) told us of a marvelous and in manner incredible thing, that is seen
among these Tartars. And that his father being sent by the prince of Moscouia
to the king of Sawolhense, saw while he was in that legacy, a certain seed
in that Island somewhat less and rounder then the seeds of Melones: Of the
which being hyd in the ground, there grows a fruit or plant very like a
Lamb, of the height of five spannes: and is therefore called in their tongue
Boranetz, which signifies a little Lamb. A marvelous fruit like a lamb.
For it has the head, eyes, ears, and all other parts like unto a Lamb
newly eyued: with also a very thyn skyn, wherewith diverse of the inhabitauntes
of those regions are accustomed to live their cappes and hattes, and other
tyrements for their heads. Many also confirmed in our presence, that they had
seen these skynnes. He said furthermore, that that plant (if it may be called
a plant) has blood, and no flesh, but has in the stead of flesh, a
certain substance like unto the flesh of Creuishes. The hooffes also are not
of horn, as are the Lambs, but covered with hear in the same form. The
root cleaves to the nauyl or myddest of the belly: the plant or fruit lives
until all the grass and herbs growing about it, being eaten, the root
wythereth for lack of nouryshment. They say that it is very sweet to be
eaten, and is therefore greatly desired, and sought for of the Woolues, and
other rauenyng beasts. And albeit I esteem all that is said of this plant to
be fabulous, yet forasmuch as it has been told me of credible persons, I
have thought good to make mention hereof.

Of this strange fruit Mandeuile makes mention, where in the.lxxxiiii.
Chapter of his Book, Wandeuile.
he writes thus: Now shall I say of some lands, countries, and Isles that are
beyond the land of Cathay: therefore whosoever goes from Cathay to India the
high and the low, he shall go through a Kingdom that men call Cadissen, and
is a great land. There grows a manner of fruit, as it were Gourdes, and
when it is ripe, m^n cut it asunder, and find therein a beast, as it were of
flesh, bone, and blood, as it were a little Lamb, without wool, and men eat
that beast, and the fruit also, which is a great marueyle: nevertheless, I
said unto them, that I held that for no marueyle, for I said, that in my
country are trees that bear fruit, Barnacles of the Orkeneys.
that become birds fleeing, which are good to be eaten, and that that falls
into the water, lives, and that that falls on the earth, dies: And they had
great marueyle of this. etc.

From the prince of Schidacke, proceedyng twentye days journey toward the
East, are the people which the Moscouites call Iurgenci, Barack Soltan.

Cathay.


whose prince is Barack Soltan, brother to the great Chan of Cathay. In ten
days journey from Barack Soltan, they come to Bebeid Chan. And this is that
great Chan of Cathay.

Names of dignities among the Tartars, are these, Chan, signifies a King:
Soltan, the son of a King: Bij, a Duke: Mursa, the son of a Duke: Olboud, a
noble man, or counselor: Olboadulu, the son of a noble man: Seid, the high
priest: Ksi, a private person.

The names of offices, are these, Vlan, the second dignity to the King: for
the Kings of the Tartars have four principal men, whose counsel they use in
all their weyghtie affairs: Of these, the first is called Schirni: the
second, Barni: the third, Gargni: the fourth, Tzipsan. And to have said thus
much of the Tartars, it shall suffice.

Marcus Paulus writes, that the great Chan is called Chan Cublai, that is, the
great King of Kings, as the great Turcke writes him self in like manner, as I
saw in a letter written by him of late in the city of Ragusa, in the which
he uses this subscription. Soltan Soliman desclim Cham Signore de Signori en
sempiterno.

The Navigations by the frosen Sea.
AT my being in Moscouia, when I was sent thither by king Ferdinando, my lord
and master, it so chanced, that Georgius Istoma, the Duke of Moscouia his
Interpreter, a man of great experience, who had before learned the latin
tongue in the court of John king of Denmark, was there present at the same
time. He, in the year of Christ.1496. being sent of his prince with master
David, a Scotte borne, and then Ambassador for the king of Denmark (whom also
I knew there at my first legacy) made me a brief information of all the
order of his journey: the which, forasmuch as it may seem difficult and
laborious, as well for the distance as dangerous places, I have thought good to
describe the same as I received it at his mouth.

First, he said that being sent of his prince with the said David, they came
first to Nouogradia the great. And whereas at that time the kingdom of Suecia
revolted from the King of Denmark, Nouogradia. Suecia under the king of
Denmark.
and also the Duke of Moscouia was at discention with the Suetians, by reason
whereof they could not pass by the most accustomed way, for the tumultes of
war, they attempted their journey by an other way, longer, but safer, and
came first from Nouogradia to the mouths of the river of Dwina and Potiwlo,
Dwina. Potiwlo.
by a very diff^cult and paynfull journey: For he said that this journey,
which can not be to much detested for such labors and traueyles, continues
for the space of three hundred leagues. In fine, taking four small ships or
barks at the mouths of Dwina, they sailed by the coast on the right hand of
the Ocean, where they saw certain high and rough mountains: High mountains
near the north Ocean.
and at the length saylyng.xvi. leagues, and passing a great gulf, followed the
coast on the left hand: and leauyng on the right hand the large sea which
has the name of the river Petzora (as have also the mountains adjacent to the
same) they came to the people of Finlappia: Finlappia.
who, although they dwell here and there in low cottagies by the sea side, and
lead in manner a beastly life, yet are they more meek and tractable then the
wild Lappians. The wild Lappians.
He said that these also are tributaries to the prince of Moscouia. Then
leaving the land of the Lappians, and saylyng fourscore leagues, they came to
the region of Nortpoden, under the dominion of the king of Suecia. The region
of Nortpoden
This the Moscouites call Kaienska Semla, and the people Kaieni. Departing from
hence, and saylyng along by the coast of a wyndyng and bendyng shore reachyng
toward the right hand, they came to a promontorie or cape, called the Holy
nose, The cape called the holy nose.

A whyrlpoole o^ swalowing goulfe.


being a great stone reachyng far into the sea, to the similitude of a nose:
under the which is seen a cave with a whyrlepoole, which swaloweth the sea
every six hours: and castyng forth the same again with terryble roaryng and
violence, causes the said whyrlepoole. Some call this the Navel of the sea:
and other name it Charibdis. He affyrmeth that the violence of this swalowing
gulf is such, Such whyrlepooles, are cauled vipers
that it draws into it, inuolueth, and swaloweth up ships, and all other
things that come near it, and that they were never in greater danger. For the
whirlepoole so sodeynely and violently drue unto it the ship or bark wherein
they were carried, that with the help of Ores and great labor they hardly
escaped. When they had thus ouerpassed the holy nose, they came to a certain
stony mountain, which they should needs compass about: but being there
stayed with contrary winds for the space of certain days, the pylot of the
ship spoke unto them in this effect: This stone (says he) that you see, is
called Semes: The stone called Semes.
the which except we please with some gift, we shall not pass by without
great danger. Superstition
But the Pylot being reproved of Istoma for his vain superstition, held his
peace. And when they had been detained there by tempest for the space of four
days, at the length the tempest ceased, and they went forward on their viage
with a prosperous wind. Then the pylot spoke unto them again, saying: You
despised my admonition of pleasing the Semes, and scorned the same as vain and
superstitious: but if I had not privily in the night ascended a rock and
pleased the Semes, we should surely have had no passage. Being demanded what
he offered to the Semes, Sacrifice to the stone Semes.

The cape Motka.

The castle of wardhus.


he said that he poured butter myxt with otemeale upon the stone which we
saw reach forth into the sea. As they sailed further, they came to an other
cape named Motka, which was almost environed with the sea, like an Island, in
whose extreme point, is situate the Castle of Barthus, which some call
Wardhus, (that is) a house of defense or fortress: For the kings of Norway
have there a garrison of men to defend their marches. He said furthermore,
that that cape reaches so far into the sea, that they could scarsely
compass it in eight days. By which tarying least they should be hyndered,
they carried on their shoulders with great labor, their barks and fardelles
over a straight of land conteynyng half a league in breadth. From hence they
sailed to the region of the wild Lappones, called Dikillappones, to a place
named Dront, The region of the wild Lappones. Dront.
being.200. leagues distant from Dwina, toward the North. And thus far as he
says, does the prince of Moscouia exact tribute. Furthermore, leaving their
Barks here, they furnyshed the residue of their journey on Sleades. Iourneying
on Sleades.
He further declared, that there were herds of Hearts, as are with us of Oxen,
which in the Noruegians tongue are called Rh^n, How the Hearts draw Sleades.
being somewhat bygger then our Hearts. These the Lappones use in this manner:
They join them to Sleades made like fysher Boats, as we put horses to the
Cart, the man in the Sleade is tied fast by the feet, lest he fall out by the
swift course of the Hearts. In his leaft hand he holds a collar or reign,
wherewith he moderateth the course of the Hearts: and in the right hand a pyked
staff, wherewith he may sustain the Sleade from falling, if it chance to
decline too much on any part. And he told me, Twentye leagues in one day
that by this means he trauayled.xx. leagues in one day, and then dismyssed
the Heart, who by him self returned to his own master and accustomed stable.
The city of Berges in Norway.
This journey thus finished, they came to Berges a city of Noruegia, or
Norway, situate directlye toward the North, between the mountains, and went
from thence to Denmark on horsbacke. At Dront and Berges the day is said to
be.xxii. hours long in the Summer Equinoctial. Blasius, an other of the prince
of Moscouia his Interpreters, who a few years before was sent of his prince
into Spain to the Emperor, declared unto us an other and shorter way of his
journey: A shorter journey.
for he said, that when he was sent from Moscouia to John the king of
Denmark, he came first on foot unto Rostowe, Rostowe. Pereaslaw. Castromow.
and taking ship there, came to Pereaslaw: and from Pereaslaw, by the river
Volga, to Castromow: and that from thence, going seven werstes by land, he
came to a little river, saylyng by the which, when first he came to Vuolochda,
Vuolochda. Suc^ana. Dwina. Hafnia Koppenhagen.
then to Suchana, and Dwina, and in five, to the city of Berges in Norway,
ouerpassyng in this viage all the perils and labors that Istoma rehearsed
before, he came at length to Hafnia the chief city of Denmark, which the
Germans call Koppenhagen: but in their returnyng home, they both confess that
they came to Moscouia by Liuonia, and that they were a year in this viage:
Liuonia.
albeit Georgius Istoma said, that half the part of that time he was
hyndered by tempests, and enforced to carrye long in many places by the way,
Werst is almost an Italian mile.
yet they both likewise constantly affirm, that in this journey either of them
trauayled a thousand, threescore, and ten werstes, (that is) three hundred and
forty leagues. Furthermore also Demetrius, who of late was sent ambassador
from the prince of Moscouia to the Bishop of Rome, (by whose relation also
Paulus Iouius wrote his description of Moscouia) confirmed all these things to
be true. Paulus Iouius.
All they being demanded of me of the congeled or frosen sea, made none other
answer, but that in places near unto that sea, Ryuers falling into the frosen
sea.
they saw many and great ryuers, by whose vehemente course and abundant
flowyng, the seas are driven far from the shore: and that the said water of
the ryuers is frosen with the sea a good space from the land, as in Liuonia
and other parts of Suecia. For although by the vehemency of the wyndes, the
Ise is broken in the sea, yet does this chance seldom or never in ryuers,
wind. Ise.
except by some innundation or fluode the Ise geathered together be lyfted up
and broken. For the flakes or pieces of Ise carried into the sea by force of the
ryuers, do flote above the water in manner all the whole year, and are again
so vehemently frosen together, that a man may there sometimes see great heaps
of the Ise of many years, as does appear by such pieces as are driven to
the shore by the wind. I have also been credybly informed by faithful men,
Ise of many y^eres.
that the sea Baltheum (otherwise called the gulf of Liuonia) is oftentimes
frosen in many places. They say furthermore, The sea Baltheum.
that in that region which is inhabited of the wild Lappones, the Sun in
the summer Equinoctial does not fall for the space of.xl. days: Where the
Sun falls not in.xl. days.
yet that the body thereof is so hydden with a dark myste or cloud three
hours, that the beams do not appear: nevertheless to give such light during
that time, that the darkness hyndereth not their work. The Moscouites make
their boste that these wild Lappones are tributaries to their prince. Whereat
I do not greatly marueyle, forasmuch as they have none other near unto them,
that may demand tribute of them. The wyld Lappones are tributares to the
Moscouites. Furs and fyshe.
Their tribute is only furs and fyshe, having in manner none other thing
greatly commodious. And albeit they lack bread, salt, and other intysementes
of gluttony, and live only with fyshe and wild beasts, yet are they
exceedyng prone to lechery. They are such expert archers, that if in their
huntyng they espy any beasts, Expert archers
whose skynnes they desire to save vnperyshed, they will not lightly mysse to
hytte him in the nosethrylles. When they go forth on huntyng, they are
accustomed to leave at home with their wives such merchauntes or strangers as
they have received into their houses: So that if at their return, they
perceive their wives through the company of the strangers to be merier and
more iocunde then the were woonte to be, Good fellowship.
they give the strangers some present. But if they find it otherwise, they
thrust them forth of the doors with words of reproach. But now by the
company they have with strangers that resort thither for gaynes, they begin to
leave their native barbarousnesse. They gladly admytte merchauntes, Necessary
wares.
because they bring them apparel of gross cloth: also hatchettes, needels,
spones, knyues, drynkyng cups, earthen and brazen pottes, with such other
necessary wares: So that they use now to eat sodden and roasted meat, and do
embrase more civil manners. Their own apparel is made of the skins of
diverse beasts sowed together. And in this apparel they sometimes come to
Moscouia. Yet few of them have cappes or hosen, which they use to make of
hearts skynnes. They have not the use of gold or silver money: but use only
barteryng of ware for ware. No use of money.
And being ignorant of other languages beside their own, they seem among
strangers to be in manner dombe. Their cotages are covered only with the
barks of trees. Their cotages.
They have no certain resting habitation: But when they have consumed the
fish and wild beasts in one place, they remove to an other. Furthermore also
the said ambassadors of the prince of Moscouia declared, that in the same
parts they saw certain high mountains, Mountains continually burning.
continually casting forth flames of fire, as does the mountain of Etna in
the Island of Sicilia: and that even in Norway many mountains are fallen down
and burnt in manner to ashes with such continual flames. Which thing some
considering, feign the fire of Purgatory to be there. And as concerning these
mountains of Norway, when I was sent ambassador to Christierne king of
Denmark, I was enfourmed the like by the governors of Norway, who chanced at
that time to be present there.

About the mouths of the river Petzora that are toward the right hand from
the mouths of Duina, The river Petzora.
are said to be diverse and great beasts in the Ocean: and among other, a
certain great beast as byg as an Ox, which the inhabitauntes call Mors. This
beast has short feet like a Beuer or an Otter, with a breast somewhat high
and broad, The beast called Mors.
for the proportion of the residue of his body, and two long and great teeth
groweyng out of the upper iawe. These beasts for rest and increase, do
sometimes leave the Ocean, and by great heardes ascend the mountains: where,
before they give them selves to profounde sleep (whereunto they are naturaly
inclined) they appoint one of their number as it were a watch man, The
providence of nature.
as do Cranes for the security of the rest. Which if he chance to sleep, or
to be slain of the hunters, the residue may easly be taken. But if the
watchman give warnyng with roryng (as the manner is) immediately the whole
heard awakened thereby, sodaynely put their hinder feet to their teeth, and
so falling from the mountain with great celeritie as it were on a sleade, they
cast them selves headlong into the Ocean: where also they rest and sleep for a
while upon the heaps of yse. The hunters pursue these beasts only for their
teeth: Of the which the Moscouites, Tartars, and especially the Turks, make
haftes for swords and daggers very artificially: and use these rather for
ornament, then to give the greater stroke for the weight or heaviness thereof,
as some fable. Also among the Turks, Moscouites, and Tartars, these teeth are
sold by weight, and are called the teeth of fyshes.

The frosen sea reaches far and wide beyond Duina, to Petzcora, and unto
the mouths of the great river Obi: The frosen sea.
beyond the which they say to be the region of Engreonland, Engreonland or
greonland.
unknown and separate from the trade and conversation of our men, by reason of
high mountains covered, and cold with perpetual snow, and the sea no less
encumbered with continual yse, which hinders nauigations, and makes them
dangerous, as they say.

Exemplar Epistolae seu Literarum Missiuarum, quas illustrissimus Princeps
Eduardus, eius nominis Sextus, Angliae, Franciae, et Hiberniae Rex, misit ad
Principes Septentrionalem, ac Orientalem, mundi plagam inhabitants iuxta mare
glaciale, nec non Indiam Orientalem. Anno Domini. 1553. Regni sui Anno septimo,
et vltimo.
EDuardus sextus, Angliae, Franciae, and Hiberniae Rex. etc. Omnibus Regibus et
principibus ac Dominis, et cunctis Iudicibus terrae, et Ducibus eius,
quibuscunque est excellens aliqua dignitas in ea, cunctis in locis quae sunt
sub vniuerso caelo: Pax, tranquillitas, and honor vobis, terris, et regionibus
vestris quae imperio vestro subiacent, cuiquae vestrum quemadmodum conuenit ei.
Propterea quod indidit Deus Opt. Max. hominibus prae cunctis alijs viuentibus,
cor and desiderium tale, vt appetat quisquae cum alijs societatem inire, amare,
et vicissim amari, beneficijs afficere, et mutua accipere beneficia studeat,
ideo cuiquae pro facultate sua hoc desiderium in omnibus quidem hominibus
beneficijs fouere et conseruare conuenit, in illis autem maxim, qui hoc
desiderio adducti, a remotis etiam regionibus ad eos veniunt. Quo enim longius
iter, eius rei gratia ingressi sunt, eo ardentius in eis hoc desiderium fuisse
declararunt. Insuper etiam ad hoc, nos patrum maiorumque nostrorum exempla
inuitant, qui semper humanissime susceperunt et benignissime tractauerunt
illos, qui tum a locis propinquis, tum a remotis, eos amice adibant, eorum se
protectioni commendantes. Quod si omnibus id prestare aequum est, certe
mercatoribus imprimis prestari debet, qui per vniuersum orbem discurrunt, mare
circumlustrantes et aridam, vt res bonas et vtiles que Dei beneficio in regione
eorum inueniuntur, ad remotissimas regiones et regna adferant, atquae inde
viuissim referant, quod suae regioni vtile ibi repererint: vt et populi ad quos
eunt, non destituantur commodis, quae non profert illis terra eorum, and ipsi
sint participes rerum, quibus illi abundant. Nam Deus caeli et terrae, humano
generi maxim consulens, nosuit vt omnia in quauis regione inuenirentur, quo
regio open alterius regionis indigeret, et gens ab alio gente commodum aliquod
expectaret, ac ita stabiliretur amicitia inter omnes, singulique omnibus
benefacere quererent, Hoc itaque ineundae ac stabiliendae amicitiae desiderio
moti viri quidam regni nostri, iter in remotas maritimas regiones instituerunt,
vt inter nostros et illos populos, viam mercibus inferendis et eferendis
aperirent, nosque rogauerunt vt id illis concederemus. Qui petitioni illorum
annuentes, concessimus viro honorabili et forti, Hugoni Wilibeo, et alijs qui
com eo sunt seruis nostris fidis et charis, vt pro sua voluntate, in regiones
eis prius incognitas eant, quesituri ea quibus nos caremus, et adducant illis
ex nostris terris, id quod illi carent. Atque ita illis et nobis commodum inde
accedat, sitque amicitia perpetua, et foedus indissolubile inter illos et nos,
dum permittent illi nos accipere de rebus, quibus super abundant in regnis
suis, et nos concedemus illis ex regnis nostris res, quibus destituuntur.
Rogamus itaque vos Reges et principes, and omnes quibus aliqua est potestas in
terra, vt viris istis nostris, transitum permittatis per regiones vestras. Non
enim tangent quicquam ex rebus vestris inuitis v^bis. Cogitate quod homines et
ipsi sunt. Et si qua re caruerint, oramus pro vestra beneficencia, eam vos
illis tribuatis, accipientes vicissim ab eis, quod poterunt rependere vobis.
Ita vos gerite erga eos, quemadmodum cuperetis vt nos, et subditi nostri, nos
gereremus erga seruos vestros, si quando transierint per regiones nostras.
Atque promittimus vobis per Deum omnium quae coelo, terra et mari continentur,
perque vitam nostrum, et tranquillitatem regnorum nostrorum, nos pari
benignitate seruos vestros accepturos, si ad regna nostra aliquando venerint.
Atque a nobis et subditis nostris, ac si nati fuisse^t in regnis nostris ita
benign tractabuntur, vt rependamus vobis benignitatem, quam nostris
exhibueritis. Postquam vos Reges, Principes. etc. rogauimus vt humanitate et
beneficentia omni prosequamini seruos nostros nobis charos, oramus omnipotentem
Deum nostrum, vt vobis diuturnam vitam largiatur, et pacem que nullam habeat
finem. Scriptum Londini, quae ciuitas est regni nostri. Anno. 5515. a creato
mundo, mense Iiar.xiiii. die mensis, anno septimo regni nostri.

The copy of the letters missiue which the right noble prince Edward the.vi.
sent to the Kings, Princes, and other potentates inhabityng the Northest
parts of the world to ward the mighty Empire of Cathay, at such time as sir
Hugh VVilloby knight and Richard Chaunceler, with their company, attempted
their voyage thither in the year of Christ.1553. and the.vii. and last year
of his reign.
Edward the syxt by the grace of God, king of England, France and Ireland.
etc. To all Kings, Princes, Rulers, Judges, and Governors of the earth, and
all other having any excellent dignity on the same in all places under the
universal heaven: Peace, tranquillity, and honor, be unto you, and your
lands and regions which are under your dominions, and to every of you, as is
convenient.

Forasmuch as the great and almyghtie God has given unto mankind, above all
other living creatures, such a heart and desire, that every man desires to
join frendeshyp with other, to love and be loved, also to give and receive
mutual benefits: it is therefore the duty of all men, according to their
power, to maintain and increase this desire in every man, with well deserving
to all men, and especially to show this good affection to such, as being moved
with this desire, come unto them from far countries. For in how much the
longer voyage they have attempted for this intent, so much the more do they
thereby declare that this desire has been ardent in them. Furthermore also,
thexemples of our fathers and predicessours do inuit us hereunto, forasmuch as
they have ever gentelly and louyngly entreated such as of frendely mind came
to them, as well from countries near hand, as far remote, commending them
selves to their protection. And if it be right and equity to show such
humanity toward all men, doubtless the same ought chiefly to be showed to
merchauntes, who wanderyng about the world, search both the land and the sea,
to carry such good and profitable things as are found in their countries, to
remote regions and kingdoms, and again to bring from the same, such things
as they find there commodious for their own countries: both as well that the
people, to whom they go, may not be destitute of such commodities as their
countries bring not forth to them, as that also they may be partakers of such
things whereof they abound. For god of heaven and earth, greatly prouydyng for
mankind, would not that al things should be found in one region, to the end
that one should have need of an other, that by this means frendshyp might be
establyshed among all men, and every one seek to gratify all. For the
establyshing and furtheraunce of which universal amity, certain men of our
realm, moved hereunto by the said desire, have instituted and taken upon them
a viage by sea into far countries, to the intent that between our people and
them, a way be opened to bring in, and carry out merchandises, desiryng us to
further their enterprise. Who assentyng to their petition, have licenced the
right valiant and worthy sir Hugh Wylloby Knight, and other our trusty and
faithful servants which are with him, according to their desire, to go to
countries to them heretofore unknown, as well to seek such things as we
lack, as also to carry unto them from our regions, such things as they
lack. So that hereby not only commodity may ensue both to them and to us, but
also an indissoluble and perpetual league of frendshyp be establyshed between
us both, while they permit us to take of their things, such whereof they have
abundance in their regions, and we again grant them such things of ours
whereof they are destitute. We therefore desire you Kings and Princes, and all
other to whom there is any power on the earth, to permit unto these our
servants, free passage by your regions and dominions: for they shall not
touch any thing of yours vnwylling unto you. Consider you that they also are
men. If therefore they shall stand in need of any thing, we desire you of all
humanity, and for the nobility which is in you, to aid and help them with
such things as they lack, receyuyng again of them such things as they
shall be able to give you in recompense. Show your selves so toward them, as you
would that we and our subjects should show our selves toward your servants,
if at any time they shall pass by our regions.

Thus doing, we promise you by the God of all things that are contained in
heaven, earth, and the sea, and by the life and tranquillity of our kingdoms,
that we will with like humanity accept your servants if at any time they
shall come to our kingdoms, where they shall as friendly and gently be
entertained, as if they were borne in our dominions, that we may hereby
recompense the favor and benignity which you have showed to our men. Thus
after we have desired you Kings and Princes. etc. With all humanity and
favor, to entertayne our well-beloved servants, we will pray our almyghtie God
to grant you long life, and peace, which never shall have end. Written in
London which is the chief city of our kingdom: in the year from the
creation of the world 5515. in the month of Iiar, Iiar, I would read Mair,
that is in the Sarasen language, mixed of Turkish and Egiptian, February,
interpreted by them the month to set shyps to the sea.
the fourteen day of the month, and seventh year of our reign.

This letter was written also in Greek, and diverse other languages.

The voyages of Persia, traueiled by the merchauntes of London, of the company
and fellowship of Moscouia. In the years.1561. 1567. 1568.
IT shall not here be needful to write any thing of the way from hence to
Moscouia by sea, unto the port of Saint Nicolas, where our merchantes have a
house of their trafique, for as much as the same is already well known. And
therefore it shall suffice for the description of this voyage, to show the way
from Saint Nicolas in Moscouia unto Persia, as our men traueyled by the
regions of Moscouia unto the Caspian sea, and by that sea into Media and
Persia, unto the court of the great Sophie King of Persia, and many other
realms and kingdoms subject unto the same, as hereafter shall be more
particularly declared, with such brevity as the time and matter now
requires. Forasmuch as many things might be written touching this voyage,
and the merchauntes trafique in these regions, which for many great
considerations ought not to be publyshed or put in prynt: and therefore
touching only those things, it shall suffice to the reader to understand the
description of the regions, with the manners and customs of the people of those
countries, after the manner of a Geographicall history, partly to delight and
content the desire of such as take pleasure in the knowledge of strange
things and countries, whereby the mind of man increases in wisdom and
knowledge, both in humane affairs, and also of the marvelous and manyfolde
works of god and nature, that thereby God may be glorified and sanctified in
all his works, in the spirits of all good and virtuous men which delight in
the same. And whereas in the description of this voyage, I may seem to have
kept no due order of writing, I shall desire the reader to have me excused, for
that I could not orderly have any information of them that came from Persia:
but was feign to geather certain notes only by communication and conference
with them at sundry times, with few words as occasion served. But now to
enter into the voyage.

From the merchauntes house at the port of Saint Nicolas in Moscouia, they
traueyle up the ryuers of Duina and Sachana, until they come unto the city of
Vologda, (where also the merchantes have an other house) a thousand werstes or
Rus miles, or miles of Russia, which may be about seven hundred English
miles. Then from Vologda ouerlande, to the city of Yeraslaue, which lies on
the river Volga, a hundred and fourscore Rus miles. A werst is their mile, and
is three quarters of an English mile.
At this city of Yeraslaue, the merchantes land their goods for Persia, and
builded their ships there upon the said river, at a place named Vstwicki
Zelesnoy, about a hundred miles from Yeraslaue. So traueylyng from thence down
the river Volga, until they come to Astracan, a forte of the Emperor of
Moscouia, lying threescore miles from the Caspian sea. Upon Volga lies a
great town of merchaundies, named Costrum, and beyond that a strong Castle
of brick, named His Nouogorod, standing upon a hill. And from thence, upon
an arm of the same river, lies a great fortress named Cazan, which the
Moscouite won from the Tartars, Nogais being their chief and principal
hold: and therewith conquered the whole country of Cazan, or the Tartars
Cazamites, conteynyng two thousand miles. From Cazan upon the said river, the
Moscouite has in his subjection the one side of the river, and the Tartars,
called Crimes, have the other side. But they dare not pass over the river, by
reason that the Moscouite keeps many Garrisons on the river, and in certain
Islands of the river from place to place, as occasion serves: So that the
river is kept quietly, notwithstanding the conflicte that happened to Banister
outward, by reason of the Turks soldiers that would have spoiled his ships:
which nevertheless defended them selves manfully, and slew two hundred of the
Turks. For the Turk sent thither an arm of.xl. thousand Turks and Tartars,
to recover Astracan from the Moscouite: but they were enforced to break up
their Camp for lack of victualles and other necessaries, especially because
the winter drue near, and the Moscouite prepared a great army against them.

From Astracan, down the said river, to the Caspian sea, is the distance of
threscore miles. From the entrance into the Caspian sea, in two or three days
saylyng with a good wind, cross over that sea from the North to the South,
they come to the realm of Media, arryuing at a port named Bilbil, enteryng
into a small river that falls into the Caspian sea, and passing from thence
by land with Camels, in three days journey, they come to a city of Sharuan
or Media, named Shamaki. Media now called Sharuan.
And from thence in.xviii. days journey by Camelles, they come to the great
and famous city of Tauris, or Teueris, being the greatest city of Persia, for
trade of merchandies. This city is esteemed almost twyse as byg as London, and
for the most part is builded of raw brickes, not burnt, but only dried and
hardened in the sun: the doors of the houses be very low and little. The
Sophie in time paste remained chiefly in this city: But after that the region
about this city was invaded by the Turks, he went further into the country,
and builded a town named Casbin, which before.xx. years was but a village,
where he now keeps his court, being.xiii. days journey from Shamaki, by
horse, and.xx. days by Camelles.

Note, that near unto this side of the Caspian sea, dwell the Tartars called
Nogais and Shalcauis. Also certain Arabians, and Christians named Armenians.
Armenians. Christians.
The Caspian sea is otherwise called Mare de Baccan: and may seem so to be
called, by reason of a town by the sea side, named Bacco.

Certain extractes of the voyage of master Antony Ienkinson into Persia, in
the year.1561.
IN the year.1561. master Antonie Ienkinson was sent as Ambassador into
Persia, with the Queens majesty's letters, in the Latin, Italian, and Hebrew
tongue, to the great Sophie or king of Persia, to entreat of commodities of
merchaundies which might be between her majesty's merchantes and them, upon
certain privileges and free passage to be granted unto her merchauntes both
by the Emperor of Moscouia and the Sophi of Persia, as hereafter shall
appear, where we will write of the said privileges. Master Ienkinson at his
first coming, found some difficulty to obtain the Emperors license to go
into Persia: but at the length by friendshyp made, he gave him both license to
go, and also gave him letters commendatorie unto the Sophie, and committed
also to him certain affairs of his to do there. And after certain
banquettes, and honorable enterteynment, accompanied him with an Ambassador
of Persia, who had been long in his Court. Therefore saylyng over the Caspian
sea, they arrived on the West side thereof. Not far from thence is a town
named Darbent, where is a very strong Castle of stone made by Alexander
Magnus, A marvelous long wall builded by great Alexander.
and a wall of the length of thirtiene days journey, whic^e he made when he
kept wars against the Persians and Medians, that the inhabitauntes of that
country then newly conquered, should neither lightly flee, nor his enemies
invade them. This Darbent, is now under the dominion of the Sophie, and in the
latitude of.41. degrees. From Darbent to Bilbec, or Bilbil, the port and
harborowe where they discharge their goods, is half a days saylyng.

And from thence to Sharuan is ten days journey: This town stands in a
valley, and is in the country of Media: in the which town also, remains
the Soltan or governor of Media, under the Sophie.

In the mean time, the King of Media, named Abdalica, cosen unto the Sophie,
came thither, The magnificence of Abdalaca king of Media.
and honorably enterteyned master Ienkinson and the English merchauntes
which were with him, and made them a great banquet, causyng master Ienkinson
(who was then rychely apparelled in silk, velvet, and scarlet, as became an
Ambassador for the Queens majesty) to sit down somewhat far from him. The
King him self did sit in a very rich Pauilion wrought with silk and gold,
of the length of sixtiene fatham, or thereabout, placed on a hills side,
having before him a goodly fountain of fair running water, whereof he and his
nobility drunk. He was rychly apparelled with long garments of silk, and
cloth of gold, brodered with pearl and precious stones. Upon his head, he
had a Cappe with a sharp end of half a yard long, standing vpryght, of
rich cloth of gold, wrapped about with a piece of Indian silk of twenty
yardes long, wrought with gold. On the left side of his Tollepan (so is the
cappe called) was a plume of feathers set in a troonke of gold, rychly
inameled and set with precious stones. At his ears, he wore earerynges, with
pendantes of gold and stones a handful long, with two great Rubies of great
value in the ends thereof. All the ground within his Pauilion, was covered
with Carpettes, and under him self was spread a square Carpet wrought with
silver and gold, and therevppon were laid two suitable Cussions. Thus the king
and his noble men satte in his Pauilion with their legs acrosse, as do
Taylers: Yet commanded stools to be given to our men, because they could not
sit so: then caused meat to be set before them, and made them a banquet of
a hundred dyshes of meat, and as many of fruits and conserues. After the
banquet, he caused them to go with him a huntyng and hauking, in the which
they killed certain beasts and Cranes. Haukyng and huntyng.
Master Ienkinson found so much favor with this king, that at his departing,
he commended him to the Sophie with his letters, and also wrote in his favor
to his son, being then in the Sophies court. So that after his coming
thither, by his means, he came at the length to the presence and speech of
the Sophie: which otherwise he should have done very hardly, The Turks
Ambassadors resist master Ienkinson.
by reason of the Turks Ambassadors which then were there, and resisted his
affairs, with many persuasions to the Sophie, and other of his nobility,
against the Christians, as mortal enemies both to the Turks and Persians, and
their religion. And whereas a while before, a perpetual peace and amity was
concluded between the Turk and the Sophie, the Ambassadors would persuade
him that his friendshyp with the Christians, or contracte with them touching
any affairs, and especially such as might be prejudicial to the Turk, or
any of his subjects, might engender new suspicions and occasions of breach
of the la^e concluded peace, with many such other surmised accusations.
Whereupon the Sophie stayde, and prolonged the time, before he would admit
master Ienkinson to his speech. At the length when by the friendshyp and
favor of King Abdalaca and his son, with other friends made in the court,
the time was appointed that master Ienkinson should be hea^de, there was one
that came to him without the court gate, before he light from his horse on the
ground, and gave him a pair of shoes sent from the Sophie, Great holiness in
shoes.
such as he him self was wont to wear in the night when he ryseth to pray,
willing him to put them on his feet, for that it was not otherwise lawful for
him being a Gawar or Caffer (that is a mysbeleeuer) to tread upon that holy
ground. When he came to his presence, he demanded of him of what country of
Frankes he was, Christians called Frankes.
meaning by Frankes Christians: For they call all Christians Frankes (that is
French men) as we commonly call all Mahumetans, Turks, although there be
many Mahumetans of other nations beside Turks. He answered, that he was a
Christian of the best Frankes of the country of England: declaryng further
unto him, the cause of his coming thither, to be for the great commodity of
him and his subjects by the way of merchandies, as might further appear by
the letters directed unto his majesty from the Queen of England his Prince,
and the Emperor of Moscouia. Much more talk had he with master Ienkinson,
not here to be written: but by reason of the Turks Ambassadors, at this
present, was no great thing done herein to the preferment of the merchantes
affairs. Yet he commanded that master Ienkinson should be honorably used,
and sent him certain rich apparel. At this time was also in the Sophies
court the son of the King of the Georgians, a Christian Sismatike as they
are now called. The same time also, The Turks son beheaded.
a son of the Turks (who had before attempted somewhat against his father,
and fled to the Sophie) was by him at the Turks request deteyned in prison:
And upon the late conclusion of peace, the Turk required the Sophie to send
him his head: which he granted, and sent it him by the said Ambassadors.
This voyage of master Ienkinson, was in the year.1561.

Here follows such informations as was given me by master Geferie Ducate,
principal Agent of the merchante^, for the last voyage into Persia, in the
year of our Lord* 1568. beginning in the dominion of the Sophie, at the city
of Shamaki in Media, because the beginning of the voyage from Moscouia
hitherto, is declared here before.
SHamaki is the fairest town in all Media, and the chiefest commodity of that
country is raw silk, and the greatest plenty thereof, is at a town three
days journey from Shamaki, called Arashe: and within three days journey of
Arashe, is a country named Groysine, whose inhabitauntes are Christians,
Christians.
and are thought to be they, which are otherwise called Georgians: Georgians.
there is also much silk to be sold. The chief town of that country is
called Zeghaui, from whence is carried yearly into Persia, an incredible
quantity of hasell Nuttes, all of one sort and goodness, Hasell Nuttes.
and as good and thyn shaled as are our Fylberdes. Of these are carried yearly
the quantity of 4000. Camelles laden.

Of the name of the Sophie of Persia, and why he is called the Shaugh, and of
other customs.
THe King of Persia (whom here we call the great Sophi) is not there so called,
but is called the Shaugh. It were there dangerous to call him by the name of
Sophi, because that Sophi in the Persian tongue, is a beggar: and it were as
much as to call him, the great beggar.

He lies at a town called Casbin, Casbin.
which is situat in a goodly fertile valley, of three or four days journey in
length. The town is but evil builded, and for the most part all of brycke,
not hardened with fire, but only dried at the Sun, as is the most part of
the buyldyng of all Persia. The king has not come out of the compass of his
own house in.xxxiii. or.xxxiiii. years, whereof the cause is not known, but
as they say, it is upon a superstition of certain prophesies, to which they
are greatly addicted: he is now about fourscore years of age, and very
lusty. And to keep him the more lustye, he has four wives always, and
about three hundred concubynes. And once in the year, The kings Concubines.
he has all the fair maidens and wives, that may be found a great way
about, brought unto him, whom he diligently peruseth, feelyng them in all
parts, taking such as he lyketh, and puttyng away some of them which he has
kept before. And with them that he puts away, he gratifieth some such as
has done him the best service. And if he chance to take any man's wife, her
husband is very glad thereof, and in recompense of her, oftentimes he gives
the husband one of his old store, whom he thankfully receives. If any
stranger, being a Christian, shall come before him, How strangers are used.
he must put on a new pair of shows made in that country, and from the
place where he enters, there is dygged as it were a causye all the way,
until he come to the place where he shall talk with the king, who stands
always above in a gallerye when he talks with any strangers: and when the
stranger is departed, then is the causye cast down, and the ground made even
again.

Of the religion of the Persians.
Their religion is all one with the Turks, saving that they dyffer who was the
right successor of Mahumet. The Turks say that it was one Homer and his son
Vsman. But the Persians say, that it was one Mortus Ali, which they would
prove in this manner. They say there was a counsel called to decide the matter
who should be the successor: Haly,
and after they had called upon Mahumet to reuele unto them his will and
pleasure therein, A goodly and well grounded religion.
there came among them a little lizarde, who declared that it was Mahumetes
pleasure that Mortus Ali should be his successor. This Martus Ali was a
valiant man, and slew Homer the Turks prophet: He had a swoorde that he
fought withal, with the which he conquered all his enemies, and killed as
many as he stroke. When Mortus Ali dyed, there came a holy prophet, who gave
them warnyng that shortly there would come a white Camel, upon the which he
charged them to lay the body and swoorde of Mortus Ali, and to suffer the
Camel to carye it whether he would. The which being performed, the said
white Camel carried the swoorde and body of Mortus Ali unto the sea side, and
the Camel going a good way into the sea, was with the swoorde and body of
Mortus Ali taken up into heaven, for whose return they have long looked for in
Persia. And for this cause, the king always keeps a horse redye sadled for
him, and also of late kept for him one of his own daughters to be his wife,
but she dyed in the year of our Lord.1573. And say furthermore, that if he
come not shortly, they shall be of our belief: much like the Jews, lookyng for
their Messiah to come and reign among them, like a worldly king for ever, and
deliver them from the captivity which they are now in among the Christians,
Turks, and Gentyles.

The Saugh, or King of Persia, is nothing in strength and power comparable unto
the Turk: for although he has a great Dominion, yet is it nothing to be
compared with the Turks: neither has he any great Ordinance of Gunnes, or
Harkebuses. Notwithstanding, his eldest son Ismael, about twenty and five
years past, fought a great battle with the Turk, and sleue of his army
about an hundred thousand men, who after his return, was by his father cast
into prison, and there continues until this day: for his father the Shaugh,
had him in suspicion that he would have put him down, and have taken the
regiment upon him self.

Their opinion of Christ, is that he was an holy man, Their opinion of Christ.
and a great Prophet, but not like unto Mahumet: saying that Mahumet was the
last Prophet, by whom all things were finished, and was therefore the
greatest. To prove that Christ was not Gods son, they say that God had
never wife, and therefore could have no son or children. They go on
pilgrimage from the furthest part of Persia, unto Mecha in Arabia, and by the
way they visit also the sepulcher of Christ at Jerusalem, which they now
call Couche Kalye.

The most part of Spyces which comes into Persia, is brought from the Island
of Ormus, situate in the gulf of Persia, called Sinus Persicus, between the
main land of Persia and Arabia. etc. The Portugales touch at Ormus both in
their viage to East India, and homewarde again, and from thence bring all
such Spyces as is occupied in Persia and the regions there about: for of
Pepper they bring very small quantity, and that at a very dear pryse. The
Turks oftentimes bring Pepper from Mecha in Arabia, which they sell as good
cheap as that which is brought from Ormus. Sylkes are brought from no place,
but are wrought all in their own country. Ormus, is within two miles of the
main land of Persia, and the Portugales fetch their fresh water there, for
the which they pay trybute to the Shaugh or king of Persia.

Within Persia, they have neither gold nor silver mines, yet have they coined
money, Their money.
both of gold and silver, and also other small moneys of Copper. There is
brought into Persia an incredible sum of Duche Dolours, which for the most
part is there employed in raw sylke.

They have few books, and less learning, and are for the most part very
brutyshe in all kind of good sciences, Their books and learning.
saving in some kind of sylke works, and in such things as parteyne to the
furniture of Horses, in the which they are passing good.

Their laws are, as is their religion, wicked and detestable. And if any man
offend the Prince, Such was the law of the Macedons for Treason.
he punysheth it extremely, not only in the person that offends, but also in
his children, and in as many as are of his kynne. Theft and murder are often
punished, yet none otherwise then pleases him that is ruler in the place where
the offense is committed, and as the party offendyng is able to make friends,
or with money to redeem his offense.

There is often times great mutenye among the people in great towns,
Dissension for religion.
which of Mortus Ali sons was greatest: Insomuche that sometimes in the
town two or three thousand people are together by the ears for the same, as
I have seen in the town of Shamaky and Ardaruill, and also in the great city
of Teueris, where I have seen a man coming from feightyng, in a bravery
bryngyng in his hand four or five men's heads, carrying them by the hear of
the head: for although they shave their heads most commonly twyse a week,
Shauing.
yet leave they a tuft of hear upon the crown, about two foot long. I have
enquired why they leave that tuft of hear upon their heads. They answer,
that thereby they may easlyer be carried up into heaven, when they are dead.

For their religion, they have certain priests, who are apparelled like unto
other men. They use every morning and afternoon, to go up to thetoppes of
their churches, and tell there a great tale of Mahumet and Mortus Ali: and
other preaching have they none. Their pryestes, and preaching. Their Lent.
Their Lent is after Christmas, not in abstinence from flesh only, but from al
meats and drynkes, until the day be of the sky: but then they eat sometimes
the whole night. And although it be against their relygion to drink wine, yet
at night they will take great excess thereof, and be dronken. Abstinence from
wine, but not from drunkenness.
Their lent begins at the new Moon, and they do not enter into it until
they have seen the same: Neither yet does their lent end, until they have
seen the next new Moon, although the same through close weather should not
be seen in long time.

They have among them certain holy men, whom they call Setes, Their saints
and holy men.
counted holy for that they or any of their ancestors have been on pilgrimage
at Mecha in Arabia, for whosoever goes thither on pilgrimage to visit the
sepulcher of Mahumet, both he and all his posterity, are ever after called
Setes, Pilgrimage.
and counted for holy men, and have no less opinion of them selves. And if a
man contrary one of these, he will say that he is a sayncte, and therefore
ought to be beloved: and that he can not lie, although he lie never so
shamefully. Thus a man may be to holy, and no pride is greater then spiritual
pride, of a mind puffed up with his own opinion of holiness. These Setes do
use to shave their headdes all over, saving on the sides a little above the
temples, the which they leave vnshauen, and use to brayde the same as women do
their hear, and wear it as long as it will grow.

Every morning they use to worship God, Mahumet, and Mortus Ali, and in
praying turn them selves toward the South, because Mecha lies that way from
them. Their prayer and worshipping of God and Mahumet,
When they be in travail on the way, many of them will (as soon as the Sun
ryseth) light from their horses, turnyng them selves to the South, and will
lay their gowns before them, with their swoordes and beads, and so standing
vpryght, worship to the South: And many times in their prayers kneel down and
kiss their beads, or somewhat else that lies before them.

The men or women do never go to make water, Washyng and outward clenlenesse.
but they use to take with them a po^te with a spout, and after they have made
water, they flashe some water upon their pryuie parts, and thus do the women
as well as the men: and this is a matter of great religion among them, and in
making of water, the men do cowre down as well as the women.

When they earnestly affirm a matter, they will swear by God, Their swearing
Mahumet, or Mortus Ali, and sometimes by all at ones: as thus in their own
language, saying, Olla Mahumet Ali. But if he swear by the Shaughes head, in
saying Shaugham basshe, you may then believe him if you will.

The Shaugh keeps a great magnificence in his court: and although sometimes
in a month or six weeks, The kings magnificence.
none of his nobility or counsel can see him, yet go they daily to the
court, and tarry there a certain time, until they have known his pleasure
whether he will command them any thing or not. He is watched every night with
a thousand of his men, which are called his Curshes, who are they that he
uses to send into the countries about his greatest affairs. Pursiuantes.
When he sends any of them (if it be to the greatest of any of his nobility)
he will obey them, although the messenger should beat any of them to death.

The Shaugh occupies him self always two days in the week in his
Bathestoue, The kings company with his wives and concubines.
and when he is disposed to go thither, he takes with him five or six of his
concubines, more or less, and one day they consume in washyng, rubbyng, and
bathyng him, and the other day in paryng his nails, and other matters. The
greatest part of his life, he spends amongst his wives and concubines. He
has now reigned about fyftie and four years, A very Sardanapalus.
and is therefore counted a very holy man, as they ever esteem their kings,
if they have reigned fyftie years or more: for they measure the favor of God
by a man's prosperity, or his displeasure by a man's misfortune or adversity.
The great Turk has this Shaugh in great reverence, because he has reigned
king so long time.

I have said before that he has four wives, and as many concubynes as him
lysteth: and if he chance to have any children by any of his concubines, The
succession of the kingdom.
and be minded that any of those children shall inherit after him, then when
one of his wives dies, the concubine whom he so favors, he makes one of
his wives, and the child whom he so loves best, he ordayneth to be king after
him.

Marriage.
What I heard of the manner of their marriages, for offending of honest
consciences and chaste ears, I may not commit to writing: their fasting I have
declared before. They use Circumcision unto children of seven years of age, as
do the Turks. Circumcis^on.


Their houses (as I have said) are for the most part made of Brycke, not
burned, but only dried in the Sun: Their houses and manner of eateyng.
In their houses they have but little furniture of household stuff, except it
be their Carpets, and some Copper work: for all their Kettles and Dyshes
wherein they eat, are of Copper. They eat on the ground, sittyng on Carpets
cross legged as do taylers. There is no man so simple but he sytteth on a
Carpet better or worse, and the whole house or room wherein he sytteth, is
wholly covered with Carpets. Their houses are all with flat roofes, covered
with earth: and in the summer time, they lie upon them all night.

They have many bond servants both men and women* Bond men and bond women,
Bond men and bond women.
is one of the best kind of merchandies that any man may bring. When they bye
any maids or young women, they use to feel them in all parts, as with us
men do horses: when one has bought a young woman, Women bougth and sold, and
let to hire.
if he like her, he will keep her for his own use as long as him lysteth, and
then sells her to an other, who does the like with her. So that one woman is
sometimes sold in the space of four or five years, twelve, or twenty times.
If a man keep a bond woman for his own use, and if he find her to be false
to him, and give her body to any other, he may kill her if he will.

When a merchant or trauailer comes to any town where he entendeth to tarry
any time, he hyreth a woman, or sometimes two or three during his abode there.
And when he comes to an other town, he does the like in the same also: for
there they use to put out their women to hyre, as we do here hackneye Horses.

There is a very great river which runs through the plain of Iauat,
which falls into the Caspian sea, by a town called Backo, near unto which
town is a strange thing to behold. Abundance of Oil ishuing out of the
ground.
For there ishueth out of the ground a marvelous quantity of Oil, which
Oil they fetch from the uttermost bounds of al Persia: it serves all the
country to burn in their houses.

This Oil is black, and is called Nefte: they use to carry it throughout all
the country upon Kyne and Asses, of which you shall oftentimes meet, with
four or five hundred in a company. There is also by the said town of Backo,
an other kind of Oil which is white and very precious: and is supposed to be
the same that here is called Petroleum. Oleum Petroleum.
There is also not far from Shamaky, a thing like unto Tar, and ishueth out
of the ground, whereof we have made the proof, that in our shyps it serves
well in the stead of Tar. Two sorts of Kyne.


In Persia are Kyne of two sorts, the one like unto ours in these parts, the
other are marvelous evil favored, with great bones, and very lean, and but
little hear upon them: their milk is walowish sweet: they are like unto them
which are spoken of in the scripture, which in the dream of Pharao signified
the seven dear years: for a leaner or more evil favored beast, can no man
see.

In the country of Sheruan (sometime called Media) if you chance to lie in
the fields near unto any village, as soon as the twylyght begins, you
shall have about you two or three hundred Foxes, Foxes in great plenty.
which make a marvelous wawelyng or howlyng: and if you look not well to
your victuales, it shall escape them hardly but they will have part with you.

The Caspian sea, does neither ebb nor flow, except sometimes by rage of
wind it swells up very high: the water is very salt. Howbeit, the quantity
of water that falls out of the great river of Volga, makes the water fresh
at the least twenty leagues into the sea. The Caspian sea is marvelous full
of fyshe, but no kind of monstrous fysh, as far as I could understand, yet
has it sundry sorts of fyshes which are not in these parties of the world.

The Mutton there is good, and the Sheep great, having very great rumpes with
much fat upon them. Rise and Mutton, is their chief victuale.

Of the Empire of the Persians, and of their original.
THe kingdom or Empire of the Persians, Abraham O^tilius.
as it was in ancient time most famous, even so is it at these days, mighty
and glorious, comprehendyng many great and large regions. For all the tracte of
Asia, which is between the river of Tigris, the gulf of Persia, and the
Indian sea (sometime called the sea Indus) and the river Iaxartes (at this day
called Chefell) even unto the Caspian sea, is at this day under the dominion of
the Sophie of Persia.

Of the original of the Sophies, thus writes Caelius Curio in his
Saracenicall history. In the year of our Lord.1369. was a certain Prince
among the Persians, who possessed the town of Ardenelim, his name was Sophi:
and glorified him self to discende of the raze and progeny of Alis Muamedis,
by Musan Cazin his Neuie. He, after the death of Calyfa, the Soltan of Babylon,
and the contrary faction which the Turks defended, suppressed also of the
Tartars, began more boldly and freely to profess his opinion and sentence of
their religion. And because that Ocemus the son of Alis, (from whom he
glorified him self to descend) had twelve children, willing to add to them of
his sect a certain sign, whereby they might be known from other, ordained
that they that would embrace his sect and profession, should were on their
heads a high cappe of purple under a vele, wherewith all the Turks inuolue
their heads, and in their language call it Tulibante, having in the midst of
it.xii. plumes or shappe tops. After his death, succeeded his son Guines:
who in all the East parts obtained so great opinion of wisdom and holiness,
that most famous Tamerlanes, Emperor of the Parthians (who before had taken
Bayazetes king of the Turks) made a journey into Persia, to visit him as a
most holy man, Tamerlanes. Thamurlanes. Tamburlanes. or Tamurthlam.
of whom Guines had so much favor, that he obtained of him the liberty
of.xxx. thousand Captives which he brought with him, whom also Guines addicted
to his faction: and his son Secaidar used them in his wars. For with these,
after the death of Guines, he made war to certain people of Scythia,
Georgians Christians.
named Georgians, his borderers, being Christians, and afflicted them very
grievously. Thus much of the original of the Sophie of Persia: they keep
continually wars with the Turks for the religion of Mahumet. Contention for
religion between Turks and Persians.
For the Sophians or Persians, follow one manner of interpretation of Mahumettes
religion, and the Turks an other: the which interpretations nevertheless are
so differyng one from the other, that the one of them esteems the other for
heretics. The Persians are of liberal nature, Persians.
of much civility and courtesy, greatly esteeming arts and sciences: they
acknowledge a certain worthiness or nobility among men, wherein they differ
much from the Turks, Turks.
which make no difference between slaves and worthier men or Gentelmen.

Of the Region of Persia, and the manners of the Persians: Anno. do. 1280.
Marcus Paulus Venetus, writes thus. Cap. xix. Lib. 1.
PErsia is a great and large province, and was once noble and of great fame,
but now devastate and ouerrun by the Tartars, it is of less dignity, and the
ancient renoume thereof greatly diminished, and the name divided into the
provinces confine or adjacent unto it. So that now the province of Persia (as
it is divided) conteyneth eight kingdoms: whereof the first is named Chasum,
the second Churdistam, the third Loc, the fourth Cielstam, the fyft,
Instanich, the sixte, Zerazi, the seventh, Socham, and the eight, Timochaim, in
the confines of Persia. There are very fair and goodly horses of great price,
insomuch that sometimes one is sold for.200. pounds of Turon. Merchants bring
them to the cities of Chisi and Curmosa, situate on the sea side, and sell them
into India. Also Asses be there very fair and great, insomuch that sometimes
one is sold for.xxx. pound weight of silver. The people is of evil
disposition, quarellous, thieves, and murderers: and rob and kill merchantes
by the way, except they go in great companyes. Yet in the cities, they are of
better manners, and of more humanity: also very excellent artificers in works
of gold, silk, Embroderie, needle work, and such like. They have abundance
of bombasine, wheat, barlye, myll, wine also, and fruits, but in religion,
they are Mahumetans.

Of the kingdom of the Persians, Haithon in his book de Tartaris. Cap. vii.
writes as follows.
THe kingdom of the Persians, is divided chiefly into two parts, which make
one kingdom, because they are both subject to the dominion of one king. The
first part of Persia, begins in the East, from the confines of the kingdom
of Turquestan, and is extended toward the West, to the great river of Phison,
Phison is thought to be Ganges.
which is the chief among the four floodes which run out of earthly Paradyse.
Toward the North, it is extended to the Caspian sea, and toward the South,
unto the desartes of India. The region is in manner all plain: in the midst
whereof, are two very great and rich cities, the one is named Boctara, and the
other Seonorgant. The Persians have a language proper to them selves: they use
merchandies and tyllage of the ground, and among them selves live in peace: In
time paste they were Idolatours, and honored fire chiefly for God. But after
that the sect of the Mahumetans occupied the dominion of those lands, they
became universally Saracens, Sarasins (that is) Mahumetans.
believing the deuilishe doctrine of Mahumet. The other part of Persia,
begins from the river Phison, and is extended Westward unto the confines of
the kingdoms of Media, and partly also of Armenia the greater. Toward the
North, it is extended unto the Caspian sea, on the South side, it confineth
with a certain province of the kingdom of Media, and in this province are two
great cities, one named Nesabor, and the other Sachen, which in sect and
manners, are like unto the other.

Of Persia, and of diverse cities thereof, and other notable things read
hereafter, the third book of the voyage of Lodouicus Vartomannus. Also, the
first book of the same voyage. Cap. 12. of Mahumet and his fellows: where you
may see the difference in religion between the Turks and Persians, being both
Mahumetans.

The name of the Sophie, Thomas Shaugh, and why he is so called.
THe Persians do not call their king by the name of Sophie, but this name
Sophie, is given him by other nations: for of his own people, he is called
Thomas Shaugh, which is, Thomas the ruler, Soltan, or governor: for Shaugh,
is not the name of a king, but of an office. For a king in their language, is
called Pachet, but no Prince is called by this name, before he have reigned by
seven discentes: but he that now reygneth, is but only of five discentes, and
is therefore called only Shaugh, which is a name of office.

He has four wives and.xii. sons, and has kept one of his sons in
prison many years, for a great overthrow which he gave the Turk in the
wars, although he took the same for acceptall service, and a noble exployt.
Yet forasmuch as by that fact, he obtained great renoume of a valiant and
warlyke man, he began him self to have him in suspicion, least the glory of
that enterprise might encourage him to attempt somewhat against his father, as
oftentimes the Turks sons have rebelled against their fathers yet living,
and displaced them of their dignity.

Of the kingdom of Ormus, confine to Persia, and of the trafique between
them. Also of the city and Island of Ormus or Armusium.
ORmus is a great kingdom, Abraham Ortelius.
and has a peculiar King, tributorie to the king of Portugale. This kingdom
conteyneth all the sea coasts of Arabia, in the gulf of Persia, from the
mouth of the river of Euphrates, until the Cape of Razalguati, and also part
of the kingdom of Persia, which is adjacent unto the straight of Bazora,
called Fretum Bazorae, and in manner all the Islands of the gulf of Persia,
called Sinus Persicus. The Metrapolis or chief city of the kingdom of Ormus,
is the city of Ormus, situate in an Island named Geru, being one of the famost
martes of these parts of the world. The Island is within the gulf of Persia,
not far within the straight of Bazora. This straight of Bazora, other have
named the straight of Ormus, being between Arabia Foelix, and the region of
Persia. The region of Ormus is well peopled, and has many goodly places and
cities. The gulf is not every where nauigable, by reason of many shelues and
low places. Within four days sailing of Ormus, are the Islands of Baharen,
where are found the fairest oriental pearls of the world. Ormus uses trafique
of merchandies with Adem and Cambaia, and with the kingdoms of Decan and Goa,
and with the ports of Narsinga and Malabar. The chief merchandies brought
from thence, are horses of Arabia and Persia, pearls, salt peter, brimstone,
silk, Tutia, Alume, also Alume of Alexandria or Borace, U^triol, or Copporose,
salt in great quantity, silver, Musk, Ambar, wheat, many dried fruits,
Rise, and many other provisions of vittailes, and other things to be eaten.
For these, they return pepper, cloves, Cinnamon, Ginger, and diverse other sorts
of spices and drugges, which are dispersed into sundry regions of Persia and
Arabia, and also into Aden where there is great plenty. But if they be dear
in Ormus, it is not possible that they should be carried to Cair, to come into
Italy. Their return, is with Rise, as much as they can have, white cloth, and
Iron. Their horses are of marvelous great price in the kingdoms of Goa,
Decan, and Narsinga, and therefore yearly the merchantes of Ormus bring many
thither, and yet sometime one horse is there at the price of vii. hundred of
those pieces of gold, which they call Saraffos. The best are of Arabia, the
second of Persia, and the woorst of Cambaia.

Of the Sophie and kingdom of Persia, after the later writers.
PErsia is one of the greatest and most famous Provinces of the world. It
touches not the sea, but at the gulf of Ormus. On the side of Cambaia, it
confineth with the people named Motagues, on the side of Arabia, with the gulf
of Ormus, on the side of the firm land, with the mountains of Deli, and on
the side of Carmania, Babylon of Chaldea, and not of Egypt.
and in manner by the confines of Babylon, it extends toward India: it has
many kingdoms and cities subject unto it. The people of Persia, are called
Azemini. It conteyneth four principal provinces, which are these: Coraconi,
Ginali, Tauris, Xitarim. In the which also are these four most famous cities:
Tauris or Teueris.
That is Tauris, Siras, Samarcante, Coraconi: They are valiant and warlyke men,
and of great estimation. They of Samarcante, have in ancient time been
Christians. Tauris and Siras, are cities as famous among them, as is with us
Paris in France: they are men of great civility and courtesy. The women of
Siras, are of commendable beauty and behauour, very neat and delicate, and
thereof comes a proverb among the Mahumetans, that Mahumet would never go
to Siras, least if he had tasted the pleasures of those women, he should never
after his death have gone to Paradyse. The king of Persia is called Siech
Ismael, whom the Italians call Gualizador, or Sophi. His chief mansion place
or court, Ismael, they pronounce Smael.
is at Tauris, or Teueris, which is distant from Ormus fifty days journey
with Camelles. He is called the great Mahumetan of the order of the red bonet
(that is) of the sect of Hali, which our men that came late from Persia, call
Mortus Ali, Mortus Ali.
whereof we have spoken more before. The region of Persia, has all sorts of
domestical or tame beasts, such as are in our countries. It has
furthermore, Lions, Onces, and Tigers, the people are much given to pleasures
and sportes, and are honorably apparelled, delighting greatly in perfumes and
sweet savors: they have many wives, and commit the keeping or charge of them
to enuches or gelded men: who for that service, Enukes or gelded men.
are oftentimes preferred to great promotion, yet are they very ielous of their
wives. Notwithstanding, both the Persians, and also their neighbors of Ormus,
are detestable Sodomites. In time paste many great and valiant personages, as
Cyrus, Darius, Assuerus, and great Alexander, have invaded Persia. It is not
baren as some have written, but has abundance of all sorts of victualles,
and pleasures, and things necessary for the life of man.

The trafique of Persia, with other countries.
IN the region of Persia, are many sorts of merchandies, wherewith they use
great trafique in the countries of Armenia, Turchia, and in the city of Cair
or Alcayr. From the land of Siras, is brought great abundance of silk,
whereof is made an infinite quantity of all sorts of silken clothes, and
fine chamolettes of diverse colors: also great abundance of roche Alume,
Uitrioll, Alcoffare. Likewise many horses, victualles, Turques stones, wax,
honey, butter. etc. Also great pieces of tapestrie of diverse sorts and works,
clothes of sundry colors, veluets both high and low after their manner:
Likewise cloth of gold of sundry sorts: Pauilions, and great abundance of
armure. From the other side of the mountains by the way of Siam, are brought
Musk, Aloes, Reubarbe, Lignum aloes, Camphora, etc. All these things, and
many other, are carried to Ormus: for the which, the return is, great quantity
of Pepper, and other spices and drugges: for the Persians use much spices with
their meats, and especially Pepper.

Of the Gulf of Persia, or Sinus Persicus.
THe region and land of Persia, is situate between two ryuers, which fall
not into the Ocean sea, but into the gulf of Persia: the which gulf has on
every side many goodly countries well inhabited. The gulf conteyneth in
largeness.lx. miles, and is nauigable with great Barks, and is sometimes
troubled with great tempests. There is taken great abundance of fish, which
being salted or dried, is carried into all parts of Persia. The gulf is also
very long, and conteyneth from Ormus to the end, lx. days journey with
Camelles.

1 Articles of the Privileges which the Sophie of Persia granted to the
English merchantes.

These articles were sent unto the company of merchants from Mosko, by master
Ienkinson, granted in the names of these persons. Sir William Garret, Sir
William Chester, governors. Sir Thomas Lodge, Master Antonie Ienkinson,
Master Thomas Nicolls, and Arthur Edwardes, merchantes of London: as also in
the names of the whole company.

2 First, it is granted that you shall pay no manner of customs or tolles any
kind of ways, now nor in time coming unto his heirs after him. And that all
English merchantes now present, or hereafter, may pass and repasse into all
places of his dominions, and other countries adjoining to him, in the trade of
merchaundies, to buy and sell all manner of commodities, with all manner of
persons.

3 Item that in all places, where any of our merchantes shall be chief
governors, rulers, and Justices, to take heed unto the English merchantes,
and be their aid, and punish them that shall do them any wrong or hurt.

4 Item that such debtes as shall be owyng by any manner of person, justice to be
done on the party, and to see all English merchantes paid at the day.

5 Item that no manner of person of what estate or degree they be of, so hardy
to take any kind of wares, or any gifts, without the English merchantes good
wills.

6 Item if by chance medley, any of the merchauntes or servants (as God
forbid) should kill any of his subjects, no parts of their goods to be
touched or meddled withal, neither no person but the offender, and being any of
the merchaunts, not to suffer without the princes knowledge and advice.

7 Item that all such debtes as shall be oweyng, to be paid to any of the
merchauntes in the absence of the other, be the party dead or alive.

8 Item that no person return any kind of wares back again, being once
bought or sold.

9 Item that when God shall send the merchauntes goods to shore, presently his
people to help them alande with them.

The prosperous vyage of Arthur Edwardes into Persia, and of the favor that
he found with the Sophy, and also what conference he had with that prince.
WHen he came first to the Sophies presence, brynging his interpretour with
him, and standing far of, the Sophie (syttyng in a seat royal with a great
number of his noble men about him) badde him come near, and that thrice, until
he came so near him that he might have touched him with his hand. Then the
first demand that he asked him, was from what country he came: he answered,
that he came from England. Then asked he of his noble men, who knew any such
country. But when Edwards saw that none of them had any intelligence of that
name, he named it Inghilterra, Londro.
as the Italians call England. Then one of the noble men said Londro, London.
meaning thereby London, which name is better known in far countries out of
Christendom, then is the name of England. When Edwardes hard him name
Londro, he said that that was the name of the chief city of England, as was
Teueris, of the chief city of Persia. He asked him many things more, as of
the realm of England, marueylyng that it should be an Island, of so great
richesse and power, as Edwardes declared unto him, of the riches and abundaunce
of our merchaundies, as he further understood by our trafique in Moscouia and
other countries. He demanded also many things of the Queens majesty, and of
the customs and laws of the realm: saying oftentimes in his own language,
Bara colla (that is to say) well said. He asked also many things of king
Philip, and of his wars against the Turk at Malta. Then demanded of him
what was the chief cause of his resort into his realm. And being certified
that it was for the trade of merchaundies, he asked what kind of merchaundies
he could bring thither. Such (said he) as the Venetian merchauntes, which
dwelling in our country in the city of Londro, send to Uenes, and from
thence into Turkey by Halepo and Tripoli in Sorya, from whence, as by the
second and third hands, with great charges of many customs and other
things thereunto parteyning, they are at the length brought into your country
and cities of Persia. What merchaundies are those, said the Sophie? Edwardes
answered, that they were great abundaunce of fine carseis, of broad clothes,
of all sorts and colors, as scarlettes, violettes, and other of the fynest
cloth of all the world. The Venetians trafique in England.
Also that the Venetians brought out of England, not only such clothes ready
made, but furthermore great plenty of fine wool to myngle with their wools, of
the which they could not otherwise make fine cloth: Affirming that there went
out of England yearly that ways, English cloths, carses and fine wool.
above two hundred thousand carseis, and as many broad clothes, beside fine
wool and other merchaundies, beside also the great abundaunce of like clothes,
yt which were carried into Spain, Barbary, and diverse other countries. The
Sophie then asked him by what means such merchaundies might be brought into
Persia. Right well Sir (said he) by the way of Moscouia, with more safety and
in much shorter time then the Venetians can bring them, first from England to
Uenes, and from thence into Persia, by the way of Turkye. And therefore if it
shall please your majesty to grant us free passage into al your dominions,
with such privileges as may apperteyne to the safeguard of our lives, goods,
and merchandies, we will furnysh your countries with all such merchandies, and
other commodities, in shorter time, and better cheap then you may have the
same at the Turks hands. This talk and much more was between the Sophie and
Edwardes for the space of two hours, all which things lyked him so well,
that shortly after he granted to the said Arthur Edwardes two other
privileges, for the trade of merchandies into Presia, all written in Azure and
gold letters, and delivered unto the lord keeper of the Sophie his great
seal. The lord keeper was named Coche Califaye, who said that when the
Shaughe (that is the king or prince) did sytte to seal any letters, that
privilege should be sealed and delivered to Laurence Chapman. In this
privilege is one principal article for servants or merchantes: That if the
Agent do perceive that upon their naughty doings, they would become Busor
men, Busor men, be they that forsake their faith, and receive the religion of
Mahumet.
that then the Agent whersoeuer he shall find any such servant or servants,
to take them, and put them in prison: and no person to keep them, or maynteyne
them. This article was granted in respect of a custom among the Persians,
being Mahumetanes: whose manner is friendly to receive and well entertayne, both
with gifts and living, all such Christians as forsakyng their religion, will
become of the religion of the Persians. Insomuch that before this privilege was
granted, there was great occasion of naughty servants to deceive and rob
their masters: that under the color of professyng that religion, they might
live among them in such safety, that you might have no law against them,
either to punysh them, or to recover your goods at their hands, or else where.
For before the Sophie (whom they say to be a marvelous wise and gracious
prince) seemed to favor our nation, and to grant them such privileges, the
people abused them very much, and so hated them that they would not touch
them, but reviled them, calling them Cafars and Gawars, which is, infydels, or
misbeleeuers. But after they saw how greatly the prince favored them, they had
them afterward in great reverence, and would kiss their hands, and use them
very friendly. For before, they took it for no wrong to rob them, defraud them,
bear false witness against them, and such merchandies as they had bought or
sold, make them take it again, and change it as often as them listed. And if
any stranger by chance had killed one of them, they would have the life of
two for one slain, and for the debtes of any stranger, would take the goods
of any other of the same nation, with many other such like abuses, in manner
unknown to the Prince, before the complayntes of our men made unto him for
reformation of such abuses: which were the cause that no merchant strangers of
contrary religion, durst come into his dominions with their commodities: which
might be greatly to the profit of him and his subjects.

The Articles.
10 Item that the merchantes have free lybertye, as in their first privilege,
to go unto Gylian, and all other places of his dominions, now or hereafter when
occasion shall be given.

11 Item if by misfortune any of their ships should break, or fall upon any
part of his dominions on the sea coast, his subjects to help with all speed to
save the goods, and to be delivered to any of the said merchants that lives:
or otherwise to be kept in safety until any of them come to demand them.

12 Item if any of the said merchants depart this life in any city or town,
or on the high way, his governors there to see their goods safely kept, and
to be delivered to any other of them that shall demand them.

13 Item the said merchants to take such camel men as they them selves will,
being country people: and that no Kyssell Bayshe do let or hinder them,
Kyssell Bashe are the gentlemen that wear red cappes.
And the said owners of the camels, to be bound to answer them such goods
as they shall receive at their hands: and the camel men to stand to the
losses of their camels or horses.

14 Item more, that the said carryars do demand no more of them, then their
agreement was to pay them.

15 Item more, if they be at a price with any carryours, and given earnest, the
Camel men to see they keep their promise.

16 Item if any of the said merchauntes be in fear to travail, to give them
one or more to go with them, and see them in saftie with their goods to the
place they will go unto.

17 Item in all places, to say, in all cities, towns, or villages on the high
way, his subjects to give them honest rooume, and vittayles for their money.

18 Item the said merchauntes may in any place where they shall think best,
build or bye any house or houses to their own uses: And no person to molest
or trouble them, and to stand in any Carauan where they will, or shall think
good.

THe commodities which the merchauntes may have by this trade into Persia, are
thought to be great, The commodity which English merchants may have by the
trade into Persia.
and may in time perhaps be greater then the Portugalles trade into the East
Indies, forasmuch as by the way of Persia into England, the return may be
made every year once, whereas the Portugalles make the return from Calecut but
once in two years, by a long and dangerous vyage all by sea: for whereas the
city and Island of Ormus, lying in the goulfe of Persia, is the most famous
mart town of all East India, whyther all the merchaundies of India are
brought, the same may in shorter time, and more safely, be brought by land and
ryuers through Persia, even unto the Caspian sea, and from thence by the
countries of Russia or Moscouia by ryuers, even unto the city of Yeraslaue,
and from thence by land a hundred and fourscore miles to Vologda: and from
thence again al by water, even unto England.

The merchaundies which be had out of Persia for the return of wares, are
sylke of all sorts and colors, both raw and wrought: Also all manner of
spices and drugges, Pearls and precious stones: likewise carpettes of diverse
sorts, with diverse other rich merchaundies, whereof you may read more here
before in the Chapter entitled, Of the trafique of Persia with other
countries. It was told me of them that came last from Persia, that there is
more sylke brought into some one city of Persia, then is of cloth brought into
the city of London. Also that one village of Armenia, named Gilgat, does carry
yearly five hundred, and sometime a thousand mules laden with sylke to Halepo
in Sorya of Turkye, being four days journey of Tripoli, where the Uenetians
have their continual abidyng, and send from thence sylkes, which they return
for English carses, and other clothes, into al parts of Christendom.

The manner how the Christians become Busor men, and forsake their religion.
I Have noted here before, that if any Christian will become a Busor man, that
is, one that has forsaken his faith, and be a Mahumetan of their religion,
they give him many gifts, and sometime also a living. The manner is, that when
the devil is entered into his heart to forsake his faith, he resorteth to the
Soltan or gouernoure of the town, to whom he makes protestation of his
diuilyshe purpose. The gouernoure appoynteth him a horse, and one to ride
before him on an other horse, bearyng a swoorde in his hand, and the Busor man
bearyng an arowe in his hand, and rydeth in the city, cursyng his father and
mother: and if ever after he return to his own religion, he is guilty of
death, as is signified by the swoorde borne before him. A young man, a servant
of one of our merchauntes, because he would not abide the correction of his
master for his faults, was minded to forsake his faith. But (as God would)
he fell sodaynely sick and dyed, before he gave him self to the devil. If he
had become a Busor man, he had greatly troubled the merchauntes, for if he
would then have said that half their goods had been his, they would have given
credit unto him. For the auoydyng of which inconvenience, it was granted in
the privileges that no Busor man etc. as there appears.

In Persia in diverse places, oxen and kine bear the tents and household
stuff of the poor men of the country, Oxen and kyne bear burdens.
which have neither Camelles nor horses.

Of the tree which bears Bombasine cotton. or Gossampine
IN Persia is great abundance of Bombasine cotton, and very fine, this grows
on a certain little tree or bryer, not past the height of a man's waste, or
little more: the tree has a slender stalk, like unto a brier, or to a carnation
gyleflour, with very many branches, bearyng on every branch a fruit, or
rather a codde, growyng in round form, conteynyng in it the cotton: and when
this budde or codde comes to the bygnesse of a wallnut, it opens and
shows forth the cotton, which grows still in bygnesse until it be like a
fleece of wool as byg as a man's fyst, and begins to be loose: and then they
geather it as it were the ripe fruit. The seeds of these trees, are as byg as
peason, and are black, and somewhat flat, and not round: they sow them in
plowed ground, where they grow in the fields in great abundance in many
countries in Persia, and diverse other regions.

The writing of the Persians.
ARthur Edwardes showed me a letter of the Sophie, written in their letters
backward, subsigned with the hands both of the Sophie and his secretarye. The
Sophies subscription, was only one word (his name I suppose of Shaugh) written
in golden letters upon red paper. The whole letter was also written on the same
piece of red paper, being long and narrow, about the length of a foot, and
not past three inches broad. The private signet of the Sophie, was a round
prynted mark, about the byggenesse of a Ryall, only prynted upon the same
paper, without any wax or other seal: the letters seem so myshapen and
disordered, that a man would think it were somewhat scribled in manner at
adventures. Yet they say that almost every letter with his prick or
circumflexe, signifies a whole word. Insomuch that in a piece of paper as
bygge as a man's hand, their writing does conteyne as much as does ours almost
in a sheet of paper.

The two viages made out of England into Guinea in Affricke, at the charges of
certain merchantes adventurers of the city of London, in the year of our
Lord* 1553.
BEing desired by certain of my friends, to make some mention of these
viages, that some memory thereof might remain to our posterity, if either
iniquity of time, consumyng all things, or ignoranuce creepyng in by
barbarousnesse and contempt of knowledge, should hereafter bury in oblivion so
worthy attempts, so much the greatlyer to be esteemed, as before never
enterprysed by English men, or at the least so frequented, as at this present
they are, and may be, to the great commodity of our merchantes, if the same be
not hyndred by the ambition of such, Ambision.
as for the conquesting of forty or fyftie miles here and there, and erectyng
of certain fortresses, or rather blockehouses among naked people, think them
selves worthy to be lords of half the world, envying that other should enjoy
the commodities, which they them selves can not wholly possess. And although
such as have been at charges in the discoueryng and conquestyng of such
lands, ought by good reason to have certain privileges, preheminences, and
tributes for the same, yet (to speak under correction) it may seem somewhat
rigorous, and against good reason and conscience, or rather against the
charity that ought to be among Christian men, that such as violentlye invade
the dominions of other, should not permit other friendly to use the trade of
merchandies, in places nearer, or seldom frequented of them, whereby their
trade is not hyndred in such places, where they them selves have at their own
election appointed the martes of their traffic. But forasmuch as at this
present, it is not my intent to accuse or defend, approve or improve, I will
cease to speak any further hereof, and proceade to the description of the
first viage, as breefely and faithfully as I was advertised of the same, by the
information of such credible persons, as made diligent inquisition to know the
truth hereof, as much as shall be requisite, omittyng to speak of many
partiticuler things, not greatly necessary to be known: which
nevertheless, with also the exact course of the navigations, shall be more
fully declared in the second vyage. And if herein favor or friendshyp shall
perhaps cause some to think that some have been sharply touched, let them
lay a part favor and friendshyp, and give place to truth, that honest men
may receive praise for well doing, and lend persons reproach, as the just
stipende of their evil desartes, whereby other may be deterred to do the
like, and virtuous men encouraged to proceed in honest attemptes.

But that these vyages may be more plainly understood of all men, I have
thought good for this purpose, before I entreat hereof, to make a brief
description of Africa, Africa.
being that great part of the world, on whose Weste side begins the coaste
of Guinea at Cabo Verde, about the twelve degrees in latitude, on this side the
Equinoctial line, The coast of Guinea.
and two degrees in longitude from the measuryng line, so runnyng from the
North to the South, and by East in some places within.v.iiii. and.iii. degrees
and a half within the Equinoctial, and so forth in manner direcly East and by
North, for the space of xxxvi. degrees, or there about, in longitude from the
West to the East, as shall more plainly appear in the description of the
second vyage.

A brief description of Affrike.
IN Africa the less are these kingdoms: the kingdom of Tunes and
Constantina, Tunes.
which is at this day under Tunes, and also the region of Bugia, Tripoli, and
Ezzah. Bugia. Tripoli.
This part of Afrike is very baren by reason of the great desartes, Numidia.
as the desartes of Numidia and Barcha The principal ports of the kingdom of
Tunes are these: Goletta, Bizerta, Potofarnia, Boua, and Stora. The chief
cities of Tunes, are Constantina, and Boua, with diverse other. Under this
kingdom are many Islands, as Zerbi, Islands of Tunes. Malta.
Lampadola, Pantalarea, Limoso, Beit, Gamelaro, and Malta, where at this
present is the great master of the Rodes. Under the South of this kingdom,
are the great desartes of Libia. The desartes of Libia.
All the nations in this Africa the less, are of the sect of Mahumet, and a
rusticall people, living scattered in villages. The best of this part of
Afrike, Barbary.
is Barbaria, lying on the coast of the sea Mediterraneum.

Mauritania.
Mauritania (now called Barbaria) is divided into two parts, as Mauritania
Tingitania, and Cesariensis. Mauritania Tingitania, is now called the kingdom
of Fes, and the kingdom of Marrocko. The kinkdoms of Fes and marrocko.
The principal city of Fes, is called Fessa: and the chief city of
Marrocko, is named Marrocko. Mauritania Cesariensis, is at this day called the
kingdom of Tremisen, Tremisen.
with also the city called Tremisen or Telensin. This region is full of
desartes, and reaches to the sea Mediterraneum, to the city of Oram, with the
port of Massaquiber. Oram. Massaquiber.
The kingdom of Fes reaches unto the Ocean sea, from the West to the city of
Argilla: and the port of the said kingdom is called Salla. Salla.


The kingdom of Marrocko is also extended above the Ocean sea, unto the city
of Azamor and Azafi, which are above the Ocean sea toward the West of the
said kingdom. Azamor.
In Mauritania Tingitania (that is to say, in the two kingdoms of Fes and
Marrocko) are, The Islands of Canarie.
in the sea, the Islands of Canarie, called in old time the fortunate Islands.
Toward the South of this region, Guinea.
is the kingdom of Guinea, with Senega, Iaiofo, Gambra, and many other regions
of the black Moors, Ethiopians.
called Ethiopians or Negros, all which are watered with the river Negro,
called in old time Niger. In the said regions are no cities, but only
certain low cotages made of boughs of trees, plastered with chauke, and
covered with straw: In these regions are also very great desartes.

Marrocko.
The kingdom of Marrocko has under it these seven kyngdoms: Hea, Sus, Guzula,
the territory of Marrocko, Duchala, Hazchora, Fes.
and Telde. The kingdom of Fes has as many: as Fes, Temesne, Azgar, Elabath,
Errifi, Garet, and Elcauz. The kingdom of Tremisen has these regions:
Tremisen.
Tremisen, Tenez, and Elgazaet, Guinea.
all which are Machometistes. But all the regions of Guinea are pure Gentyles
and Idolatours, without profession of any religion, or other knowledge of God,
then by the law of nature.

Africa the great.
Africa the great, is one of the three parts of the world, known in old
time, and severed from Asia, on the East by the river Nilus, on the West, from
Europe by the pillars of Hercules. The hither part is now called Barbary, and
the people Moors. The inner part is called Libia and Ethiopia. Affricke the
leasse.
Afrike the less, is in this wise bounded: On the West it has Numidia: On the
East Cyrenaica: On the North, the sea called Mediterraneum. In this country
was the noble city of Carthage. Carthage.


In the East side of Afric, beneath the red sea, dwells the great and
myghtie Emperor and Christian king Prester John, Prester John.
well known to the Portugales in their vyages to Calicut. His dominions reach
very far on every side: and has under him many other kings both Chrystian
and heathen that pay him tribute. This mighty prince is called David
The Emperor of Ethiopia. Some write, that the king of Portugale sends him
yearly.viii. ships laden with marchaundies. His kingdom confineth with the red sea, and reaches far into Afrike toward Egypt and Barbary. Cape de
Buona Speranza. The sea of sand. Alcair.
Southwarde it confineth with the sea toward the cape de Buona Speranza: and
on the other side with the sea of sand, called Mare de Sabione, a very
dangerous sea, lying between the great city of Alcayer, or Cairo in Egypt,
and the country of Ethiopia: In the which way are many uninhabitable deserts,
continuing for the space of five days journey. And they affirm, that if the
said Christian Emperor were not hyndered by those desartes (in the which is
great lack of victualles, and especially of water) he would or now have
invaded the kingdom of Egypt, and the city of Alcayer. The chief city of
Ethiopia, where this great Emperor is resident, is called Amacaiz, being a
fair city, whose inhabitants are of the color of an Olyue. There are also
many other cities, as the city of Saua upon the river of Nilus, where
The Emperor is accustomed to remain in the summer season. There is likewise a
great city named Barbaregaf, and Ascon, from whence it is said that the
Queen of Saba came to Jerusalem to hear the wisdom of Solomon. From whence
the queen of Saba came.
This city is but little, yet very fair, and one of the chief cities in
Ethiope. In the said kingdom is a province called Manicongni, Manicongni.
whose king is a Moore, and tributarie to The Emperor of Ethiope. In this
province are many exceedyng high mountains, upon the which is said to be
the earthly Paradyse: The earthly Paradise. The trees of the Sun and Moon.
and some say that there are the trees of the Sun and Moon, whereof the
antiquity makes mention: yet that none can pass thither, by reason of great
desartes of a hundred days journey. Also beyond these mountains, is the cape
of Bona Speranza. And to have said thus much of Afrike it may suffice.

The first vyage to Guiena.
IN the year of our Lord.1553. the.xii. day of August, sailed from Porchmouth
two goodly ships, The Primrose. The Lion. The Moon.
the Primrose and the Lion, with a pynnesse called the Moon, being all well
furnished as well with men of the lustiest sort, to the number of seven score,
as also with ordinance and vyttayles, requisite to such a viage: having also
two Captains, the one a stranger, called Antoniades Pinteado, a Portugale,
borne in a town named the port of Portugale, Pinteado.
a wise, discreet, and sober man, who for his cunnyng in saylyng, being as
well an expert pylot as politic Captain, was sometime in great favor with
the king of Portugale, and to whom the coasts of Brasile and Guinea, were
committed to be kept from the Frenchmen, Brasile. Guinea.
to whom he was a terror on the sea in those parts, and was furthermore a
Gentelman of the king his masters house. But as fortune in manner never
favors but flattereth, The flatteryng of fortune.
never promises but deceives, never rayseth but casts down again, and as
great wealth and favor has always companions emulation and envy, he was
after many adversities and quarrels made against him, enforced to come into
England: where in this golden vyage he was evil matched with an unequal
companion, and unlike match of most sundry qualities and conditions, with
virtues few or none adourned. Thus departed these noble ships under sail on
their vyage. But first Captain Wyndam, puttyng forth of his ship at
Porchmouth, a kynseman of one of the head merchants, and showing herein a
muster of the tragical parts he had conceived in his brain, and with such
small begynnynges nouryshed so monstrous a birth, that more happy, yea and
blessed was that young man being left behind, The Islands of Madera.
then if he had been taken with them, as some do wish he had done the like by
theyrs. Thus sailed they on their vyage, until they came to the Islands of
Madera, where they took in certain wynes for the store of their ships, and
paid for them as they agreed of the price. At these Islands they met with a
great Galion of the king of Portugale, full of men and ordinance: A galeon of
the king of Portugale.
yet such as could not have prevailed if it had attempted to withstand or
resist our ships, for the which cause it was set forth, not only to let and
interrupte these our ships of their purposed viage, but all other that should
attempt the like: yet chiefly to frustrate our vyage. For the King of
Portugale was sinisterly informed that our ships were armed to his castle of
Mina in these parties, The Castle of Mina.
whereas nothing less was meant.

After that our ships departed from the Islands of Madera forward on their
vyage, began this worthy Captain Pinteados sorrow, as a man tormented with
the company of a terrible Hydra, who hitherto flattered with him, and made him
a fair countenance and show of love. Then did he take upon him to command
all alone, setting naught both by Captain Pinteado, with the rest of the
merchante factours: sometimes with opprobrious words, and sometimes with
threatenings, most shamefully abusing them, taking from Pinteado the service of
the boys and certain mariners that were assigned him by the order and
direction of the woorshipfull merchauntes, and leauyng him as a common mariner,
which is the greatest despite and grief that can be to a Portugale or
Spanyarde, to be diminishte their honor, which they esteem above all riches.
Thus saylyng forward on their vyage, they came to the Islands of Canarie, The
Islands of Canarie. The Island of S. Nicolas.
continuing their course from thence until they arrived at the Island of
Saint Nicolas, where they vyttayled them selves with fresh meat, of the
flesh of wild Goats, whereof is great plenty in that Island, and in manner
of nothing else. From hence following on their course, and tarying here and
there at the desarte Islands in the way, because they would not come to tymely
to the country of Guinea for the heat, Guinea.
and tarying somewhat to long (for what can be well mynistred in a common
wealth, where inequality with tyranny will rule alone) they came at the
length to the first land of the country of Guinea, The river of Sesto.
where they fell with the great river of Sesto, where they might for their
merchandies have laden their ships with the graynes of that country, Graynes.
which is a very hot fruit, and much like unto a fygge as it grows on the
tree. For as the fygges are full of small seeds, so is the said fruit full
of graynes, which are lose within the codde, having in the myddest thereof a
hole on every side. This kind of spyce is much used in cold countries, and
may there be sold for great advantage, for exchange of other wares. But our
men by the persuasion or rather inforcement of this tragical Captain, not
regardyng, and setting light by that commodit^e, in comparison to the fine
gold they thirsted, The thirst of gold.
sailed an hundred leagues further, until they came to the golden land: where
not attemptyng to come near the Castle parteynyng to the king of Portugale,
The Castle of Mina.
which was within the river of Mina, made sale of their were only on this side
and beyond it, for the gold of that country, The quantity of gold.
to the quantity of an hundred and fyftie pounds weight, there being in case
that they might have dispatched all their ware for gold, if the vntame brain
of Wyndam had or could have given ear to the counsel and experience of
Pinteado. For when that Wyndam, not satisfied with the gold which he had (and
more might have had if he had tarried about the Mina) commaundyng the said
Pinteado (for so he took upon him) to lead the ships to Benin, Benin.
being under the Equinoctial line, and a hundred and fyftie leagues beyond
the Mina, where he looked to have their ships laden with pepper: and being
counsayled of the said Pinteado, Pepper.
considering the late time of the year, for that time to go no further, but
to make sale of their wares such as they had for gold, whereby they might
have been great gayners. But Wyndam not assentyng hereunto, fell into a sudden
rage, Fury admits no counsel.
reuilyng the said Pinteado, calling him Jew, with other opprobrious words,
saying, This horson Jew has promised to bring us to such places as are not,
or as he can not bring us unto: but if he do not, I will cut of his ears, and
nail them to the mast. Pinteado gave the foresaid counsel to go no
further, for the safegarde of the men and their lives, which they should put
in danger if they came to late, for the rossia which is their winter, The
Rossia. Rottyng heat.
not for cold but for smotheryng heat, with close and cloudie air, and
storming wether, of such putrefying quality, that it rotted the coats of
their backs: or else for coming to soon for the scorching heat of the sun,
Scorchyng heat.
which caused them to linger in the way. But of force, and not of will,
brought he the ships before the river of Benin: where rydyng at an Anchor,
Benin.
sent their pinnesse up into the river fyftie or threescore leagues, from
whence certain of the merchauntes with Captain Pinteado, Francisco a
Portugale, Francisco. Nicolas Lamberte.
Nicolas Lambert Gentelman, and other merchauntes, were conducted to the court
where the king remained, ten leagues from the river side: whyther when they
came, they were brought with a great company to the presence of the King, The
king of Banin his court.
who being a black Moore (although not so black as the rest) sat in a great
houge hal, long and wide, the walls made of earth, without windows, the roof
of thynne boordes, open in sundry places, like unto lovers, to let in the air.

And here to speak of the great reverence they give to their king, Reverence
toward the king.
being such that if we would give as much to our savior Christ, we should
remove from our heads many plagues which we daily deserve for our contempt
and impiety.

So it is therefore, that when his noble men are in his presence, they never
look him in the face, but sit couryng, as we upon our knees, so they upon
their buttockes, with their elbowes upon their knees, and their hands before
their faces, not looking up until the King command them. And when they are
coming toward the King, as far as they do see him, do they show such
reverence, syttyng on the ground with their faces covered as before. Likewise
when they depart from him, they turn not their backs toward him, but go
creeping backwarde with like reverence.

And now to speak somewhat of the communication that was between the King
and our men, The communication between the king of Benin and our men.
you shall first understand that he him self could speak the Portugale
tongue, which he had learned of a child. Therefore after that he had
commanded our men to stand up, and demanded of them the cause of their
coming into that country, they answered by Pinteado, that they were
merchauntes, traueylyng into those parties for the commodities of his country,
for exchange of wares which they had brought from their countries, being such
as should be no less commodious for him and his people. The King then having
of old lying in a certain store house thirty or forty kyntalles of pepper
(every kyntall being an hundred weight) wyllyng them to look upon the same,
Pepper.
and again to bring him a sight of such merchaundies as they had brought with
them. And therevppon sent with the Captain and the merchauntes, certain of
his men to conducte them to the waters side, with other to bring the ware from
the pinnesse to the court. Who when they were returned and the wares seen,
the king grew to this end with the merchantes, The kings gentelnesse toward
our men.
to provide in thirty days the ladyng of all their ships with pepper. And
in case their merchaundies would not extend to the value of so much pepper,
he promised to credit them to their next return: and therevppon sent the
country round about to geather pepper, causing the same to be brought to the
court: So that within the space of thirty days they had geathered fourscore
tun of pepper.

In the mean season, our men partly having no rule of them selves, The
disorder and death of our men.
but eating without measure of the fruits of the country, and drinkyng the
wine of the Palm trees that droppeth in the night from the cut branches of
the same, and in such extreme heat runnyng continually into the water, not
used before to such sudden and vehement alterations (then the which nothing
is more dangerous) were thereby brought into swellynges and agues: insomuche
that the later time of the year coming on, caused them to dye sometimes.iii.
and sometimes.iiii. or.v. in a day. Then Windam perceiving the time of the.xxx.
days to be expired, and his men dying so fast, sent to the court in post to
captain Pinteado, and the rest, to come away, and to tarry no longer. But
Pinteado, with the rest, wrote back to him again, certifying him of the great
quantity of pepper they had already geathered, and looked daily for much more:
Desiring him furthermore to remember the great praise and name they should wyn,
if they came home prosperously, and what shame of the contrary. With which
answer Wyndam not satisfied, and many of their men dying daily, willed and
commanded them again either to come away furthwith, or else threatened to
leave them behind. When Pinteado heard this aunsweare, thynkyng to persuade
him with reason, took his way from the court toward the ships, being
conducted thither with men by the kings commandment.

In the mean season Windam all rageyng, brake up Pinteados Cabin, brake open
his chestes, spoiled such provision of cold stylled waters and suckettes as he
had provided for his health, and left him nothing, neither of his instruments
to sail by, nor yet of his apparel: and in the mean time falling sick him
self, dyed also. Whose death Pinteado, coming abroad, The death of wyndan.

Pinteado evil used of the maryners.


lamented as much as if he had been the dearest friend he had in the world.
But certain of the maryners and other officers did spette in his face, some
calling him Jew, saying that he had brought them thither to kill them: and
some drawyng their swoordes at him, making a show to slay him. Then he,
perceyuyng that they would needs away, desired them to tarry, that he might
fetch the rest of the merchauntes that were left at the court. But they
would not grant his request. Then desired he them to give him the ship
boat, with as much of an old sail as might serve for the same, promisyng
them therewith to bring Nicolas Lambert and the rest into England: But al was
in vain. Then wrote he a letter to the court to the merchants, This Lambart
was a Lo^dener borne, whose father had been Lord mayre of London, and this
Lambart sometime a knight of the rodes, one as he was unmarried, so he lived in
the fear of God, and was the first of that order that forsook the Pope, and
cla^e to Gods holy word. The death of Pinteado.
informyng them of all the matter, and promisyng them if God would lend him
life to return with all have to fetch them. And thus was Pinteado kept a
bordeshyppe against his will, thrust among the boys of the ship, not used
like a man, nor yet like an honest boy, but glad to find favor at the cooks
hand. Then departed they, leaving one of their ships behynd them, which they
sonke for lack of men to carry her. After this, within six or seven days
saylyng, dyed also Penteado, for very pensiveness and thought that stroke him
to the heart: A man worthy to serve any prince, and most vilely used. And of
seuenscore men came home to Plymmowth scarsely forty, and of them many dyed.
And that no man should suspect these words which I have said in commendation
of Pinteado, to be spoken upon favor otherwise then truth, I have thought
good to ad hereunto the coppie of the letters which the king of Portugale and
the infant his brother wrote unto him, to reconcyle him, at such time as upon
the king his masters displeasure (and not for any other crime or offense, as
may appear by the said letters) he was only for poverty enforced to come
into England, where he first persuaded our merchauntes to attempt the said
vyages to Guinea. But as the king of Portugale to late repented him that he had
so punyshed Pinteado, upon malicious informations of such as envied the man's
good fortune, even so may it hereby appear, that in some cases, even Lions
them selves, may either be hyndred by the contempt, or aided by the help of
the poor myse, according unto the fable of Esope.

The copy of Antoni Anes Pinteado his letters patentes, whereby the king of
Portugale made him knight of his house, after al his troubles and imprisonment,
which, by wrong information made to the king, he had sustained of long time,
being at the last delivered, his cause known and manifested to the king by a
gray friar the kings confessor.
I The king do give you to understand lord Frances Desseosa, one of my
counsel, and ouerseer of my house, that in consideration of the good service
which Antonie Anes Pinteado, the son of John Anes, dwelling in the town
called the port, has done unto me, my will and pleasure is, to make him knight
of mi house, Seven hundred reis are.x. s. Alcayre is half a bushel.
alowing to him in pension seven hundred reis monthly, and every day one
alcayre of barley, as long as he keeps a horse, and to be paid according to
the ordinance of my house. Prouydyng always that he shall receive but one
marriage gift: And this also in such condition, that the time which is excepted
in our ordinance, forbiddyng such men to marry for gettyng such children as
might succeed them in this alowance, which is six years after the making of
this patent, shall be first expired before he do mary. I therefore command you to
cause this to be entered in the book called the Matricola of our household,
under the title of knights. And when it is so entered, let the clarke of ye
Matricola, for the certainty thereof, write on the backsyde of this Aluala, or
patent, the number of the leaf wherein this our grant is entered. Which done,
let him return this writing unto the said Anthony Anes Pinteado for his
warrant.

I Diego Henriques have written this in Almarin the twenty and two day of
September, in the year of our Lord.1551. And this benevolence the king gave
unto Anthony Anes Pinteado the twenty and five day of July this present year.

Rey.

The secretaries declaration written under the kings grant.
YOur Majesty has vouchsafed, in respect and consideration of the good
service of Anthony Anes Pinteado, dwelling in the port, and son of John
Anes, to make him knight of your house, with ordinary allowance, of seven
hundred Reys pension by the month, and one Alcayr of Barley by the day, as
long as he keeps a Horse: and to be paid according to the ordinance of your
house, with condition that he shall have but one marriage gift: and that not
within the space of.vi. years after the making of these letters patentes. The
secretaries note. Entered in the book of the Matricola. Fol. 683.

Francisco de Siquera.

The coppie of the letter of Don Jews the infant, and brother to the king of
Portugale: sent into England to Anthony Anes Pinteado.
Anthony Anes Pinteado, I the infant brother to the king, have me heartily
commended unto you. Peter Gonsalues is gone to seek you, desiring to bring you
home again into your country. And for that purpose, has with him a safe
conduct for you, granted by the king, that thereby you may freelye and
without all fear come home. And allthough the weather be foul and stormye,
yet fail not to come: For in the time that his Majesty has given you, you
may do many things to your contentation and gratyfiyng the king, whereof I
would be right glad: and to bring the same to pass, will do all that lies in
me for your profit. But forasmuch as Peter Gonsalues will make further
declaration hereof unto you, I say no more at this present.

Written in Luxburne the eight day of December. Anno. M.D.LII. The infant Don
Jews.
AL these forsayde wrytynges I saw under seal, in the house of my friend
Nicholas Liese, with whom Pinteado left them, at his unfortunate departing to
Guinea. But notwithstanding all these freendly letters and fair promises,
Pinteado durst not attempt to go home, neither to keep company with the
Portugales his country men, without the presence of other: forasmuch as he had
secret admonitions that they intended to sley him, if time and place might
have served their wicked intent.



The second viage to Guinea.
AS in the first viage I have declared rather the order of the history, then
the course of the navigations, whereof at that time I could have no perfect
information: so in the description of this second viage, my chief intent has
been to (...) the course of the same, according to the observation and ordinary
custom of the maryners, and as I received it at the hands of an expert Pilot,
being one of the chief in this viage, who also with his own hands wrote a
brief declaration of the same, as he found and tried al things, not by
conjecture, but by the art of saylyng, and instruments parteynyng to the
mariners faculty. Not therefore assumyng to my self the commendations due
unto other, neither so bold as in any part to change or otherwise dispose the
order of this viage, so well observed by art and experyence, I have thought
good to set forth the same, in such sort and phrase of speech as is commonly
used among them, and as I received it of the said pilot, as I have said. Take
it therefore as follows.

In the year of our lord.1554. the.11. day of October, we departed the river
of Temmes with three goodly ships, the one called the Trinity, a ship of the
burden of seuenscore tun, the other called ye Barthelmew, a ship of the
burden of.lxxxx. the third was the John Evangelist, a ship of seuenscore tun.
With the said ships and two pynnesses (whereof the one was drowned in the
coast of England) we went forward on our vyage, and stayed at Dover.xiiii.
days. We stayed also at Rye three or four days. Moreover last of all we
touched at Darthmouth.

The first day of November at.ix of the clock at night, departing from the
coaste of England, we set of the stert, bearyng southwest all that night in
the sea, and the next day all day, and the next night after, until the third
day of the said month about noone, making our way good, did run.60. leagues.

Item from.xii. of the clock the third day, till.xii. of the clock
the.iiii. day of the said month, making our way good southest, did run
every three hours two leagues, which amounts to.xvi. leagues the whole.

Item from.x^i. of the clock the.iiii. day, to.xii. of the clock the.v. day,
running southwest in the sea, did run.xii. leagues.

Item runnyng from.xii. of the clock the.v day, until.xii. of the cloak
the.vi. day, runnyng southeast, did run xviii. leagues.

And so from.xii. of the clock the.vi. day, until.xii. of the clock the.vii.
day, runnyng southsouthwest, did run every hour.ii. leagues, which amount
to.xlviii. leagues the whole.

Item from.xii. of the clock the.vii. day, till.iii. of the clock the.viii.
day, southsouthwest runnyng in the sea, did run.xxx. leagues.

Item from three of the clock the.viii. day, until.iii. of the clock the.ix.
day, runnyng southsouthwest, did run.xxx. leagues.

Item from.iii. of the clock the.ix. day, till.iii. of the clock the.x. day,
did southsoutheast in runnyng in the sea the sum of.xxiiii. leagues.

Also from.iii. of the clock the.x. day, until.xii of the clock the.xi.
day, did run southsouthwest the sum of.xii. leagues, and from.xii. of the
clock, till.vi of the said day, did run vi. leagues.

Running south and by west in the sea, from.vi. of the clock the xi. day,
til.vi. of the clock the xii. day, did run.xxxvi. leagues.

From.vi. of the clock at after noone the.xii. day, till.vi. of the clock
the.xiii. day at after noone, did run.xiii. leagues. Item from.vi. of the
clock the.xiii. day, till.vi. of the clock the.xiiii. day at after noone, we
were becalmed, that we could lie southwest with a sail. And the.xv. day in
the morning, the wynd came to the East and Eastnortheast. The.xvii. day in the
morning, The I Will of Madera.
we had sight of the I Will of Madera, which does rise to him that comes in the
northnortheast part vpryght land in the west part of it, and very high: and to
the southsoutheast a low long land, and a long point, with a saddle thorough
the myddest of it, stands in the.xxxii. degrees: and in the west part, many
sprynges of water runnyng down from the mountain, and many white fields like
unto corn fields, and some white houses to the southeast part of it: and the
top of the mountain shows very ragged if you may see it, and in the
northeast part there is a byght or bay as though it were a harborowe: Also in
the said part, there is a rock a little distance from the shore, and over the
said byght, you shall see a great gap in the mountain.

The.xix. day at.xii. of the clock, we had sight of the I Will of Palms and
Teneriffa and the Canaries. The I Will of palms. Teneriffa. The Canaries.
The I Will of Palm rises round, and lies southeast and northwest, and the
northwest part is lowest. In the south, is a round hill over the head land, and
an other round hill above that in the land. There is between the Southeast part
of the I Will of Madera and the northwest part of the I Will of Palm.lvii. leagues.
From Madera to the I Will of Palms.
This I Will of Palm lies in the.xxix. degrees. And our course from Madera to
the I Will of Palm was south, and south and by west, so that we had sight of
Teneriffa and of the Canaries. The southeast part of the I Will of Palm, and the
northnortheast of Teneriffa, lies southeast and northwest, and between them
is twenty leagues. Teneriffa and the great Canarie, called Grancanaria, and
the West part of Fortisuentura, stands in.xxvii. degrees and a half. Gomera,
Grancanaria. Fortisuentura. The Island of Gomera.
is a fair Island and very ragged, and lies West Southwest of Teneriffa. And
who so ever will come between them two Islands, must come South and by East,
and in the South part of Gomera is a town and a good rode in the said part
of the Island: and it stands in twenty and seven degrees and three terces.
Teneriffa is an high land, and a great high pycke, like a sugar loaf:
Teneriffa. Snow.
and upon the said pick is snow throughout all the whole year. And by reason
of that pycke it may be known above al other Islands, and there we were
becalmed the.xx. day of November, from six of the clock in the morning, until
four of the clock at after noone.

Between Gomera, and Cape de las Barbas.
THe.xxii. day of November, under the Tropyke of Cancer, the Sun goes down
West and by South. The coast of Barbary. Cape blanke.
Upon the coast of Barbary.xxv. leagues by North Cape blanke at three leagues
of the main, there is.xv. fadome, and good shelly ground, and sand among, and
no streams, and two small Islands standing in the.xxii. degrees and a terce.

From Gomera to Cape de las Barbas is an hundred leagues, and our course was
South and by East. The said Cape stands in xxii. and a half: and all that
coast is flat.xvi. or xvii. fadome deep. Uii. or.viii, leagues of from the
river de Oro to cape de las Barbas, The river of de Oro.
there use many Spanyardes and Portugales to trade for fyshyng, during the
month af November: and all that coast is very low lands. Also we went from
cape de las Barbas southsouthwest, and southwest and by south, till we brought
our selves in.xx. degrees and a half, reckonyng our selves.vii. leagues of:
and that was the least sholes of cape Blanke.

Then we went South, until we brought our selves in thyrtene degrees, reckonyng
our selves twenty and five leagues of. And in fyfteene degrees, we did rear
the crossiers, The Cros^ers or cross s^arres*
and we might have reared them sooner if we had looked for them: They are not
right a Cross in the month of November, by reason of the nyghtes are short
there. Nevertheless we had the sight of them the.xxix. day of the said month
at night.

The first of December out thyrteene degrees, we set our course South and by
East, until the fourth day of December at twelve of the clock the same day.
Then we were in niene degrees and a terce, reckonyng our selves thyrtye leagues
of the sholes of the river called Ria Grande, Rio Grande.
being West Southwest of them: the which sholes be thyrtie leagues long.

The fourth of December* we began to set our course Southeast, we being in six
degrees and a half.

The nienth day of December we set our course East Southeast: the fourteenth
day of the said month, we set our course East, we being in five degrees and a
half, reckonyng our selves thyrtie and six leagues from the coast of Guinea.

The.xix. of the said month, we set our course East and by North, Cape
Mensurado.

The river of Sesto.


reckoning our selves.xvii. leagues distant from Cape Mensurado, the said Cape
being East. Northeast of us, and the river of Sesto being East.

The.xxi. day of the said month, we fell with Cape Mensurado to the Southeast,
about two leagues of. This Cape may be easily known, by reason the rysyng of
it is like a Porpose head. Also toward the Southeast there are three trees,
whereof the Eastermost tree is the highest, and the myddlemost is like a hie
stacke, and the Southermost like unto a Gibet: and upon the main, are four
or five high hills rysyng one after an other like round hoommockes or
hyllockes. And the Southeast of the three trees, is three trees like a
brandierwyse: and all the coast along is white sand. The said Cape stands
within a little in six degrees.

The.xxii. of December, we came to the river of Sesto, and remained there
until the.xxix. day of the said month. Here we thought it best to send
before us the pynnesse to the river of Dulce, called Rio Dulce, that they might
have the beginning of the market before the coming of the John.

At the river of Sesto, we had a Tun of graynes. This river stands in.vi.
degrees, The river of Sesto.

Rio Dulce.


lackyng a terce. From the river of Sesto to Rio Dulce, is.xxv. leagues. Rio
Dulce stands in five degrees and a half. The river of Sesto is easy to be
known, by reason there is a ledge of rocks on the Southeast part of the
Rode. And at the entryng into the haven, are five or six trees that bear no
leaves. This is a good harborowe, but very narow at the entrance into the
river. There is also a rock in the havens mouth right as you enter. And all
that coast between Cape de Monte, and cape de las Palmas, lies Southeast and
by East, Cape de monte.
Northwest and by West, being three leagues of the shore, And you shall have in
some places rocks two leagues of: and that between the river of Sesto and
cape de las Palmas. Cape de las Palmas.


Between the river of Sesto and the river Dulce. is.xxv. leagues: and the high
land that is between them both, is called Cakeado, The land of Cakeado.
being eight leagues from the river of Sesto. And to the Southeastwarde of him,
is a place called Shawgro, and an other called Shyawe or Shauo, where you may
get fresh water. Shauo.
Of this Shyawe, lies a redge of rocks: and to the Southeastwarde, lies a
hedlande called Croke. Between Cakeado and Croke, Croke.
is.ix. or ten leagues. To the Southeastwarde of, is a harborowe called saint
Vincent: Right over against saint Vincent, Saint Vincentes harborowe.
is a rock under the water, two leagues and a half of the shore. To the
Southeastwarde of that rock you shall see an Island about three or four
leagues of: this Island is not paste a league of the shore. To the East
Southeast of the Island, is a rock that lies above the water, and by that
rock goes in the river of Dulce, The river Dulce.
which you shall know by the said river and rock. The Northwest side of the
haven, is flat sand, and the Southeast side thereof, is like an Island, and
a bare platte without any trees, and so is it not in any other place.

In the Rode, you shall ride in xiii. or.xiiii. fadomes, good owes and sand,
being the marks of the Rode to bring the Island and the Northeast land
together, and here we Ankered the last of December.

The third day of January, we came from the river of Dulce.

Note that cape de las Palmas, is a fair high land, Cape de las Palmas.
but some low places thereof by the water side look like read cliffes with
white strakes like ways, a cable length a piece, and this is to the East part
of the cape. This cape is the Southermost land in all the coast of Guinea, The
coast of Guinea.
and stands in four degrees and a terce.

The coast from Cape de las palmas to Cape Trepoyntes, or the tres Puntas, is
fair and clear without rock or other danger.

Twenty and five leagues from Cape de las Palmas, the land is higher then in
any place, until we come to Cape Trepoyntes. And about ten leagues before you
come to Cape Trepoyntes, the land ryseth still higher and higher, until you
come to Cape Trepoyntes. Also before you come to the said Cape, after other
five leagues to the Northwest part of it, there is certain broken ground,
with two great rocks, and within them in the byght of a bay, The castle of
Arra.
is a castle called Arra, parteining to the king of Portugale. You shall know it
by the said rocks that lie of it: for there is none such from Cape de las
Palmas to cape Trepoyntes. This coast lies East and by North, West and by
South. From Cape de las Palmas to the said castle, is fourscore and fyfteene
leagues. And the coast lies from the said castle to the westermost point of
the Trepoyntes, Southeast and by South, Northwest and by North. Also the
westermost point of the Trepoyntes, is a low land, lying half a mile out in
the sea: and upon the innermoste neck to the land ward, is a tuft of trees,
and there we arrived the eleventh day of January.

The town of Samma.
The twelf day of January, we came to a town called Samma or Samua, being.viii.
leagues from Cape Trepoyntes toward East Northeast. Between Cape Trepoyntes
and the town of Samua, is a great ledge of rocks a great way out in the sea.
We continued four days at that town: and the captain thereof would needs
have a pledge a shore. The pledge was sir John yo^k his neuew.
But when they received the pledge, they kept him still, and would traffic no
more, but shot of their ordinance at us. They have two or three pieces of
ordinance and no more. The.xvi. day of the said mooneth, we made reckonyng to
come to a place called Cape Corea, Cape Corea.
where captain Don Ihon dwells, whose men entertained us friendly. This Cape
Corea, is four leagues Eastwarde of the castle of Mina, other wise called La
mina or Castello de mina, The castle of mina parteynyng to the king of
Portugale.
where we arrived the.xviii. day of the month. Here we made sail of all our
cloth, saving two or three packes.

The.xxvi. day of the same month we weighed anchor, and departed from thence to
the Trinity, which was.vii. leagues Eastwarde of us, where she sold her
wares. Then they of the Trinity wylled us to go Eastwarde of that.viii or.ix.
leagues, to sell part of their wares, in a place called Perecow, Perecowe.
Perecowe grands.
and an other place named Perecow Grande, being the eastermost place of both
these, which you shall know by a great round hill near unto it, named Monte
Rodondo, lying westward from it, Monte rodond^.
and by the water side are many high palm trees. From hence did we set forth
homewarde the.xiii. day of February, and plied up alongest till we came
within.vii or.viii. leagues to Cape Trepointes. About.viii. of the clock
the.xv. day at afternoon, we did cast about to seawarde: and beware of the
currantes, The currantes
for they will deceive you sore. Whosoever shall come from the coaste of Mina
homewarde, From Mina homewarde.
let him be sure to make his way good west, until he reckon him self as far
as Cape de las Palmas, where the current sets always to the eastwarde. And
within.xx. leagues eastwarde of Cape de las Palmas, is a river called De los
Potos, where you may have fresh water and balasse enough, Rio de los Potos.

Iuerye.


and plenty of Iuery or Elephantes teeth. This river stands in four
degrees, and almost two terces. And when you reckon your self as far shot
as Cape de las Palmas, being in a degree, or a degree and a half, Cabe de las
Palms.
you may go west, and west by north, until you come in three degrees: and then
you may go west northwest, and northwest and by west, until you come in five
degrees, and then northwest. And in the.vi. degrees, we met northerly wyndes,
and great rooflyng of tides. And as we could judge, the currantes went to the
north northwest. Furthermore between Cape de Monte and Cape verde, go great
currantes which deceive many men. Currantes.


The.xxii. day of Apryll, we were in.viii. degrees and two terces: and so we
ran to the northwest, having the wind at northeast and east northeast, and
sometimes at east, until we were at.xviii. degrees and a terce, which was on
May day. And so from.xviii. and two terces, we had the wind at east and east
northeast, and sometimes at east southeast: and then we reckened the Islands of
Cape Verde east southeast of us, we iudgyng our selves to be.xlviii. leagues
of. And in.xx. and.xxi. degrees, we had the wind more easterly to the
southwarde then before. And so we ran to the Northwest and north northwest, and
sometimes north and by west and north, until we came into.xxxi. degrees, where
we reckoned our selves a hundred and fourscore leagues southwest, and by south
of the Island de Flore or de los Flores, The Ilede Flora.
and there we met with the wynd at south southeast, and set our course
northeast.

In.xxiii. degrees, we had the wind at the South and southwest, and then we
set our course north northeast, and so we ran to.xl. degrees, and then we set
our course northeast, the wind being at the southwest, and having the I Will de
Flore East of us, and xvii. leagues of.

In.xli. degrees, we met with the wind at Northeast, and so we ran
northwestwarde, then we met with the wind at the west northwest, and at the
west within.vi. leagues, runnyng toward the northwest, and then we cast about,
and lay northeast, until we came in.xlii. degrees, where we set our course
East northeast, The I Will of Coruo.
iudgyng the I Will of Coruo south and by west of us, and xxxvi. leagues distant
from us.

A remembrance that the.xxi day of May, we communed with John Rafe, and he
thought it best to go northeast, and judged him self.xxv. leagues Eastwarde
to the I Will de Flore, and in.xxxix. degrees and a half.

Where they lost the sight of the North star.

How the compass does vary.


Note that in the fourth day of September, under niene degrees, we lost the
sight of the north star.

Note also, that in the.xlv. degrees, the compass is varied.viii. degrees to
the West.

Item, in.xl. degrees, the compass did vary.xv. degrees in the whole.

Item, in.xxx. degrees and a half, the compass is varyed.v. degrees to the
West.

Be it also in memory, that two or three days before we came to cape
Trepointes, the pynnesse went alongest the shore, thinkyng to sell some of our
wares, and so we came to Anchor three or four leagues west and by south of the
cape Trepointes, where we left the Trinity.

Then our pynnesse came aboorde with all our men: the Pynnesse also took in
more wares. They told me moreover that they would go to a place where the
Prymrose was, The Primrose.
and had received much gold at the first vyage to these parties, and told me
furthermore that it was a good place: but I fearyng a brigantine that was then
upon the coast, did wey and follow them, and left the Trinity about four
leagues of from us, and there we rode against that town four days: so that
Martine by his own desire, and assent of some of the Commissioners that were
in the pinnesse, went a shore to the town, and there John Berin went to
trafique from us, being three miles of trafcking at an other town. The town
is called Samma or Samua, for Samma and Sammaterra, are the names of the two
first towns, The town of Samma.
where we did traficke for gold, to the Northeast of cape Trepoints. Gold.


Hitherto continues the course of the vyage, as it was described by the said
Pylot. Now therefore I will speak somewhat of the country and people, and of
such things as are brought from thence.

They brought from thence at the last vyage, Gold four hundred weight.
Graynes.
four hundred pound weight and odd of gold, of.xxii. Carrattes and one grain
in finenesse: also.xxxvi. buttes of graynes, and about two hundred and fyftie
Elephantes teeth of all quantities. Of these, I saw and measured some of.ix.
spannes in length, Eleuantes teeth.
as they were crooked. Some of them were as bygge as a man's thygh above the
knee, and weyed about four score and ten pound weight a piece. They say
that some one has been seen of a hundred and.xxv. pound weight. Other there
were which they call the teeth of calves, of one or two or three years,
whereof some were a foot and a half, some two foot, and some three, or more,
according to the age of the beast. These great teeth or tuskes, grow in the
upper iawe downewarde, and not in the nether iawe upward, wherein the paynters
and arras woorkers are deceived. At this last vyage was brought from Guinea
the head of an Elephante, of such huge bygnesse, The head of an Elephant.
that only the bones or crauewe thereof, beside the nether iawe and great
tuskes, weighed about two hundred weight, and was as much as I could well
lift from the ground: insomuche that considering also heerewith the weight of
two such great teethe, the nether jaws with the less teeth, the tongue, the
great hangyng ears, the bygge and long snoute or troonke, with all the flesh,
brains, and skin, with all other parts belongyng to the whole head, in my
judgment it could wey little less then five hundred weight. This head diverse
have seen in the house of the worthy merchant sir Andrewe Iudde, where also
I saw it, and beheld it, not only with my bodyly eyes, but much more with the
eyes of my mind and spirit, considered by the work, the cunnyng and
wisdom of the workemaister: The contemplations of Gods works.
without which consideration, the sight of such strange and wonderful
things may rather seem curiosities, then profitable contemplations.

The Elephante (which some call an Oliphante) is the biggest of all four
footed beasts, The description and properties of the Elephant
his forelegges are longer then his hinder, he has ankles in the lower part
of his hinder legs, and five toes on his feet undivided, his snoute or
troonke is so long, and in such form, that it is to him in the steed of a
hand: for he neither eats nor drynketh but by bryngyng his troonke to his
mouth, therewith he helps up his master or keeper, therewith he overthrows
trees. Beside his two great tuskes, he has on every side of his mouth four
teethe, wherewith he eats and gryndeth his meat: either of these teeth, are
almost a spanne in length, as they grow along in the iawe, and are about two
inches in heyght, and almost as much in thickness. The tuskes of the Male are
greater then of the Female: his tongue is very little, and so far in his
mouth, that it can not be seen: of all beasts they are most gentle and
tractable, for by many sundry ways they are taught, and do understand:
insomuche that they learn to do due honor to a King, and are of quick sense
and sharpness of wit. When the Male has once seasoned the Female, he never
after touches her. The Male Elephante lives two hundred years, or at the
least one hundred and twenty: the Female almost as long, but the flower of
their age, is but.lx. years, as some write. They can not suffer winter or
cold: they love ryuers, and will often go into them up to the snoute,
wherewith they blow and snuff, and play in the water: but swymme they can not
for the weight of their bodies. Pliny and Solinie write, that they use none
adultery. If they happen to meet with a man in wilderness being out of the
way, gentelly they will go before him, and bring him into the plain way.
Joined in battle, they have no small respect unto them that be wounded: for
they bring them that are hurt or weary into the middle of the army to be
defended: they are made tame by drinking the iuise of barley. They have
continual war against Dragons, which desire their blood, because it is very
cold: Debate between the Elephant and the Dragon.
and therefore the Dragon lying awayte as the Elephant passes by, wyndeth his
tail (being of exceeding length) about the hinder legs of the Elephant, and
so steying him, thrusts his head into his troonke and exhausteth his breath,
or else byteth him in the ear, whereunto he can not reach with his troonke,
and when the Elephant waxes faynte, he falls down on the Serpent, being
now full of blood, and with the poyse of his body breaks him: so that his
own blood with the blood of the Elephant, runs out of him myngeled
together, which being cold, is congealed into that substance which the
Apothecaries call Sanguis Draconis, (that is) Dragons blood, otherwise called
Cinnabaris, Sanguis Draconis.
although there be an other kind of Cinnabaris, Cinnabaris.
commonly called cinoper or vermilion, which the painters use in certain
colors.

They are also of three kinds, as of the maryshes, the plains, and the
mountains, no less differyng in conditions. Three kinds of Elephantes.
Philostratus writes, that as much as the Elephant of Libia in bygnesse
passes the horse of Nysea, so much does the Elephantes of India exceed them
of Libia: for of the Elephantes of India, some have been seen of the heyght
of.ix. cubits: the other do so greatly fear these, that they dare not abide
the sight of them. Of the Indian Elephantes, only the Males have tuskes, but of
them of Ethiopia and Libia, both kinds are tusked: they are of diverse
heyghtes, as of.xii.xiii. and.xiiii. dordantes, every dodrant benig a measure
of niene inches. Some write that an Elephant is bygger then three wild Oxen or
Buffes. They of India are black, or of the color of a Mouse, but they of
Ethiope or Guinea, are brown: the hyde or skin of them all, is very hard,
and without hear or brystels: their ears are two dodrantes broad, and their
eyes very little. Our men saw one drynkyng at a river in Guinea, as they sailed
into the land.

Of other properties and conditions of the Elephant, as of their marvelous
docilicie, of their fight and use in the wars, of their generation and
chastity, when they were first seen in the theaters and tryumphes of the
Romans, how they are taken and tamed, and when they cast their tuskes, with
the use of the same in medicine, who so desires to know, let him read Pliny,
in the.viii. book of his natural history. He also writes in his xii. book,
that in old time they made many goodly works of Iuery or Elephants teeth:
Works of Iuery.
as tables, tressels, posts of houses, rayles, lattesses for wyndowes, Images
of their gods, and diverse other things of Iuery, both colored and
vncoloured, and intermyxt with sundry kinds of precious woods, as at this day
are made certain Chayres, Lutes, and Uirginalles. They had such plenty
thereof in old time, that (as far as I remember) Josephus writes, that one of
the gates of Jerusalem was called Porta Eburnea, (that is) the Iuery gate. The
whytenesse thereof was so much esteemed, that it was thought to represent the
natural fayrenesse of man's skin: insomuche that such as went about to set
forth (or rather corrupt) natural beauty with colors and payntyng, were
reproved by this proverb, Ebur atramento candefacere, that is, to make Iuery
white with ynke. The Poettes also, describyng the fair necks of beautiful
virgins, call them Eburnea colla, that is, Iuery necks. And to have said thus
much of Elephantes and Iuery, it may suffice.

Now therefore I will speak somewhat of the people and their manners, The people
of Africa.
and manner of living, with also an other brief description of Africa. It is to
understand, that the people which now inhabit the regions of the coast of
Guinea, and the myd parts of Africa, as Libia the inner, and Nubia, with
diverse other great and large regions about the same, were in old time called
Ethiopes and Nigrite, which we now call Moors, Moorens, or Negros, a people of
beastly living, without a God, law, religion, or common wealth, and so
scorched and vexed with the heat of the sun, that in many places they curse it
when it ryseth. Of the regions and people about the inner Libia (called Libia
Interior) Gemma Phrysius writes thus. Libia Interior.


Libia Interior, is very large and desolate, in the which are many horrible
Wyldernesses and mountains, replenished with diverse kinds of wild and
monstrous beasts and Serpents. First from Mauritania or Barbary toward the
South is Getulia, Getulia.
a rough and saluage region, whose inhabitauntes are wild and wanderyng
people. After these follow the people called Melanogetuli and Pharusii, which
wander in the wilderness, carrying with them great gourdes of water. The
Ethiophians, called Nigrite, occupy a great part of Aphrica, Ethiopes. Nigrite.
and are extended to the West Ocean. Southwarde also they reach to the river
Nigritis, whose nature agrees with the river of Nilus, The river Nigritis or
Senega.
forasmuch as it is increased and diminished at the same time, and brings
forth the like beasts as the Crocodile. By reason whereof, I think this to
be the same river which the Portugales call Senega: For this river is also of
the same nature. It is furthermore marvelous and very strange that is said of
this river: And this is, that on the one side thereof, A strange thing
thinhabitauntes are of high stature and black, and on the other side, of
brown or tawnie color, and low stature, which thing also our men confyrme
to be true. There are also other people of Libia called Garamantes, whose women
are common: Garamantes.
for they contracte no matrimony, neither have respect to chastity. After
these are the nations of the people called Pyrei, Sathiodaphnite, Odrangi,
Mimaces, Lynxamate, Dolopes, Agangine, People of Libia.
Leuce Ethiopes, Xilicei Ethiopes, Calcei Ethiopes, and Nubi. These have the
same situation in Ptolomie that they now give to the kingdom of Nubia. Here
are certain Christians under the dominion of the great Emperor of Ethiopia,
called Prester John. From these toward the west, Prester John.
is a great nation of people called Aphricerones, whose region (as far as may
be geathered by conjecture) is the same that is now called Regnum Orguene,
Regnum Orguene.
confinyng upon the east parts of Guinea. From hence Westwarde, and somewhat
toward the North, are the kingdoms of Gambra and Budomel, Gambra.
not far from the river of Senega. And from hence toward the inlande
regions, and along by the sea coast, are the regions of Ginoia or Guinea, which
we commonly call Gynnee. On the West side of these regions toward the Ocean,
Guinea or Cap. Perde. The Portugales nauigations to Brasile.
is the cape or point called Gabouerde, or Caput viride (that is) the green
cape, to the which the Portugales first direct their course when they sail
to America or the land of Brasile. Then departing from hence, they turn to
the right hand toward the quarter of the wind called Garbino, which is
between the west and the south. But to speak somewhat more of Ethiopia.
Ethiopia.
Although there are many nations of people so named, yet is Ethiopia chiefly
divided into two parts, whereof the one is called Ethiopia under Egypt, The
Island of Meroe.
a great and rich region. To this parteyneth the Island of Meroe, imbrased
round about with the streams of the river Nilus. In this Island women reigned
in old time. The queen of Saba.
Josephus writes, that it was sometime called Sabea: and that the queen of
Saba came from thence to Jerusalem, to bear the wisdom of Solomon. From
hence toward the East, reigns the said Christian Emperor Prester John,
whom some call Papa Johannes, Prester John Emperor of Ethiopia.
and other say that he is called Pean Iuan (that is) great John, whose Empire
reaches far beyond Nilus, and is extended to the coasts of the red sea
and Indian sea. The myddle of the region is almost in the.66. degrees of
longitude, and.xii. degrees of latitude. About this region inhabit the people
called Clodu, People of the east side of Africa.
Risophagi, Babilonij, Axiunite, Molili, and Molibe. After these is the region
called Trogloditica, whose inhabitauntes dwell in caves and dens: for these
are their houses, Ephiophagi.
and the flesh of serpents their meat, as writes Pliny, and Diodorus
Siculus. They have no speech, but rather a grynnyng and chatteryng. People
without heads.
There are also people without heads, called Blemines, having their eyes and
mouth in their breast. Likewise Strucophagi, and naked Ganphasantes: Satyrs
also, which have nothing of men but only shape. Moreover Oripei, great
hunters. Mennones also, and the region of Smyrnophora, Myrre. Azania.
which brings forth myrre. After these is the regio^ of Azania, in the which
many Elephantes are found. A great part of the other regions of Afrike that
are beyond the Equinoctial line, Regnum Melinde.
are now ascrybed to the kingdom of Melinde, whose inhabitauntes are
accustomed to traffike with the nations of Arabie, and their king is joined in
frendshyp with the king of Portugale, and pays tribute to Prester John.

The other Ethiope, called Ethiopia Interior (that is) the inner Ethiope, is
not yet known for the greatness thereof, but only by the sea coasts:
Ethiopia Interior.
yet is it described in this manner. First from the Equinoctial toward the
South, is a great region of Ethiopians, which brings forth white Elephantes,
Tigers, White Elephantes.
and the beasts called Rhinocerontes. Also a region that brings forth
plenty of Cinamome, lying between the branches of Nilus. Also the kingdom of
Habech or Habasia, a region of Christien men, Habasia.
lying both on this side and beyond Nilus. Here are also the Ethiopians,
called Ichthiophagi (that is) such as live only by fyshe, Ichthiophagi.
and were sometimes subdued by the wars of great Alexander. Furthermore the
Ethiopians called Rhapsii, and Anthropophagi, An thropophagi.
that are accustomed to man's flesh, inhabit the regions near unto the
mountains called Montes Lunae, (that is) the mountains of the Moon. Montes
Lunae.
Gazatia, is under the Tropyke of Capricorn. After this, Gazatia,
follows the front of Affrike, the Cape of Buena Speranza, or Caput Bonae
Spei, (that is) the Cape of good hope, Cape bonae Spei.
by the which they pass that sail from Spain to Calicut. But by what names
the Capes and gulfes are called, forasmuch as the same are in every globe and
card, it were here superfluous to rehearse them.

Some write that Africa was so named by the Grecians, because it is without
cold. For the Greek letter Alpha, or A, Aphrica without cold.
signifies privation, void, or without: and Phrice, signifies cold. For in
deed although in the stead of winter, they have a cloudy and tempestious
season, yet is it not cold, The winter of Africa.
but rather smootheryng hot, with also hot shewres of rain, and somewhere
such scorchyng wyndes, that what by one means and other, they seem at
certain times to live as it were in fornaces, and in manner already half way in
Purgatory or hell Gemma Phrisius writes, that in certain parts of Africa,
Flames of fire and noise in the air.
(as in Atlas the greater) the air in the night season is seen shynyng, with
many strange fyers and flames rysyng in manner as high as the Moon: and that
in the element are sometime heard as it were the sound of pypes, trumpettes,
and drommes: Which noises may perhaps be caused by the vehement and sundry
motions of such fyrye exhalations in the air, as we see the like in many
experiences wrought by fire, air, and wind. The holownesse also, and diverse
reflections and breaking of the clouds, The myddle region of the air is cold.
may be great causes hereof, beside the vehement cold of the middle region of
the air, whereby the said fyrie exhalations, ascendyng thither, are suddenly
strycken back with great force: For even commen and daily experience teaches
us, by the whyssyng of a burning Torche, what noise fire makes in the air,
The strife of elements.
and much more where it stryueth when it is enclosed with air, as appears in
gunnes, and as the like is seen in only air enclosed, as in Orgen pipes, and
such other instruments that go by wind. For wynd (as say the Philosophers) is
none other then air vehemently moved, Wind.
as we see in a pair of bellows, and such other.

Some of our men of good credit that were in this last viage to Guinea, affirm
ernestly that in the night season they felt a sensible heat to come from the
beams of the Moon. The which thing, The heat of the Moon.
although it be strange and insensible to us that inhabit cold regions, yet
does it stand with good reason that it may so be, forasmuch as the nature of
stars and planettes (as writes Pliny) consists of fire, The nature of the
stars.
and conteyneth in it a spirit of life* which can not be without heat.

And that the Moon gives heat upon the earth, the Prophet David seems to
confirm in his.Cxxi. Psalm, where speaking of such men as are defended from
evils by gods protection, he says thus: Per diem Sol non exuret te, nec
Luna per noctem. That is to say, In the day the Sun shall not burn thee, nor
the Moon by night.

They say furthermore that in certain places of the sea, they saw certain
streams of water, Spoutes of water falling out of the air.
which they call spoutes, falling out of the air into the sea, and that some
of these are as byg as the great pyllers of Churches: Insomuch that sometimes
they fall into shyps, and put them in great danger of drownyng. Some phantasye
that these should be the Caractes of Heaven, Carractes of heaven.
which were all opened at Noes fludde. But I think them rather to be such
fluxions and eruptions as Aristotle in his book de Mundo says, to chance in
the sea. For speaking of such strange things as are seen often times in the
sea, he writes thus. Oftentimes also even in the sea are seen euaporations of
fire, and such eruptions and breakyng forth of springs, that the mouths of
ryuers are opened, Whyrlepooles, and fluxions are caused of such other vehement
motions, Vehement motions in the sea.
not only in the myddest of the sea, but also in creekes and streyghtes. At
certain times also, a great quantity of water is suddenly lyfted up and
carried about with the Moon. etc. By which words of Aristotle it does
appear that such waters may be lyfted up in one place at one time, and
suddenly fall down in an other place at an other time. And hereunto perhaps
parteyneth it that Rychard Chaunceller told me that he hard Sebastian Cabot
report, that (as far as I remenber) either about the coasts of Brasile or
Rio de Plata, A strange thing.
his ship or pumesse was suddaynly lyfted from the sea, and cast upon land,
I wotte not how far. The which thing, and such other like wonderful and
strange works of nature while I consider, and call to rememberaunce the
narownesse of man's understanding and knowledge, in comparyson of her myghtie
power, The power of nature.
I can but cease to marueyle and confess with Pliny, that nothing is to her
impossible, the least part of whose power is not yet known to men. Many
things more our men saw and considered in this vyage, worthy to be noted,
whereof I have thought good to put some in memory, that the reader may as well
take pleasure in the variety of things, as knowledge of the history. Among
other things therefore touching the manners and nature of the people, this may
seem strange, that their princes and noble men use to pounce and raze their
skins with pretty knottes in diverse forms, as it were branched damask, They
raze their skynnes.
thynkyng that to be a decent ornament. And albeit they go in manner all naked,
yet are many of them, Fine iewelles.
and especially their women, in manner laden with collars, braslettes, hoopes,
and chains, either of gold, copper, or Iuery. I my self have one of their
braselettes of Iuery, A braslet.
waying two pound and.vi. ounces of Troy weight, which make.xxxviii. ounces:
this one of their women did wear upon her arm. It is made of one whole piece
of the byggest part of the tooth, turned and somewhat carved, with a hole in
the myddest, wherein they put their hands to wear it on their arm. Some have
of every arm one, and as many on their legs, wherewith some of them are so
galded, that although they are in manner made lame thereby, yet will they by no
means leave them of. Some wear also on their legs great shackels of bright
copper, which they think to be no less comely. Shackels.
They wear also collars, braslettes, garlandes, and gyrdels, of certain blewe
stones like beads. Likewise some of their women wear on their bare arms
certain foresleeues, made of the plates of beaten gold. On their fingers also
they wear ringes, Rings.
made of golden wyres, with a knotte or wreathe, like unto that which children
make in a ryng of a ryshe. Among other things of gold that our men bought of
them for exchange of their wares, were certain dogs chains and collers.
Dogs chains of gold.


They are very ware people in their bargaynyng, and will not lose one spark of
gold of any value. They use weyghtes and measures, and are very circumspect in
occupying the same. They that shall have to do with them, must use them
gentelly: for they will not traffike or bring in any wares if they be evil
used. At the first vyage that our men had into these parties, it so chanced,
that at their departure from the first place where they did trafike, one of
them either stole a musk catte, or took her away by force, A musk cat.
not mystrustyng that that should have hyndred their bargaynyng in an other
place whyther they intended to go. But for all the have they could make with
full sails, the fame of their mysusage so prevented them, that the people of
that place also, offended thereby, would bring in no wares: Insomuche that they
were enforced either to restore the cat, or pay for her at their price, before
they could trafike there.

Their houses are made of four posts or trees, and covered with bows. Their
houses.


Their common feedyng is of roots, and such fyshes as they take, Their feeding
whereof they have great plenty. There are also such sleeing fyshes as are
seen in the sea of the West Indies. Our men salted of their fyshes, hopyng to
provide store thereof: but they would take no salt, Fleyng fyshes.
and must therefore be eaten forthwith as some say. How be it, other affirm
that if they be salted immediately after they be taken, they will last
uncorrupted.x. or.xii. days. But this is more strange, that part of such
flesh as they carried with them out of England, A strange thing.
and putrifyed there, became sweet again at their return to the clime of
temperate regions.

They use also a strange making of bread, in this manner. They grynde between
two stones with their hands as much corn as they think may suffice their
famylie, Their bread.
and when they have thus brought it to flower, they put thereto a certain
quantity of water, and make thereof very thin dough, which they stick upon some
post of their houses, where it is baked by the heat of the Sun: So that when
the master of the house or any of his famely will eat thereof, they take it
down, and eat it. They have very fair wheat, Their wheats.
the ear whereof is two handefulles in length, and as bygge as a great
Bulrush, and almost four inches about where it is byggest. The stem or
straw, seems to be almost as byg as the little finger of a man's hand, or
little less. The graynes of this wheat are as byg as our peason, round also,
and very white, and somewhat shynyng, like pearls that have lost their color.
Almost all the substance of them turns into flower, and makes little branne
or none. I told in one ear two hundred and threescore graynes. The ear is
enclosed in three blades longer then it self, and of two inches broad a
piece. And by this fruitfulness the Sun seems partly to recompense such
greefes and molestations as they otherwise receive by the fervent heat
thereof. The Sun.
It is doubtless a worthy contemplation to consider the contrary effects of
the Sun: or rather the contrary passions of such things as receive the
influence of his beams, either to their hurt or benefyte. Their drink is
either water, or the iuise that droppeth from the cut branches of the barren
Date trees, called Palmites. Their drink.
For either they hang great gourdes at the said branches every euenyng, and
let them so hang al night, or else they set them on the ground under the trees,
that the drops may fall therein, They say that this kind of drink is in
taste much like unto whey, but somewhat sweeter, and more pleasant. They cut
the branches every evening, because they are seared up in the day by the heat
of the Sun. They have also great Beans as bygge as chestnuts, and very hard
with a shel in the stead of a husk.

Many things more might be said of the manners of the people, and of the
woonders and monstrous things that are engendered in Afric. But it shall
suffice to have said thus much of such things as our men partly saw, and
partlye brought with them.

And whereas before speaking of the fruit of graynes, I described the same to
have holes by the side (as in deed it is, Graynes*
as it is brought hither) yet was I afterward enfourmed, that those holes were
made to p^t strings or twigs through the fruit, thereby to hang them up to
dry at the Sun. They grow not past a foot and a half, or two foot from
the ground, and are as red as blood when they are geathered. The graynes them
selves, are called of the physicians, Grana Paradisi.

Shelles that cleave to shyps.
At their coming home, the keeles of their ships were marvelously ouergrowen
with certain shelles of two inches length and more, as thycke as they could
stand, and of such byggenesse that a man may put his thumme in the mouths of
them. They certaynely affirm that in these there grows a certain slymy
substance, which at the length slyppyng out of the shell and falling in the
sea, becomes those fowls which we call Barnacles. The like shelles have been
seen in ships returnyng from Iselande, Barnacles.
but these shells were not past half an inche in length. Of the other that came
from Guinea, I saw the Prymrose lying in the Docke, and in manner covered with
the said shelles, which in my judgment should greatly hinder her saylyng.
Their ships were also in many places eaten with the worms called Bromas or
Bissas, Bromas.
whereof mention is made in the Decades. These creep between the plankes,
which they eat through in many places.

A secret.
Among other things that chanced to them in this viage, this is worthy to be
noted, that whereas they sailed thither in seven weeks, they could return in
no less space then twenty weeks. The cause whereof they say to be this: That
about the coast of Cabo Verde, the wind is ever at the East, by reason whereof
they were enforced to sail far out of their course into the main Ocean, to
find the wind at the West to bring them home. The death of our men.
There died of our men at this last viage about twenty and four, whereof many
died at their return into the clyme of the cold regions, as between the
Islands of Soria and England. They brought with them certain black slaves,
whereof some were tall and strong men, and could well agree with our meats and
drynkes. The cold and moist air does somewhat offend them. Yet doubtelesse
men that are borne in hot regions, may better abide cold, Cold may be better
abiden then heat.
then men that are borne in cold regions may abide heat, forasmuch as
vehement heat resolves the radical moisture of men's bodies, as cold
constrayneth and preserves the same.

This is also to be considered as a secret work of nature, that throughout
all Affricke under the Equinoctial line, and near about the same, on both
sides, the regions are extreme hot, and the people very black. Whereas
contrarily such regions of the West Indies as are under the same line, are very
temperate, and the people neither black, nor with curlde and short wool on
their heads, as have they of Affrike, but of the color of an Olyue, with long
and black hear on their heads: the cause of which variety is declared in
diverse places in the Decades.

It is also worthy to be noted that some of them that were at this vyage
told me: That is, that they ouertooke the course of the Sun, so that they
had it North from them at noone, the xiiii. day of March. And to have said
thus much of these vyages, it may suffice.

Of the Dooues of the Island of Madera.
CAdamastus writes, that before the Portugales came to this Island, it was
ouergrowen with trees, and uninhabited, yet were there many beasts, and great
plenty of Dooues, which were utterly without fear of men, because they had
never seen any men before, nor yet were accustomed to be put in fear:
insomuche that they stood still while snares were put about their necks with
long rods and poles: the which thing he says, he has also seen in other
Islands. There are many rich men in this Island, and great abundance of
flesh, because the whole Island is in manner one gardeyne.

Of the Island of Saint Thomas, under the Equinoctial line.
THe chiefest occupation and living of the inhabitants of this Island, is the
making of sugar, which they sell yearly to the ships that come for it out of
Spain and Portugale, laden with buttes of meal and flower, also wine, oil,
cheese, lether, swoordes, cups of glass, beads, certain scaruels of the
fine white earth called Porcellana, of the which are made the earthen dishes
of the work of Maiolica. And if it were not that such victualles and
provisions were brought them out of Spain and Portugale, the white merchantes
which dwell in that Island (parteynyng to the dominion of the king of
Portugale) should not be able to live there, forasmuch as they are not
accustomed to eat such meats as do the Ethiopians or Negros. And therefore
the Portugales which inhabit this Island, have certain black slaves of
Guinea, Benin, and Manicongo, which they set to till and labor the ground,
and make sugar. Among these white inhabitauntes, there are many rich men,
which have 150. or.200. and some.300. black slaves of men and women, to till
the ground, and do other laborious works. This Island was discovered a
hundred years since, by the nauigations of the Portugales, and was unknown to
the old writers. It lies in the great gulf of Affrike, in the.30. degree of
longitude from the West to the East, and is in manner round. It is of
largeness from side to side.lx. Italian miles, (that is to say) one degree.
The horizontall line of the Island passes by the two poles, Artike, and
Antartike, and has ever the day equal with the night, without any sensible
difference, whether the Sun be in Cancer or in Capricorn. The star of the
pole Artike, is there invisible: but the wardens are seen somewhat to move
about: and the stars called the Cross are seen very high. Of this Island,
with the other lands and Islands lying between Portugale and the same, a
certain pylotte of Portugale has written a goodly vyage to Conte Rimondo.

FINIS.
The Navigations and vyages of Jews Vertomannus, Gentelman of the city of
Rome, to the regions of Arabia, Egypt, Persia, Syria, Ethiopia, and East
India, both within and without the river of Ganges. etc. In the year of our
Lord.1503. Conteynyng many notable and strange things, both hystoricall and
natural.

Translated out of Latin into English, by Richard Eden.

In the year of our Lord.1576.

The Preface of the Author.
THere have been many before me, who to know the miracles of the world, have
with diligent study read diverse Authors which have written of such things.
But other giving more credit to the lively voice, have been more desirous to
know the same by relation of such as have traueyled in those countries, and
seen such things whereof they make relation, for that in many books,
geathered of uncertain authority, are myxt false things with true. Other
there are so greatly desirous to know the truth of these things, that they
can in no wise be satisfied, until by their own experience they have found
the truth, by voyages and peregrinations into strange countries and people,
to know their manners, fashions, and customs, with diverse things there to be
seen: wherein, the only readyng of books, could not satisfy their thirst of
such knowledge, but rather increased the same, in so much that they feared not
with loss of goods and danger of life to attempt great vyages to diverse
countries, with witness of their eyes to see that they so greatly desired to
know. The which thing among other chanced unto me also. For as often as in
the books of hystories and Cosmographie, I read of such marvelous things
whereof they make mention (especially of things in the East parts of the
world) there was nothing that could pacify my unquiet mind, until I had
with mine eyes seen the truth thereof. I know that some there are endued
with high knowledge, mountyng unto the heavens, which will contempne these our
writings, as base and humble, because we do not here, after their manner, with
high and subtle inquisition entreat of the motions and dispositions of the
stars, and give reason of their woorkyng on the earth, with their motions,
retrogradations, directions, mutations, epicicles, reuolutions, inclinations,
diuinations, reflections, and such other parteynyng to the science of
Astrology: which certeynely we do not condemn, but greatly praise. But
measuryng us with our own foot, we will leave that heavy burden of heaven to
the strong shoulders of Atlas and Hercules: and only creepyng upon the earth,
in our own person behold the situations of lands and regions, with the
manners and customs of men, and variable fourmes, shapes, natures, and
propriettes of beasts, fruits, and trees, especially such as are among the
Arabians, Persians, Indians, and Ethiopians. And whereas in the searchyng of
these things, we have (thanked be God) satisfied our desire, we think
nevertheless that we have done little, except we should communicate to other,
such things as we have seen and had experience of, that they likewise by the
readyng thereof, may take pleasure, for whose sakes we have written this long
and dangerous discourse, of things which we have seen in diverse regions and
sects of men, desiryng nothing more then that the truth may be known to them
that desire the same. But what incommodities and troubles chanced unto me in
these viages, as hunger, thirst, cold, heat, wars, captivity, terrors,
and diverse other such dangers, I will declare by the way in their due places.

The first Chapter, of the navigations from Venice to Alexandria in Egypt.
IF any man shall demand of me the cause of this my vyage, certeynely I can
show no better reason then is the ardent desire of knowledge, which has moved
many other to see the world and miracles of God therein. And forasmuch as other
known parts of the world, have heretofore ben sufficiently traueyled of
other, I was determined to visit and describe such parts as here before have
not been sufficiently known: and therefore with the grace of God, and calling
upon his holy name to prosper our enterprise, departing from Uenice with
prosperous wyndes, in few days we arrived at the city of Alexandria in
Egypt: where the desire we had to know things more strange and further of,
would not permit us to tarry long. And therefore departing from thence, and
saylyng up the river of Nilus, we came to the city of new Babylon, commonly
called Cayrus or Alcayr.

The same was also called Memphis in time past.
Of the city named Babylon, or Alcayr, a city of Nilus in Egypt. Cap. 2.
WHen we arrived there, I marueyled more then I am able to say: yet when I
approached so near the city that I might well see into it, it seemed to me much
inferior to the report and fame that was thereof: for the greatness thereof,
seemed nothing agreeable to the brute, and appeared no more in circuit then
the city of Rome, although much more peopled, and better inhabited. But the
large fields of the suburbs have deceived many, being dispersed with in manner
innumerable villages, which some have thought to have been part of the city,
which is nothing so. For those villages and dispersed houses, are two or three
miles from the city, and round about it on every side. Neither is it here
needful to spend much time in declaryng of their manners, or religion,
forasmuch as it is well known, that all the inhabitants of those regions are
Mahumetans, and Mamalukes, Mamalukes. Mahumetans.
which are such Christians as have forsaken their faith, to serve the
Mahumetans and Turks: Although commonly they that served the Soltan of Babylon
in time past, before the Soltan was overcome by the Turk, were called
Mamaluchi, as they that serve the Turk, are called Ienetzari. Ienezzari.
But these Mamaluke Mahumetans, are subject to the Soltan of Syria.

Of the cities of Berynto, Tripoli, and Antioch. Cap. 3.
THe riches, fayrenesse, and magnificence of Babylon aforesaid, and the
strange soldiers Mamalukes, as things known, we will now pretermit. Therefore
departing from Babylon, and returnyng to Alexandria, where we again entered
into our sea, we came to Berynto, a city on the sea coast of Syria Phoenicia,
Syria Phoenicia.
where we spent many days. This is inhabited of Mahumetans, and plentiful of
all things. The sea beats on the walls of the town: it is not compassed
with walls, but on the West side toward the sea. Here found we nothing
memorable, but only an old place ruinate, where they say that Saint George
delivered the kings daughter from a cruel Dragon, Saint George and the
Dragon.
which he slew, and restored her to her father. Departing from hence, we
sailed to Tripoli. This is a city of S^ria, Eastwarde from Berynto two days
saylyng. Tripoli.
The inhabitauntes are subject to the Lieuetenant or governor of Syria, and
are Mahumetans. The soil is very fertile, and for the great trafique of
merchaundies, incredibly abounds with all things. Departing from thence, we
came to the city Comagen of Syria, Alepo or Antioch.
commonly called Alepo, and named of our men Antioch.

It is a goodly city, situate under the mount Taurus, and is subject to the
Lieuetenant or Soltan of Babylon. The mount Taurus. The mount Olympus.
There be the scales or ladders (for so they call them) of the Turks and
Syrians, for it is near the mount of Olympus. It is a famous mart town of
the Azamians and Persians. Azamia.
The Azamians, are people of Mesopotamia, Mesapotamia.
near unto the Persians, and of the religion of Mahumet. From thence, is the
journey to the Turks and Syrians, and especially of them that come from the
part of Mesopotamia, Persia
named Azamia.

Of the cities of Aman and Menin. Cap. 4.
Departing from thence, we came to Damasco, Damasco.
in ten days journey. But before you come there, in the myd way, is a city
named Aman, where is great abundance of gossampine or cotton wool, and all
manner of pleasant fruits. Going a little from Damasco, the space of six
miles, is a city named Menin, situate on the declinyng of a mountain. It is
inhabited of Christians of the Greek profession, who also obaye to the
governor of Damasco. There are seen two fair Temples, which (as the
inhabitants report) were builded by Helena, Saint Helene the mother of
Constantine the Emperor.
the mother of the Emperor Constantine. There are all kinds of fruits, and
goodly Grapes, and Gardens watered with continual sprynges. Departing from
thence, we came to the city of Damasco.

Of the city of Damasco. Chap. 5.
IT is in manner incredible, and passes all belief, to think how fair the
city of Damasco is, and how fertile is the soil. And therefore allured by the
marvelous beauty of the city, I remained there many days, that learning
their language, I might know the manners of the people. The inhabitants are
Mahumetans and Mamalukes, with also many Christians, Christians Greeks.
living after the manner of the Greeks. By the way, it shall not be from my
purpose to speak of their Hexarchatus: the which (as we have said) is
subject to the Lieuetenaunt, Hexarchatus is a principate or government.
viceroye, or gouernoure of Syria, which some call Sorya. There is a very
strong fortress or Castle, which a certain Ethruscan, borne in the city
of Florence, builded at his own charges, while he was there ye chief
Hexarchatus or governor, as appears by the flower of a Lilie there graven in
marble, being the arms of the city of Florence. The city is compassed with a
deep fosse or diche, with four goodly high towers. They pass the dyche with
a hangyng bridge, which is lyfted up or let down at their pleasure. There
is all kind of great artillery and munition, with also a guard of fyftie
Mamalukes, which daily assyste the gouernoure or captain of the castle, and
receive their stipende of the gouernoure or viceroye of Syria. The Soltan of
Syrya.
Fortune seemed to give the Hexarchatus or principate to the said Florentine,
which we will declare as we have heard of thinhabitauntes. They say that
poison was once given to the Soltan of Syria: and when he sought for remedy,
he chanced to be healed by the said Florentine, which was one of the
company of the Mamalukes. After which good fortune, he grew daily in
favor with the said Prince, who for reward gave him that city: where also
the said Florentine builded a Castle, and dyed: whom to this day the Citisens
honor for a saint, for saving the life of their prince: after whose death,
the government returned to the Syrians. They say furthermore that the Soltan is
well beloved of his lords and princes, for that he easily grants them
principates and gouernementes: yet with condition to pay yearly many
thousands of those pieces of gold which they call Saraphos. They that deny to
pay the sum agreed of, ar^ in danger of imminent death. Of the chief noble
men or gouernoures.x. or.xii. ever assiste the Prince. And when it pleases him
to extorte a certain sum of gold of his noble men or merchauntes (for they
use great tyranny and oppression by the injuries and theft of the Mamalukes
against the Mahumetans) the Prince gives two letters to the captain of the
Castle. A strange manner to demand a subside.
In the one is contained, that with an oration he inuit to the Castle such
as pleases him. In the other is declared the mind of the Prince, what he
demands of his subjects. When the letters be read, withal expedition they
accomplish his commandment, be it right or wrong, without respect. This
means the Prince invented to extorte money. Yet sometimes it comes to pass,
that the noble men are of such strength, that they will not come when they are
commanded, knowing that the tyrant will offer them violence. And therefore
oftentimes when they know that the captain of the Castle will call them,
they flee into the dominions of the Turk. This have we geathered as touching
their manners, we have also observed, that the watchemen in the towers, do not
give warnyng to the guard with lively voice, but with drommes, the one
answearyng the other by course. But if any of the watchemen be so sleepye, that
in the moment of an hour he aunsweare not to the sound of the watch, he is
immediately committed to prison for one whole year.

Of such things as are seen in the city of Damasco. Cap. 6.
AFter that I have declared the manners of the Princes of Damasco, it seems
agreeable to speak of some such things as I have seen there. And therefore
to speak first of the excellency and beauty of the city, it is certaynely
marvelously well peopled, and greatly frequented, and also marvelous rich. It
is of goodly buildyng, and exceeds in abundance and fruitfulness of all
things, and especially of all kind of victuales, flesh, corn, and fruits,
as fresh damesenne grapes all the whole year: also Pomegranets, Oranges,
Lymons, and excellent Olyue trees. Likewise Roses, both white and red, the
fairest that ever I saw: and all kinds of sweet apples, yet pears and
peaches very unsavory. The cause whereof, they say to be to much moisture. A
goodly and clear river runs about the city: and therefore in manner in every
house are seen fountaynes of curious work embossed and graven. Their houses
outwardly are not very beautyfull, but inwardly marvelously adourned with
variable works of the stone called Ophis, or serpentine Marble. Within the
town are many temples or churches, which they call Moscheas. But that which is
most beautyfull of all other, Their churches.
is builded after the manner of Saint Peter's church in Rome, if you respect the
greatness, exceptyng this, that in the myddle is no roof or couerture, but is
all open: but about the rest of the temple, it is altogether vaulted. There
they observe religiously the body of the holy Prophet Zachary. The body of
the Prophet Zacharias.
The temple has also four great double gates of metal, very fair, and many
goodly fountaynes within it. There are yet seen the ruins of many deca^ed
houses, which were once inhabited by the Christians. Those houses they call
Canonicas, and are of work both carved and imbossed. There is also to be
seen the place where (as they say) our savior Christ spoke to Saint Paul
these words, The place of the conversion of Saint Paul.
Paul, Paul, why do thou persecute me. etc. This place is without the
city about a mile.

There are buried the Christians that die in the city. There is seen also the
Tower in which Saint Paul was committed to prison, The prison of Saint
Paul.
and joins to the wall of the city. But that place of the Tower where Paul
was brought forth by the Angel, the Mahumetans do not attempt to close up:
Saying, that if it be closed over night, they find it open again in the
morning. I saw also there, those houses in the which (as they say) Cain slew
his brother Abell. The place where Cain slew Abel.
These are on the other part of the city a mile of, in a certain valley, yet
on the side of a hill. But let us now return to the stranger Solgiers, which
they call Mamaluchos, and to speak somewhat how licenciously they live in
that city.

Of the Mamalukes of Damasco. Cap. 7.
THe Mamalukes therefore, are that kind of men, which have forsaken our faith,
and as slaves are bought by the gouerner of Syria. They are very active, and
brought up both in learning and warlike discipline, until they come to great
perfection. The Mamalukes wages.
As well the little as ye great, without respect, receive stipend of the
governor: which for every month amounts to six of those pieces of gold
which they call Saraphos, beside the meat and drink of them selves and their
servants, and also provision for their horses. And the more valiant they be,
and of greater actiuitie, they are hired for the greater wages. They walk not
in the city but by two or three together, for it is counted dishonor for any
of them to walk without a companion. And if by the way they chance to meet
with two or three women (for they lay wait to tarry for them about such
houses whyther they know the women resort) license is granted them, How the
Mamalukes abuse women.
as they by chance first meet with them, to bring them into certain tauerns,
where they abuse them. When the Mamalukes attempt to descouer their faces (for
they go with their faces covered) they strive with them because they will not
be known. But when the Mamalukes persyste wantonly to discover them, they say
thus unto them, Is it not enough for you that you have abused our bodies as
pleases you, but that you will also discover our faces? Then the Mamalukes
suffer them to depart. But sometime it chances, that when they think to
prostitute the daughter of some gentelmen or noble men, they committee the
fact with their own wives: which thing chanced whilst I was there. The
women beautify and garnishe them selves as much as any. They use sylken
apparel, The women of Damasco.
and cover them with cloth of gosampine, in manner as fine as sylke. They wear
white buskyns, and shoes of red or purple color. They garnyshe their heads
with many iewelles and earerynges, and wear rings and braslettes. They mary
as often as them lysteth: for when they are weary of their first marriage, they
go to the chief press of their religion (whom they call Cady) and make
request to him to be divorced from their first marriage. This diuorsment in
their language is called Talacare: which granted by the high Priest or
Bishop, they begin new maryages. Change of husbands and wives.
The like liberty is also granted to the husbands. Some think that the
Mahumetans have five or six wives together, which I have not observed: but as
far as I could perceive they have but two or three. The Mahumetans wives.
They eat openly, specially in the martes or fayres, and there dress they all
their meats. They eat horses, Cammelles, Bufles, Gotes, and such other
beasts. They have great abundaunce of fresh cheese. They that sell milk,
drive about with them xl. or.l. Gotes, Gotes milk.
which they bring into the houses of them that will bye milk, even up into
their chambers, although they be three roofes high, and there milk them, to
have it fresh and new. These Gotes have their ears a spanne long, many
voders or pappes, and are very fruitful: There is great abundaunce of
mussheromes, for sometimes there are seen.xx. or.xxx. Cammelles laden with
mussheromes, Mussheromes. Asia the less now named Natolia or Turchia.
and yet in the space of three days they are all sold. They are brought from
the mountains of Armenia, and from Asia the less, which is now called
Turchia or Natolia, or Anatolia.

The Mahumetans use long vestures and loose, both of sylke and cloth. The most
part use hose of gossampine cloth, and white shoes. When any of the Mahumetans
by chance meets with any of the Mamalukes, although the Mahumetan be the
woorthyer person, yet gives he place and reverence to the Mamaluke, who
otherwise would give him the Bastonado, and beat him with a staff. The
Christians also keep there many ware houses of merchaundies, Christians of
Damasco.
where they have diverse sorts of sylkes and velvet: but the Christians are
there evil entreated of the Mahumetans.

The journey from Damasco to Mecha, and of the manners of the Arabians. Chap. 8.
AFter that I have largely spoken of Damasco, I will proceed to the rest of my
vyage. Therefore in the year of our lord.1503. the eight day of the month of
Apryll, when I had hired certain Cammelles (which they call Carauanas) to go
to Mecha, and being then ignorant of the customs and manners of them in whose
company I should go, Carauana, a company of Cameles.
I entered familiarity and frendshyppe with a certain captain Mamaluke, of
them that had forsaken our faith, Mamaluchi renegadi.
with whom being agreed of the price, he prepared me apparel like unto that
which the Mamalukes use to wear, and geuyng me also a good horse, accompanied
me with the other Mamalukes. This (as I have said) I obtained with great cost,
and many gifts which I gave him. Thus enteryng to the journey, after the space
of three days, we came to a certain place named Mezaris, where we remained
three days, Mezaris.
that the merchauntes which were in our company might provide things
necessary, as specially Camels, and diverse other things. There is a certain
Prince whom they call Zambei, The prince Zambei in Arabia.
of great power in the country of Arabia: he had three brethren and four
children. He norysheth forty thousand horses, ten thousand mares, and four
thousand Camels. The country where he keeps the heardes of these beasts, is
large, of two days journey. This Prince Zambei, is of so great power, that he
keeps war with the Soltan of Babylon, the governor of Damasco, and the
prince of Jerusalem al at once. In the time of harvest and geatheryng of
fruits, The Prince of Jerusalem.
he is given wholly to pray and robbyng, and with great subtlety deceyueth the
Arabians: A Prince a thief.
for when they think him to be a mile or two of, he is with them suddenly
betymes in the morning: and inuadyng their lands, carries away their fruits,
Wheat, and Barlye, even as he fyndeth it in the sackes: and so lives
contynually day and night with such incursions. When his Mares be weeried with
continual runnyng, he rests a while: Mares.
and to refreshe them, gives them Camelles milk to drink, to cool them
after their great labor. Those Mares are of such marvelous swyftnesse, that
when I presently saw them, they seemed rather to flee then to run. The
Arabians live by robbery.
Note also that these Arabians ride on horses only covered with certain
clothes or mattes, and wear none other vesture then only an inward coat, or
peticoate: for weapon, they use a certain long Dart of Reeds, of the length
of ten or twelve cubits, poynted with Iron (after the manner of Iauelyns) and
frynged with sylke. When they attempt any incursyons, they march in such
order, that they seem to go in troops: they are of despicable and little
stature, and of color between yealowe and black, which some call Oliuastro.
They have the voices of women, and the hear of their head long and black, and
laid out at large. They are of greater multitude then a man would believe,
and are among them selves at contynuall strife and war. They inhabit the
mountains, and have certain times appointed to robberye: for this purpose
they observe especially the time, when they are certain of the passage of the
Pylgryms and other that journey that way to Mecha, then like thieves they lie in
the way and rob them. When they make these theeuysh invasions, they bring
with them their wives, children, families, and all the goods they have. Their
houses they put upon the Camelles, for other houses have they none, Houses
(...) on Camels backs.

Tents and pauilions*


but live only in tents and pauylyons as do our Soldiers.

Such tabernacles are made of black wool, and that rough and fylthy. But to
return to our viage. The eleventh day of April, departed from Mezaris a
company of Camels (which company they call the Carauana) to the number
of.xxxv. thousand, with forty thousand men. But we were no more then
threescore persons, of whom the Mamalukes had taken the charge to guide and
guard us, This for fear of the Arabians.
and the Carauana of our company, which the Mamalukes divided into three
parts, as some in the front, other in the myddest of the army, and other in a
wyng after the manner of a half Moon, inclosyng the whole army: for in this
order march the peregrines which journey in these regions, as hereafter we will
further declare. But you shall first understand that Damasco is from Mecha
forty days and forty nyghtes journey. From Damasco to Mecha.
Departing therefore from Mezaris, we continued our journey that day, until
the.xxii. hour of the day. Then our Captain and guide Agmirus, after he had
given the watch word and sign, commanded that every man should rest and
remain in the place where the sign should be given them. Therefore as soon
as they heard the sign by the sound of a Trumpet, they stayed, and after they
had unburdened their Camels, spent there two hours to victual them selves and
their beasts: Perhaps with the sound of a Horn of Trumpet.
then the Captain geuyng a new sign, chargyng their Camelles again, they
departed speedyly from thence. Every Camel has at one feedyng five Barley
loaves, raw and not baked, as bygge as a Pomegranate. Taking Horse, they
continued that journey the day and night following, until xxii. hours of the
day, and at that hour they observe the order which we have spoken of
herebefore. Every eight day they draw water by dyggyng the ground or sand:
by the way nevertheless somewhere are found Wells and Sesternes. Water.
Also every eight day, they rest their Camelles two days to recover their
strength. The Camelles are laden with incredible Burdens, The Burden of the
Camelles.
and double charge: that is to mean, the burden of two great Mules. They
drink but once in three days.

Of the strength and valiantness of the Mamalukes. Cap. 9.
WHen they tarry and rest them at the waters aforesaid, they are ever enforced
to conflict with a great multitude of the Arabians: but the battle is for the
most part without bloodshed. For although we have often times fought with
them, yet was there only one man slain on our part: for these Arabians are so
weak and feeble, that threescore Mamalukes, The feebleness of the Arabians.

Pagans.


have often put to the worst fyftie thousand Arabians. For these feelde
Arabians, which are called Pagani, are not in strength or force of arms to be
compared to the Mamalukes, of whose actiuitie I have seen great experience:
among the which this is one. The actiuitie of the Mamalukes.
A certain Mamaluke laid an Apple upon the head of his servant, and at the
distance of about.xii. or.xiiii. pases, stroke it of from his head. I saw
likewise an other, who ryding on a sadled horse with full course (for they use
saddles as we do) took of the saddle from the horse still runnyng: and for a
space bearyng it on his head, put it again on the horse, still continuing his
full course.

Of the cities of Sodoma and Gomorrha. Cap. 10.
Passing the journey of twelve days, we came to the plain or valley of Sodoma
and Gomorrha, where we found it to be true that is written in holy scripture:
for there yet remain the ruynes of the destroyed city, as witness of Gods
wrath. We may affirm that there are three cities, and each of them situate on
the declining of three hills: and the ruins do appear about the heyght of
three or four cubits. There is yet seen, I wotte near what, like blood, or
rather like red wax myxte with earth. It is easy to believe that those men
were infected with most horrible vices, as testifies the baren, dry, filthy,
and unwholesome region, utterly without water. Manna, turned in bitter plagues.
Those people were once fed with Manna: but when they abused the gift of God,
they were sore plagued. Departing twenty miles from these cities, about
thirty of our company peryshed for lack of water, Lack of water.
and diverse other were overwhelmed with sand. Going somewhat further
forewarde, we found a little mountain, at the foot whereof we found water,
and therefore made our abode there. The day following early in the morning, came
unto us xxiiii* thousand Arabians, Water dearly bought.

So did Abraham with the Philistians.


askyng money for the water which we had taken. We answered that we would pay
nothing, because it was given us by the goodness of God. Immediately we came to
hand strokes. We geatheryng our selves together on the said mountain, as in
the safest place, used our Camelles in the steed of a bulwark, and placed the
merchauntes in the myddest of the army (that is) in the myddest of the
Camelles, while we fought manfully on every side. So does the Turk his army.
The battle continued so long, that water failed both us and our enemies in
the space of two days. The Arabians compassed about the mountain, crying and
threatenyng that they would break in among the Camelles: at the length to make
an end of the conflicte, our Captain assemblyng the merchauntes, commanded a
thousand and two hundred pieces of gold to be given to the Arabians: who when
they had received the money, said that the sum of ten thousand pieces of
gold should not satisfy them for the water which we had drawn. Whereby we
perceived that they began further to quarrel with us, and to demand some
other thing then money. Whereupon incontinent our Captain gave commandment,
that whosoever in all our company were able to bear arms, should not mount
upon the Camelles, but should with all expedition prepare them selves to
fight. The day following in the morning, sendyng the Camelles before, and
inclosyng our army, being about three hundred in number, we met with the
enemies, and gave the onset. In this conflicte, we lost only a man and a woman,
and had none other damage: we slew of the Arabians a thousand and five
hundred. Whereof you need not marueyle, if you consider that they are unarmed,
and wear only a thynne loose vesture, and are beside almost naked: their
horses also being as evil furnished, and without saddles, or other furniture.

Of a mountain inhabited with Jews, and of the city of Medinathalhabi, where
Mahumet was buried. Cap. 11.
IN the space of eight days, we came to a mountain which conteyneth in
circuit ten or twelve miles. This is inhabited with Jews, to the number of
five thousand, or thereabout. Jews Pigmet.
They are of very little stature, as of the heyght of five or six spannes, and
some much less. They have small voices like women, and of black color, yet
some blacker then other: They feed of none other meat then Goats flesh.
They are circumcised, and deny not them selves to be Jews. If by chance any
Mahumetan come into their hands, they slay him alive. At the foot of the
mountain, we found a certain hole, out of the which flowed abundance of
water. By fyndyng this opportunity, we laded sixtiene thousand Camels: which
thing greatly offended the Jews. They wandered in that mountain, scattered
like wild Goats or Prickettes, yet durst they not come down, partly for
fear, and partly for hatred against the Mahumetans. Beneath the mountain, are
seen seven or eight thorn trees, very fair, and in them we found a pair of
Turtle Doves, which seemed to us in manner a miracle, having before made so long
iourneyes, and saw neither beast nor foul. Then proceedyng two days journey,
we came to a certain city named Medinathalhabi: The city of Medinathalhabi.
four miles from the said city, we found a well. Here the Carauana (that
is, the whole heard of the Camelles) rested.

And remaining here one day, we washed our selves, and changed our shertes,
the more freshely to enter into the city: it is well peopled, and conteyneth
about three hundred houses, the walls are like bulwarks of earth, and the
houses both of stone and brick. The soil about the city, is utterly barren,
except that about two miles from the city, are seen about fyftie palm trees
that bear Dates. There, by a certain garden, runs a course of water
falling into a lower plain, where also passingers are accustomed to water
their Camelles. And here opportunity now serves to confute the opinion of
them which think that the Arc or Toombe of wicked Mahumet in Mecha, The
Toombe or Sepulcher of Mahumet.
to hang in the air, not borne up with any thing. As touching which thing. I
am utterly of an other opinion, and affirm this neither to be true, nor to
have any likeness of truth, as I presently beheld these things, and saw
the place where Mahumet is buried, Mahumet was not buried in Mecha.
in the said city of Medinathalhabi: for we tarried there three days, to come
to the true knowledge of all these things. When we were desirous to enter
into their Temple (which they call Meschita, and all other churches by the same
name) we could not be suffered to enter, without a companion, little or great.
They taking us by the hand, brought us to the place where they say Mahumet is
buried.

Of the Temple or Chapel, and Sepulcher of Mahumet, and of his fellows. Cap.
12.
HIs Temple is vaulted, and is a hundred pases in length, and fourscore in
breadth: the entry into it, is by two gates: from the sides, it is covered with
three vaultes, it is borne up with iiii. hundred columns or pillars of white
brick, there are seen hanging lamps about the number of.3. thousand. From
the other part of the Temple in the first place of the Meschita, is seen a
Tower of the circuit of five pases, vaulted on every side, and covered with a
cloth of silk, and is borne up with a grate of copper curiously wrought, and
distant from it two pases: and of them that go thither, is seen as it were
through a lattesse. Toward the left hand, is the way to the Tower, and when
you come thither, you must enter by a narower gate. On every side of those
gates or doors, are seen many books in manner of a Library, Mahumets
Library.
on the one side.xx. and on the other side xxv. These contain the filthy
traditions and life of Mahumet and his fellows: within the said gate, is
seen a Sepulcher (that is) a dug place, where they say Mahumet is buried
and his fellows, which are these, Nabi, Bubacar, Othomar, Aumar, Nomothetae
Turcarum.
and Fatoma: But Mahumet was their chief Captain, and an Arabian borne. Hali,
was son in law to Mahumet, This Hali, our men that have been in Persia, call
Mortus Hali, That is, Saint Hali. Discord and sects of religion among the
Mahumetans, Turks, and Persians.
for he took to wife his daughter Fatoma. Bubacar, is he who they say was
exalted to the dignity of a chief counselor and great governor, although he
came not to the high degree of an Apostle or prophet, as did Mahumet. Othomar
and Aumar, were chief Captains of the army of Mahumet. Every of these have
their proper books of their factes and traditions. And hereof proceeds the
great dissension and discord of religion and manners among this kind of
filthy men, while some confirm one doctrine, and some an other, by reason of
their diverse sects of patrons, Doctors, and saints, as they call them. By
this means, are they marvelously divided among them selves, Note.
and like beasts kill them selves, for such quarelles of diverse opinions, and
all false. Such come, such c^affe. Not only among Turks and (...), Sed.
This also is the chief cause of war between the Sophie of Persia and the
great Turk, being nevertheless both Mahumetans, and live in mortal hatred
one against the other, for the mayntenaunce of their sects, Saints, and
Apostles, while every of them thinks their own to be best.

Of the Sect of Mahumet. Cap. 13.
NOw will we speak of the manners and sect of Mahumet. Understande therefore,
that in the highest part of the Tower aforesaid, is an open round place. Now
shall you understand what craft they used to deceive our Carauana. The first
euenyng that we came thither to see the Sepulcher of Mahumet, our Captain sent
for the chief priest of the Temple to come to him: and when he came, declared
unto him that the only cause of his coming thither, was to visit the
Sepulcher and body of Nabi, Nabi* i^ the (...) of Mahumet. A great price for
vil^ marchandies.
by which word, is signified the Prophet Mahumet: and that he understood that
the price to be admitted to the sight of these mysteries, should be four
thousand Saraphes of gold. Also that he had no parents, neither brothers,
sisters, kinsefolkes, children, or wives, neither that he came thither to buy
merchaundies, as spices, or Baccar, or Nardus, or any manner of precious
Iewelles: but only for very zeal of religion and salvation of his soul, and
was therefore greatly desirous to see the body of the Prophet. Such people
such priest.
To whom the priest of the Temple (they call them Side) with countenance like
one that were distraught, made answer in this manner, Dare thou with those
eyes with the which thou have committed so many horrible sins, desire to see
him by whose sight God has created heaven and earth? My lord bishop of Mecha
To whom again our Captain answered thus, My Lord, you have said truly:
nevertheless I pray you that I may find so much favor with you, that I may
see the Prophet: whom when I have seen, I will immediately thrust out mine
eyes. The Side answered, O Prince, I will open all things unto thee. So it
is, that no man can deny but that our Prophet dyed here, who if he would
might have dyed at Mecha: It seems that they know not where he was buried.
But to show in him self a token of humility, and thereby to give us example
to follow him, was willing rather here then elsewhere to depart out of this
world, and was incontinent of Angels borne into heaven, and there received
as equal with them. The devil he was.
Then our Captain said to him, Where is Jesus Christus the son of Marie? To
whom the Side answered, At the feet of Mahumet. Then said our Captain
again: Thri^^ at the feet of Mahumet.
It suffyceth, it suffyceth, I will know no more. After this, our Captain
coming out of the Temple, and turnyng him to us, said, See (I pray you) for
what goodly stuff I would have paid three thousand Saraphes of gold? The
same day at euenyng, at almost three a clock of the night, ten or twelve of
the Elders of the sect of Mahumet entered into our Carauana, which remained
not paste a stone cast from the gate of the city. These ran hither and
thither, crying like mad men, with these words, Mahumet the messenger and
Apostle of God, shall rise again. O Prophet, O God, Mahumet shall rise* etc.
with Judah.
Mahumet shall rise again, have mercy on us God. Our Captain and we all
raised with this cry, took weapon with all expedition, suspectyng that the
Arabians were come to rob our Carauana: We asked what was the cause of that
exclamation, and what they cried? for they cried as do the Christians, when
suddenly any marvelous thing chances. The Elders answered, False miracles to
confirm false religion.
Saw you not the lyghtnyng which shone out of the Sepulcher of the Prophet
Mahumet. Our Captain answered, that he saw nothing, and we also being
demanded, answered in like manner. Then said one of the old men, Are you
slaves? That is to say, bought men: meaning thereby Mamalukes. Then said our
Captain, We are in deed Mamalukes. Then again the old man said, Neophiti.
Y^u my Lords, can not see heavenly things, as being Neophiti, (that is)
newly come to the faith, and not yet confirmed in our religion. To this our
Captain answered again, Sic ne respondes pontifi^i.
O you mad and insensa^e beasts, I had thought to have given you three
thousand pieces of gold, but now, O you dogs, and progeny of dogs, I
will give you nothing. It is therefore to be understood, that none other
shynyng came out of the Sepulcher, then a certain flame which the priests
caused to come out of the open place of the Tower spoken of here before,
whereby they would have deceived us. And therefore our Captain commanded that
thereafter none of us should enter into the Temple. Of this also we have most
true experience, The ^able that Mahumets Toombe hangs in the air.
and most certaynely assure you, that there is neither Iron or steel, or the
Magnes stone that should so make the toombe of Mahumet to hang in the air, as
some have falsely imagined: neither is there any mountain nearer then four
miles: we remained here three days to refreshe our company. To this city,
victualles and all kind of corn is brought from Arabia Foelix, and Babylon or
Alcayr, and also from Ethiope, by the red sea, which is from this city but
four days journey.

The journey to Mecha. Cap. 14.
AFter that we were satisfied, or rather wearyed, with the filthiness and
lothesomenesse of the trumperyes, deceites, trifles, and hypocrises of the
religion of Mahumet, we determined to go forward on our journey: and that by
guiding of a pylot, who might direct our course with the mariners box or
compass, Journey on the land by card and compass as on the sea.
with also the card of the sea, even as is used in saylyng on the sea. And
thus bendyng our journey to the West, we found a very fair well or fountain,
from the which flowed great abundance of water. The inhabitants affirm that
Saint Mark the Evangelist was the aucthour of this fountain by a miracle of
God, The fountain of Saint Mark the Evangelist.
when that region was in manner burned with incredible dryness. Here we and our
beasts were satisfied with drink. I may not here omit to speak of the sea of
sand, and of the dangers thereof. This was found of us before we came to the
mountain of the Jews. The sea of sand.
In this sea of sand we traueiled the journey of three days and nights: Mare
fabulosum.
this is a great broad plain, all covered with white sand, in manner as small
as flower: If by evil fortune it so chance that any travail that way
southward, if in the mean time the wind come to the north, they are
overwhelmed with sand. And although they should have prosperous wind, yet
are they so inuolued with sand, that they scatter out of the way, and can
scarsely see the one the other.x. pases of. And therefore thinhabitans
trauaylyng this way, are enclosed in cages of woodde, borne with Camels, and
live in them, so passing the journey guided by pilots with maryners compass and
card, even as on the sea, as we have said. In this journey also many peryshe
for thirst, and many for drynkyng to much, when they find such good waters.
In these sands is found Momia, which is the flesh of such men as are
drowned in these sands, and there dried by the heat of the Sun: Momia.
So that those bodies are preserved from putrefaction by the dryness of the
sand: and therefore that dry flesh is esteemed medicinable. Albeit there is
an other kind of more precious Momia, which is ye dried and embalmed bodies of
kings and princes, Momia of kings bodies embalmed.
which of long time have been preserved dry without corruption. When the
wind blows from the northeast, the^ the sand rises, and is driven against a
certain mountain which is an arm of the mount Sinai. There we found certain
pyllers artificially wrought, which they call Ianuan. Mont Sinai.
On the left hand of the said mountain, in the top or rydge thereof, is a
den, and the entry into it, is by an Iron gate. The den where Mahumet lived
in contemplation.
Some feign that in that place Mahumet lived in contemplation. Here we heard a
certain horrible noise and cry: for passing the said mountain, we were in
so great danger, that we thought never to have escaped. Departing therefore
from the fountain, we continued our journey for the space of.x. days: And
twyse in the way fought with fyftie thousand Arabians, and so at the length
came to the city of Mecha, where al things were troubled by reason of the
wars between two brethren, Mecha, The kingdom of Mecha.
contendyng which of them should possess the kyngedome of Mecha.

Of the form and situation of the city of Mecha: and why the Mahumetans
resort thither. Cap. 15.
Now the time requires to speak somewhat of the famous city of Mecha, or
Mecca, what it is, how it is situate, and by whom it is governed. Mecha,
which Abraham O^telius calls Mecca.
The city is very fair and well inhabited, and contains in round form
six thousand houses, as well builded as ours, and some that cost three or
four thousand pieces of gold: it has no walls. About two furlongs from the
city is a mount, where the way is cut out, which leads to a plain
beneath. It is on every side fortified with mountains, in the stead of walls
or bulwarks, and has four entries. The governor is a Soltan, and one of the
four brethren of the progeny of Mahumet, and is subject to the Soltan of
Babylon, The Soltan of Mecha.
of whom we have spoken before: His other three brethren be at continual war
with him. The xviii. day of May, we entered into the city by the north side:
then by a declynyng way, we came into a plain. On the south side are two
mountains, the one very near the other, distant only by a little valley,
which is the way that leads to the gate of Mecha. On the east side, is an
open place between two mountains, like unto a valley, and is the way to the
mountain where they sacrifice to the Patriarchs Abraham and Isaac. This
mountain is from the city about.x. or xii miles, Sacrifice to Abraham and
Isaac.
and of the heyght of three stones cast: it is of stone as hard as marble, yet
no marble. In the top of the mountain, is a Temple or Meschita, made after
their fashion, and has three ways to enter into it. At the foot of the
mountain are two cesterns, which conserve waters without corruption: of these,
the one is reserved to minister water to the Camels of the Carauana of Babylon
or Alcayr, and the other, for them of Damasco. It is rain water, and is
derived far of.

But to return to speak of the city: for as touching the manner of sacrifice
which they use at the foot of the mountain, we will speak hereafter.
Entryng therefore into the city, we found there the Carauana of Memphis, or
Babylon, which prevented us eight days, and came not the way that we came.
This Carauana contained threescore and four thousand Camelles, and a hundred
Mamalukes to guide them. And here ought you to consider, that by the opinion of
all men, this city is greatly cursed of God, Mecha cursed of god.
as appears by the great barrenness thereof, for it is destitute of all
manner of fruits and corn. It is scorched with dryness for lack of water,
and therefore the water is there grown to such price, Water very dear.
that you can not for twelve pence buy as much water as will satysfie your
thyrst for one day. Now therefore I will declare what provision they have for
victuales. The most part is brought them from the city of Babylon, otherwise
named Memphis, Cayrus, or Alcayr, a city of the river of Nilus in Egypt, The
river Nilus.
as we have said before, and is brought by the red sea (called Mare Erythreum)
from a certain port named Gida, The red sea.
distaunt from Mecha forty miles. The rest of their provisions, is brought
from Arabia Faelix (that is) the happy or blessed Arabia: so named for the
fruitfulness thereof, Arabia Faelix,
in respect of the other two Arabiaes, called Petrea and Diserta, that is,
stonye and desert. They have also much corn from Ethyopia. Here we found a
marvelous number of strangers and peregrynes, Many pilgrims and strangers at
Mecha.
or Pylgryms: Of the which, some came from Syria, some from Persia, and other
from both the East Indiaes, (that is to say) both India within the river of
Ganges, and also the other India without the same river. I never saw in any
place greater abundaunce and frequentation of people, forasmuch as I could
perceive by tarrying there the space of.xx. days. These people resort thither
for diverse causes, as some for merchandies, some to observe their vow of
Pilgrimage, Why so many nations (...) to Mecha.
and other to have pardon for their sins: as touching the which we will
speak more hereafter,

Of the merchandies of Mecha. Cap. 16.
FRom India the greater, which is both within and without the river of Ganges,
they have pearls, precious stones, and plenty of spyces: and especially from
that city of the greater India, which is named Bangella, they have much
gossampyne cloth and sylke. They have also spyces from Ethiopia: and therefore
we must needs confess that this city is a famous mart of many rich things,
whereof there is great plenty.

Of the Pardons or Indulgences of Mecha. Cap. 17.
LEt us now return to speak of the pardons of pilgryms, for the which so many
strange nations resort thither. In the myddest of the city, The temple of
Mecha.
is a Temple, in fashyon like unto the Collossus of Rome, the Amphitheatrum I
mean, like unto a stage, yet not of marble or hewed stones, but of burnt
bryckes: For this temple, like unto an Amphitheater, has fourscore and ten,
or an hundred gates, and is vaulted. The entrance, is by a descent of twelve
stayers or degrees on every part: in the church porche, are sold only jewels
and precious stones. In the entry the gylted walls shine on every side with
imcomparable splendor. In the lower part of the temple (that is under the
vaulted places) is seen a marvelous multitude of men: For there are five or
six thousand men that sell none other thing then sweet oyntmentes, and
especially a certain odoriferous and most sweet powder, wherewith dead bodies
are embalmed. And from hence, all manner of sweet savors are carried in manner
into the countries of all the Mahumetans. It passes all belief to think of
the exceedyng sweetness of these savors, far surmounting the shoppes of
the Apothecaries. The.xxiii. day of May, the pardones began to be granted in
the Temple, and in what manner we will now declare. The Temple in the myddest
is open, without any inclosyng, A Turret in the Temple of Mecha.
and in the myddest also thereof, is a Turret, of the largnesse of six pases in
cercuitie, and inuolued or hanged with cloth or tapestry of sylke, and passes
not the heyght of a man. They enter into the turret by a gate of silver, and is
on every side besette with vessels full of balm. A gate of silver.
On the day of Pentecost, license is granted to al men to se these things.
The inhabitants affirm, that balm or balsame, to be part of the treasure of
the Soltan that is Lord of Mecha. At every vaulte of the turret, is fastened a
round circle of Iron, Balsame or balm.
like to the ryng of a door. The.xxiii. day of May, a great multitude of
people began early in the morning before day, seven times to walk about the
Turret, kyssyng every corner thereof, oftentimes feelyng and handdelyng them.
From this Turret, about ten or twelve pases, is an other Turret, like a
Chapel builded after our manner. A chapel with a well in it, in the Temple.
This has three or four entryes: in the myddest thereof is a well of
threescore and ten cubits deep: the water of this Well is infected with
salt Peter or salniter. Eight men are thereunto appointed to draw water for
all the people: and when a multitude of people have seven times gone round
about the first Turret, they come to this well: and touching the mouth or brym
thereof, they say thus, Be it in the honor of God, God pardon me, A strange
baptism for remission of sins.
and forgive me my sins. When these words are said, they that draw the
water, power three buckettes of water on the headdes of every one of them that
stand near about the well, and wash them all wette from the headde to the
foot, although they be apparelled with sylke. Then their dotyng fools dream
that they are clean from all their sins, Good meaning suffices not.
and that their sins are forgeuen them. They say furthermore, that the first
Turret, whereof we have spoken, was the first house that ever Abraham builded:
and therefore, while they are yet all wette of the said washyng, they go to the
mountain, The house of Abraham. Sacrifice to Abraham.
where (as we have said before) they are accustomed to sacrifice to Abraham.
And remaining there two days, they make the said sacrifice to Abraham at the
foot of the mountain.

The manner of Sacrificyng at Mecha. Cap. 18.
Forasmuch as for the most part, noble spirits are delyted with novelties of
great and strange things, therefore to satisfy their expectation, I will
describe their manner of sacrifycyng. Therefore, when they intend to sacrifice,
some of them kyl three sheep, some four, and some ten: So that the
butcherie sometime so flows with blood, Sacrifice of sheep.
that in one sacrifice are slain above three thousand sheep. They are slain
at the rysyng of the Sun, and shortly after are distributed to the poor for
Gods sake: for I saw there a great and confounded multitude of poor people,
as to the number of.xxx. thousand. These make many and long dyches in the
feeldes, where they keep fire with Camels doong, and roast or sees the flesh
that is given them, and eat it even there. I believe that these poor people
come thither rather for hunger then for devotion: Religion for poverty.
which I think by this coniectur, that great abundance of cucumbers are
brought thither from Arabia Faelix, which they eat, castyng away the parings
without their houses or tabernacles, where a multitude of the said poor
people geather them even out of the mire and sand, and eat them, and are so
greedy of these parings, that they fight who may geather most. The day
following, their Cadi (which are in place with them as with us the preachers of
gods word) ascended into a high mountain, Cadi, a preacher.
to preach to the people that remained beneath: and preached to them in their
language the space of an hour. The sum of his sermon was, A goodly sermon.
that with tears they should bewail their sins, and beat their breasts,
with sighs and lamentation. And the preacher him self with loud voice, spoke
these words, O Abraham beloved of god, O Isaac chosen of god, and his friend.
^^aye to god for the people of Nabi. When these words were said, Soldiers
trouble the word of God.
suddenly were heard lamenting voices. When the sermon was done, a rumor was
spredde that a great army of Arabians, to the number of twenty thousand,
were coming. With which news, they that kept the Carau^nas being greatly
feared, with all speed, like mad men, fled into the city of Mecha, and we
again hearing news of the Arabians approach, fled also into the city. But
while we were in the mydwaye between the mountain and Mecha* we came by a
despicable wall, of the breadth of four cubits: The people passing by this
wall, had covered the way with stones, the cause whereof, they say to be
this: Where Abraham sacrifyced his son Isaac.
When Abraham was commanded to sacrifice his son, he wylled his son Isaac
to follow him to the place where he should execute the commandment of God. As
Isaac went to follow his father, there appeared to him in the way a Devil, The
Devil appears to Isaac.
in likeness of a fair and freendly person, not far from the said wall,
and asked him freendlye whyther he went. Isaac answered that he went to his
father who tarryed for him. To this the enemy of mankind answered, that it
was best for him to tarrye, and if that he went any further, his father would
sacrifice him. But Isaac nothing feareyng this advertisement of the Devil, went
foreward, that his father on him might execute the commandment of God: and
with this answer (as they say) the Devil departed. Yet as Isaac went
forward, the Devil appeared to him again in the likeness of an other
frendlye person, and forbade him as before. Then Isaac taking up a stone in
that place, Isaac wounded the Devil in the forehead.
huride it at the Devil, and wounded him in the forehead: In witness and
remembrance whereof, the people passing that way, when they come near the
wall, are accustomed to cast stones against it, and from thence go into the
city. As we went this way, the air was in manner darkened with a multitude of
stock Doves. They say that these Doves, Stock doves of the progeny of the
Dove which spoke in Mahumets ear.
are of the progeny of the Dove that spoke in the ear of Mahumet, in
likeness of the Holy Ghost. These are seen every where, as in the villages,
houses, tauernes, and graniers of corn and rise, and are so tame, that one can
scharsely drive them a way. Too take them or kill them, is esteemed a thing
worthy death: and therefore a certain pensyon is given to nouryshe them in the
Temple.

Of the Unicorns of the temple of Mecha* which are not seen in any other
place. Cap. 19.
ON the other part of the temple are parkes or places enclosed, where are seen
two Unicorns, named of the Greeks Monocerotae, Monoceros.
and are there showed to the people for a miracle, and not without good reason,
for the seldomenesse and strange nature. The Unicorns.
The one of them, which is much higher then the other, yet not much unlike to
a colte of thyrtye months of age, in the forehead grows only one horn, in
manner right forth, The Unicorns horn.
of the length of three cubits. The other is much younger, of the age of one
year, and like a young colte: the horn of this, is of the length of four
handfuls. This beast is of the color of a horse of weesell color, and has
the head like an Heart, but no long neck, a thynne mane hangyng only on the
one side: their legs are thyn and slender, like a fawn or hynde: the hoofes
of the fore feet are divided in two, much like the feet of a Goat, the
outward part of the hinder feet is very full of hear. This beast doubtless
seems wild and fierce, yet tempereth that fierceness with a certain
comeliness. These Unicornes one gave to the Soltan of Mecha* as a most
precious and rare gift. They were sent him out of Ethiope by a king of that
country, who desired by that present to gratify the Soltan of Mecha.

Of diverse things which chanced to me in Mecha: And of Zida, a port of Mecha.
Cap. 20.
IT may seem good here to make mention of certain things, in the which is
seen sharpness of wit in case of urgent necessity, which has no law, as
says the proverb: for I was driven to the point how I might privily escape
from Mecha. Therefore whereas my Captain gave me charge to buy certain
things, as I was in the market place, a certain Mamaluke knew me to be a
Christian. And therefore in his own language, spoke unto me these words,
Inte mename: That is, whence art thou? To whom I answered that I was a
Mahumetan. But he said, Thou say not truly. I said again, By the head of
Mahumet, I am a Mahumetan. Then he said again, Come home to my house. I
followed him willingly. When we were there, he began to speak to me in the
Italian tongue, and asked me again from whence I was, affyrmyng that he knew
me, and that I was no Mahumetan: Also that he had been sometime in Genua and
Venice. And that his words might be the better believed, rehearsed many
things which testified that he said truth. When I understood this, I
confessed freely that I was a Roman, but professed to the faith of Mahumet in
the city of Babylon, and there made one of the Mamalukes. Whereof he seemed
greatly to rejoice, and therefore used me honorably. But because my desire was
yet to go further, I asked the Mahumetan whether that city of Mecha was so
famous as all the world spoke of it: Why Mecha is not so much frequented as in
time paste.
and inquired of him where was the great abundance of pearls, precious
stones, spices, and other rich merchandies that the brute went of to be in
that city. And all my talk was to the end to grope the mind of the
Mahumetan, that I might know the cause why such things were not brought
thither as in time paste. But to avoid all suspicion, I durst here make no
mention of the dominion which the King of Portugale had in the most part of
that Ocean, The dominion of the King of Portugale in the East parts
and of the gulfes of the red sea and Persia. Then he began with more
attentyue mind, in order to declare unto me the cause why that mart was not
so greatly frequented as it had been before, and laid the only fault thereof
in the king of Portugale. But when he had made mention of the King, I began of
purpose to detracte his fame, least the Mahumetan might think that I rejoiced
that the Christians came thither for merchandies. When he perceived that I was
of profession an enemy to the Christians, he had me yet in greater estimation,
and proceeded to tell me many things more. When I was well instructed in all
things, I spoke unto him friendly these words in the Mahumets language,
Menaha Menalhabi: That is to say, I pray you assist me. Hypocrisy.
He asked me wherein. To help me (said I) how I may secretly depart hence.
Confirmyng by great oaths, that I would go to those Kings that were most
enemies to the Christians: Affirmyng furthermore, that I knew certain
secrets greatly to be esteemed, which if they were known to the said
kings, I doubted not but that in short time I should be sent for from
Mecha. Astonyshed at these words, he said unto me, I pray you what art or
secret do you know? I answered, that I would give place to no man in making
of all manner of Gunnes and artillery. Then said he, Praised be Mahumet who
sent thee hither, to do him and his Saints good service: and willed me to
remain secretly in his house with his wife, and required me earnestly to
obtain leave of our Captain, that under his name he might lead from Mecha
fiftiene Camelles laden with spices, Paying of custom to the Soltan.
without paying any custom: for they ordinarily pay to the Soltan thirty
Saraphes of gold, for transportyng of such merchandies for the charge of so
many Camelles. I put him in good hope of his request, although he would ask
for a hundred, affyrmyng that that might easily be obtained by the privileges
of the Mamalukes, and therefore desired him that I might safely remain in his
house. Then nothing doubtyng to obtain his request, he greatly rejoiced, and
talkyng with me yet more freely, gave me further instructions, and counsayled
me to repair to a certain King of the greater India, The realm of Decham in
India.
in the kingdom and realm of Decham, whereof we will speak hereafter.
Therefore the day before the Carauana departed from Mecha, he willed me to lie
hid in the most secret part of his house. The day following, early in the
morning, the trumpetter of the Carauana gave warning to all the Mamalukes to
make ready their horses, to direct their journey toward Syria, with
proclamation of death to all that should refuse so to do. When I heard the
sound of the Trumpet, and was advertised of the straight commandment, I was
marvelously troubled in mind, and with heavy countenance desired the
Mahumetans wife not to bewraye me, and with earnest prayer committed myself to
the mercy of God. On the Tuesday following, our Carauana departed from Mecha,
and I remained in the Mahumetans house with his wife, but he followed the
Carauana. Yet before he departed, he gave commandment to his wife to bring me
to the Carauana, which should depart from Zida the port of Mecha, to go into
India. This port is distant from Mecha.xl miles. Whilst I lay thus hyd in
the Mahumetans house, I can not express how friendly his wife used me. This
also furthered my good interteynement, that there was in the house a fair
young maid, the Niese of the Mahumetan, who was greatly in love with me. But
at that time, in the myddest of those troubles and fear, Affliction cools
lechery.
the fire of Uenus was almost extincte in me: and therefore with daliaunce of
fair words and promises, I still kept my self in her favor. Therefore the
Friday following, about noone tide I departed, following the Carauana of India.
And about mydnyght, we came to a certain village of the Arabians, and there
remained the rest of that night, and the next day till noone. From hence we
went forward on our journey toward Zida, The city of Zida.
and came thither in the silence of the night. This city has no walls, yet
fair houses, somewhat after the buyldyng of Italy. Here is great abundance
of all kind of merchandies, by reason of resort in manner of all nations
thither, except Jews and Christians, to whom it is not lawful to come
thither. As Soon as I entered into the city, I went to their Temple or
Meschita, where I saw a great multitude of poor people, as about the number
of.xxv. thousand, Poor Pilgryms that came from Mecha.
attendyng a certain Pilot who should bring them into their country. Here I
suffered much trouble and affliction, being enforced to hyde my self among
these poor folks, faynyng my self very sick, to the end that none should
be inquisityue what I was, whence I came, or whyther I would. The Lord of this
city is the Soltan of Babylon, brother to the Soltan of Mecha, who is his
subject. The inhabitauntes are Mahumetans. The soil is unfruitful, and
lacks fresh water. The sea beats against the town. There is nevertheless
abundance of all things: but brought thither from other places, as from
Babylon of Nilus, Arabia Foelix, and diverse other places. The heat is here so
great, that men are in manner dried up therewith. And therefore there is ever a
great number of sick folks. The city conteyneth about five hundred houses.

After fyftiene days were past, I couenaunted with a pilot, who was ready to
depart from thence into Persia, From Arabia to Persia.
and agreed of the price, to go with him. There lay at Anchor in the haven
almost a hundred Brigantines and Foistes, with diverse boats and barks of
sundry sorts, both with Ores and without Ores. Therefore after three days,
gyuyng wind to our sails, we entered into the red sea, The red sea.
otherwise named Mare Erythraeum.

Of the red sea, and why it can not be sailed in the night. Cap. 21.
IT is well known to wise men that this sea is not red, as some have imagined,
but is of the color of other seas. We continued therefore our vyage until the
going down of the Sun. For this sea, is nauigable only in the day time: and
therefore in the nights, the maryners rest them, until they come to the
Island named Chameran, from whence they proceed forward more safely. Why this
sea can not be sailed in the night, they say the cause to be, that there are
many dangerous sands, rocks, and shelues: and therefore that it is needful
of diligent and long prospecte, from the top Castle of the ship, to
foresee the dangerous places.

The second book, entreating of Arabia Foelix, That is, the happy or blessed
Arabia.
Of the city of Gezan, and the fruitfulness thereof. Cap. 1.
Forasmuch as hitherto we have spoken somewhat of the manners of the people
and cities of Arabia Foelix, it may now seem convenient to finishe the rest
of our vyage with such things as we have seen in the said country of
Arabia. The city of Gezan.
Therefore after six days saylyng, we came to a city named Gezan. It has a
commodious port, and very fair, where we found about forty and five
Brigantines and Foistes of diverse regions. The city is hard by the sea side,
and the Prince thereof, is a Mahumetan. The soil is fruitful, like unto
Italy: It bears Pomegranates, Quinses, Peaches, Apples of Assyria, Pepons,
Melons, Oranges, Gourdes, and diverse other fruits: Also Roses, and sundry
sorts of flowers, the fairest that ever I saw: It seems an earthly
Paradyse. The most part of the inhabitauntes go naked* In other things, they
live after the manner of the Mahumetans. There is also great abundance of
flesh, wheat, barley, the grain of white Millet or Hirse (which they call
Dora) whereof they make very sweet bread.

Of certain people named Banduin. Cap. 2.
DEparting from the city of Gezan, the space of.v. days, sailing toward the
left hand, having ever the coast of the land in sight, we came to the sight
of certain houses, where about.xiiii. of us went alande, hopyng to have had
some victuals of the inhabitans. But we lost our labor, for in the steed of
victuals, they cast stones at us with stinges. They were about a hundred that
fought with our men for the space of an hour. Of them were slain.xxiiii. The
rest were driven to flight, they were naked, and had none other weapons then
slings. After their flight, we brought away with us certain hens and Calves
very good. Shortly after a great multitude of the inhabitauntes showed them
selves to the number of five or six hundred: but we departed with our pray,
and returned to the ships.

Of an Island of the red sea, named Camaran. Cap. 3.
THe same day saylyng forward, we came to an Island named Camaran, which
conteyneth ten miles in circuit. In it is a town of two hundred houses, the
inhabitants are Mahumetans: it has abundance of fresh water and flesh,
and the fairest salt that ever I saw. The port is eight miles from the
continent, it is subject to the Soltan of Amanian of Arabia Foelix. After we
had remained here two days, we took our way toward the mouth of the red sea
in the space of two days saylyng: This sea may here be sailed both day and
night. For (as we have said before) from this Island unto the port of Zida,
the red sea is not safely nauigable by night. When we came to the mouth of the
sea, we seemed to be in manner enclosed, for that the mouth of the sea is there
very straight, and no more then three miles over. Toward the right hand, the
continent land is seen of the heyght of ten pases: the soil seems rude and
not cultured. At the left hand of the said mouth, ryseth a very high hill of
stone. In the myddest of the mouth, is a little Island uninhabited, named
Bebmendo, and is toward the left hand to them that sail to Zeila: But they
that go to Aden, must keep the way to the left hand. All this way, we had
ever the land in our sight, from Bebmendo to Aden, in the space of two days
and a half.

Of the city of Aden, and of their manners and customs toward strangers.
Cap. 4.
I Do not remember that I have seen any city better fortified then this: It
stands on a soil not much unequal, Of the city of Aden look. Cap. 13.
it is walled on two sides: The rest is enclosed with mountains, having on
them five fortresses. The city conteyneth six thousand houses. Their
exercise of bying and sellyng, Bying and sellyng by night.
begins the second hour of the night, by reason of extreme heat in the
day time. A stone cast from the city, is a mountain, having on it a
fortress. The ships lie near the foot of the mountain: it is certaynely a
very goodly city, and the fairest of all the cities of Arabia Foelix. To this,
as to the chief mart, the merchauntes of India, Ethiopia, and Persia, have
recourse by sea, and they also that resort to Mecha. As Soon as our
Brigantines came into the haven, immediately the customers and searchers came
aborde, demaundyng what we were, from whence we came, what merchaundies we
brought, and how many men were in every Brigantine.

Being advertised of these things, immediately they took away our maste,
sails, and other tackelynges of our ships, that we should not depart
without paying of custom. The day after our arryuyng there, the Mahumetans
took me, and put shackles on my legs, The Aucthour taken and put in prison.
which came by occasion of a certain Idolatour who cried after me, saying, O
Christian Dog, borne of Dogs. Picade the Moonke writes that Christians are
found in all regions saving in Arabia and Egypt, where they are most hated.
When the Mahumetans heard the name of a Christian, incontinent they laid
hands on me, and brought me to the Lieuetenaunt of the Soltan of that place,
who assemblyng his counsel, asked their opinion if I should be put to death
as a spy of the Christians.

The Soltan him self was out of the city, and therefore his Lieuetenaunt, who
had yet never adjudged any man to death, thought it not good to give sentence
against me, before the Soltan should be advertised hereof. And therefore I
escaped this present danger, and remained in custody fifty and five days,
with an Iron of eightiene pound weight hangyng at my feet. The second day
after I was taken, many Mahumetans in great rage resorted to him, whose office
was to make inquisition of treason. These a few days before, by swimming
hardly escaped the hands of the Portugales, with the loss of their Foistes
and Barks, and therefore desired greatly to be revenged of the Christians:
affyrmyng with outrageous cry, that I was a spy of the Portugales. But God
failed not to assyst me. For the master of the prison, perceiving the outrage
of the Mahumetans, and fearyng that they would offer me violence, made fast the
gates of the prison. After that five and fifty days were paste, the Soltan
commanded that I should be brought before him: and so, set upon a Camel with
my shackles, I came in eight days journey to the place where the Soltan lay,
and was brought to his presence in a city named Rhada: for there the Soltan
had assembled an army of thirty thousand men, to make war against the
Soltan of the city of Sana, which is three days journey from Rhada, and
situate partly on the declining of a hill, and partly in a plain, very fair
to be seen, well peopled, and having plenty of all things. When I came
before the Soltan, he began to ask me what I was. I answered that I was a
Roman, professed a Mamaluke in Babylon of Alcayr, and that of religious mind to
discharge my conscience of a vow which I had made to see the body of Nabi
the holy Prophet, I came to the city of Medinathalhabi, where they say he is
buried: and that in all cities and countries by the way, I heard honorable
report of his greatness, wisdom, and singular virtue, and therefore ceased
not until I entered his dominions, most desirous to see his face, yeldyng
thanks to God, and Nabi, that it was now my chance to be presented before
him: trustyng that the equity of his wisdom, would thereby consider that I
was no spy of the Christians, but a true Mahumetan, and his servant and slave.
Then said the Soltan, (...) ^oordes of them that prof^sse the religion of
Mahumet.
Say, Leila illala Mahumet resullala: which words I could never well
pronounce, either that it pleased not God, or that for fear and scruple of
conscience, I durst not. Therefore when he saw me hold my peace, he
committed me again to prison, commaundyng that I should be straightly looked
unto, where.xvi. men of the city were appointed, every day four, to watch
me by course. So that for the space of three months, I had not ye fruition of
heaven, during which miserable time, me diet was every day a lofe of myllet, so
little that seven of them would not have satisfied my hunger for one day: But
if I might have had my fill of water, I would have thought my self happy.
Within three days after the Soltan marched with his army of thyrtie thousand
footmen (as we have said) and three thousand horsemen, to beseege the city
of Sana. These horsemen were borne of Christian parents, and black like the
Ethiopians, Soldiers horsemen of Christian Ethiopians of the dominion of
Presbiter Johannes. Abbyssini, under Prester John.
and while they were yet very young, were bought in the kingdom of Prester
John, named in Latin Presbyter Johannes, or rather Preciosus Johannes. These
Christian Ethiopians, are also named Abbyssini. They are brought up in
discipline of war, as are the Mamalukes and Ienetzares of the Turks. This
Soltan has them in great estimation, for they are the guard of his own person,
and therefore have greater wages, and are in number fourscore thousand. A
guard of fourscore thousand black men.
They cover their body with a sindon, like unto a cloak or cape, putting out
only one arm, and are beside naked without any other apparel. In the wars
they use round targettes, made of bufles hydes, Targettes.
with certain little bars of Iron to strengthen them. These targets are
painted very fair with sundry colors, and very commodious to resyste darts,
and are in largeness as much as the mouth of a barell: the handle is made of
woodde, as bygge as they may well hold in their hands, and made fast with
nails. They use darts, and short broad swoordes. At other times, they use
also vestures of lynnen cloth of sundry colors. Also of gossampine or Xylon,
otherwise also named bombasine. In the wars, every man bears with him a
slyng, which he casts, Slings.
first shaking it often about his head. When they come to.xl. or.l. years of
age, they make them horns, by wreathyng ye hear of their heds, so bearyng two
horns like young Gotes. When they proceed to the wars, five thousand Camels
follow the army, all laden with ropes of bombasine.

How the women of Arabia, are greatly in love with white men, Cap. 5.
AFter the army was departed, I was incontinent committed to prison, as I have
said. Hard by the prysone was a long entry in manner of a cloister, where
sometime we were permitted to walk. Ye shall further understand, that in the
Soltans place remained one of his three wives, with twelve young maids to
wait upon her, very fair and comely, after their manner, and of color
inclinyng to black. The favor that they bore me, helped me very much, for I
with two other, Counterfeit madness.
being in the same prison, agreed that one of us should counterfytte him self
to be mad, that by this device, one of us might help an other. In fine, it was
my lotte to take upon me the mad man's part, and therefore stood me in hand
to do such follies as pertayne to madness. Also the opinion which they have
of mad folks, made greatly for my purpose: for they take mad men to be holy,
and therefore suffered me to run more at large, until the Eremites had given
judgment whether I wear holy, or ragyng mad, as appears heareafter. But the
first three days in which I began to show my madness, weryed me so much,
that I was never so tired with labor or grieved with pain, for the boys and
rascal people sometime to the number of.xl. or.l. hurled stones at me almost
without ceassing, while in the mean time again I paid some of them home with
like wages. The boys cried ever after me, calling me mad man. And to show it
the more, I carried always stones with me in my shyrt, for other apparel had I
none. The queen hearing of my follies, looked oftentimes out of the wyndowes
to see me, more for a secret love she bore me, then for the pleasure she took
in my follyes, as afterward appeared.

Therefore on a time, when some of them, much madder then I, played the knaves
with me in the sight of the queen (whose secret favor toward me I somewhat
perceived) that my maddenesse might seem more manifest, I cast of my shyrt,
and went to the place before the wyndowes, where the queen might see me all
naked: wherein I perceived she took great pleasure. For she ever found some
occasion that I might not go out of her sight: and would sometimes, with all
her damoselles waytyng on her, spend almost the whole day in beholding me:
and in the mean season diverse times sent me secretlye much good meat by her
maidens, and when she saw the boys or other do me any hurt, she badde me kill
them, and spare not, reuylyng them also, and calling them dogs and beasts.
In the palace was nouryshed a great fatt sheep: for there are some of such
exceedyng bygnesse, that only the tail wayeth.xi. or.xii. pound weight.
Sheep with exceedyng great tails.
Under the color of madness, I laid hand on this sheep, saying, Leila
illala Mahumet resullala: which words the Soltan before, when I was brought to
his presence, wyllyd me to say, to prove whether I were a Mahumetan or a
professed Mamaluke. But the beast answeryng nothing, I asked him if he were a
Mahumetan, Jew, A Sheep made a mahumetan.
or Christian. And wyllyng to make him a Mahumetan, I rehearsed again the
said words Leila illala Mahumet resullala, (that is to say) there is one
God, and Mahumet his chief Prophet: which are the words which they speak in
professyng their faith. But when the beast yet answered nothing, I broke his
legs with a staff. The queen took great pleasure in these my mad
follyes, and commanded the flesh of the sheep to be given me to eat: I
never ate meat with more pleasure, or better appetite. Also three days after,
Hunger makes appetite.
I likewise killed an Ass that was wont to bring water into the palace,
because he refused to be a Mahumetan, and to say those words. The same time
also I handeled a Jew so evil, that I had almost killed him, one in the mean
time calling me Christian dog, dog borne. With which words being very
angry, I cast many stones at him: but he again hurlyng at me, gave me a stroke
on the breast, and an other on the side, which grieved me very sore.

And because I could not follow him by reason of my shackles, I returned to
the prison, and stopped the door with a heap of stones, and there lived in
great pain for the space of two days without meat or drink: And therefore
the queen and other thought me to be dead, but the door was opened by the
queens commandment. Then these dogs derydyng me, gave me stones in the
steed of bread, and pieces of white marble, saying that it was sugar: other
gave me clusters of Grapes full of sand. But partly that they should not
suspect that I counterfeyted madness, I ate the Grapes as they gave me them.
When the brute was spread that I lived two days and nyghtes without meat and
drink: Madness taken for holiness.
some began to suspect that I was a holy man, and some that I was stark mad.
And thus being divided into diverse opinions, they consulted to send for
certain men, Heremytes. Mahumetans.
of whom they have such opinion of holiness, as we have of Heremytes: these
dwell in the mountains, and lead a contemplatyue life. When they came unto
me, to give their judgment what manner of man I was, certain merchantes asked
them if I were a holy man, or a mad man. These were also of diverse opinions,
some affyrmyng one thing, and some another. While they were yet debatyng this
matter, for the space of an hour, I pyssed in my hands, and hurlde it in
their faces: whereby they agreed that I was no Saint, but a mad man. The
queen seeing all this at the wyndowe, laughed well thereat among her maidens,
and said thus to them, By the goodness of God, and by the head of Mahumet,
this is a good man. The day following, when in the morning I found him a sleep
that had so sore hurt me with stones, I took him by the hear of the head with
both hands, and with my knee so pounched him on the stomach, and battered his
face, that I left him all blooddy, and half dead. Which thing the queen
seeing, cried unto me saying, kill the beast, kill the dog: whereupon, he ran
his way, and came no more in sight. When the President of the city heard that
the queen favored me, and took pleasure in my mad sport, thynkyng also that I
was not mad, commanded that I should go at liberty within the palace, only
wearyng my shackles: Yet every night was I put in an other prison in the lower
part of the palace, and so remained still in the court for the space of.xx.
days. In the mean time, the queen wylled me to go a huntyng with her, which
I refused not, and at my return, I fained me to be sick for weariness. So
continuyng for the space of eight days, under the color of sickness, the
queen often sent to me to know how I did. After this, fyndyng opportunity, A
holy vow.
I declared to the queen that I had made a vow to God and Mahumet to visit a
certain holy man in the city of Aden, and desired her to give me leave to go
thither. Whereunto she consented: and commanded immediately a Cammell and.xxv.
Sarraphes of gold to be delivered me. Therefore ye day following, I took my
journey, and in the space of eight days, came to the city of Aden: and shortly
after my coming, vysited the man of whom was so great report of holiness,
and whom the people honored for a saint. A holy saint.
And this only, because he had ever lived in great poverty, and without the
company of women. And hear are seen many other such: But doubtless all such
lose their labor, being out of the faith of Christ. When I had performed my
vow, I feigned that I had recovered health by miracle of that holy man, and
certified the queen thereof, desyryng that I might tarry there a while, to
visyte likewise certain other men in that country, of whom was the like fame
of holiness: which excuse I devised, because the fleet of India would not
yet depart from thence for the space of a month. In the mean time I secretly
agreed with a certain captain of that navy to go with him into India, The
fleet of India.
and made him many fair promises to reward him largly. He answered, that he
would not go into India before he had first ben in Persia: whereunto I agreed.

Of the cities of Lagi and Aiaz in Arabia Felix: And of the martes of Aiaz and
the town of Dante. Cap. 7.
THe day following, mountyng upon a Camel, and making a journey of.xxv. miles,
I came to a certain city mamed Lagi, situate in a great plain, well peopled,
having abundaunce of Olives, and flesh, with also great plenty of corn,
after our manner: but no vines, and great scarsenesse of woodde. The
inhabitauntes are uncivil and rusticall people, of the nation of vagabunde and
feelde Arabians, and therefore but poor. Departing from hence one dai^ journey,
I came to an other city named Aiaz, situate upon two hills, with a great
plain between them, and has in it a notable fountain, and therefore diverse
nations resort thither as to a famous mart. The inhabitauntes are Mahumetans,
and yet greatly differyng in opinion of their religion: Strife and hatred for
religion and all worth naught.
insomuche that therefore they be at great enimitie one against the other, and
keep sore war. The cause whereof they say to be this: That the people of
the north mountain, maynteyne the faith and sect of Mahumet and his fellows,
of whom we have spoken before: but the other of the South mountain affirm,
that faith should be given only to Mahumet and Haly, Mortus Hali, as the
Persians call him.
saying the other to be false prophets. But let us now return to the mart.
Almost all manner of spices are brought hither. The region brings forth sylke
and bombassine: also diverse goodly fruits, and vynes. On the top of both the
hills, are very strong fortresses, two days journey from thence is the city
of Dante, well fortified both by art and nature, situate in the top of a
very great mountain.

Of Almacharan, a city of Arabia Faelix, and of the fruitefulnesse thereof.
Cap. 8.
Departing from Dante, we came to the city of Almacharan, in two days journey.
This is situate on a very high mountain, and declynyng, and difficulte to
ascend, as of the heyght of seven miles, and the way so narow, that only two
men can pass together. In the top, is a plain of incredible largeness,
very fruiteful, with plenty of all things to the use of man. And therefore I
think it to be inexpugnable and inaccessible: having also so great abundaunce
of water, that one fountain may suffice for a hundred thousand men. And
therefore they say that the Soltan here hydeth his treasure, because he was
borne in this city.

Here also ever remains one of his wives. The air is marvelous temperate
and wholesome, and the city second to none in all respects: the color of the
inhabitants is rather enclynyng to white, then any other color. As much gold
as will lade a hundred Camels.
And to speak that I have seen, the Soltan reserueth here as much gold, as
will lade a hundred Camels.

Of Reame a city of Arabia Faelix, and the temperatenesse thereof. Cap. 9.
THis city is distaunt two days journey from Almacaran. The color of the
inhabitants is enclinyng to black: they are great merchantes. The soil is
fruitful of all things saving wood: it conteyneth in circuit two thousand
houses: on the one side is a mountain having on it a very strong fortress.
Here I saw a certain kind of sheep having their tails of forty and four
pound weight, A sheep tail of.44. pound weight.
and are without horns, and also so marvelous fat, that they can scarcely go
for fatness. There be likewise certain grapes without graynes, the sweetest
that ever I eat, and al manner of such fruits, as I have spoken of before.
Grapes without graynes.
It is of marvelous temperatenesse, as witnesses the long life of men, for I
have spoken with many of them that have passed the age of a hundred and five
and twenty years, Men of long life in temperate air.
and yet very lusty and well complexioned. They go for the most part naked,
wearyng only shyrts, or other loose and thynne apparel, like Mantelles,
puttyng out one Arm all bare. Almost all the Arabians make them Horns with
wreathyng of their own hear, and that they think very comely.

Of Sana a city of Arabia Faelix. Cap. 10.
Departing from thence three days journey, I came to a city named Sana,
situate upon a very high mountain, very strong by Art and Nature. The
Soltan besyeged this, with a great army of fourscore thousand men for the
space of three months, but could never win it. An army of fourscore
thousand men.
Yet it was at the last rendered by composition. The walls are of eyghteene
cubits heyght, and twenty in breadth, insomuch that eight Camels in order may
well march upon them. Strong walls.
The region is very fruitful and much like unto ours, and has plenty of
water. A Soltan is Lord of the city: he has twelve sons, of the which
one is named Mahumet, who by a certain natural tyranny and madness,
delyteth to eat man's fleeshe, Anthopophagus.
and therefore secretly kylleth many to eat them. He is of large and strong
body, of four cubits high, and of the color inclinyng to ashes. The soil
bears certain spyces not far from the city. It conteyneth about four
thousand houses. The houses are of fair buyldyng, and give no place to ours.
The city is so large, that it conteyneth within the walls, fields, gardens,
and meadows.

Of Taessa, Zibith, and Damar. great cities of Arabia Eaelix. Cap. 11.
AFter three days journey, I came to a city named Taessa, sytuate upon a
mountain, and very fair to sight: it has plenty of all delices, and
especially of marvelous fair Roses, Roses.
whereof they make Rose water. It is an ancient city, and has in it a Temple
builded after the fashion of the church of Sancta Maria Rotunda in Rome. The
houses are very fair, and show yet the monumentes of antiquity: innumerable
merchantes resort hither for the traffic of sundry merchandies. In apparel
they are like unto other, and of darkyshe ash color of skin, enclynyng to
black. Three days journey from thence, I came to an other city named Zibith,
very fair and good, distaunt from the red sea only half a days journey:
there is great abundance of merchandies by reason of the nearenesse of the sea.
It abounds with many goodly things, and especially with most white Sugar,
and sundry kinds of pleasant fruits. Sugar.
It is sytuate in a very large plain within two mountains: it lacks walls,
and is one of the cheifest martes for all sorts of spyces. The inhabitants are
of the color of them aforesaid. From hence in one days journey, I came to the
city of Damar: it is in a fruitful soil, and has great exercise of
merchandise. The inhabitants are Mahumetans, in apparel and colourlyke unto
the other.

Of the Soltan of the aforesaid cities, and why he is named Sechamir. Cap. 12.
THese cities whereof we have spoken here a little before, are subject to a
Soltan of Arabia Faelix, named Sechamir. The Soltan of Arabia felix.
Secha (by interpretation) signifies holy, and Amir, a Prince, named the holy
Prince, because he abhors sheddyng of man's blood. A pitiful pagan.
At the time of my being there in prison, he nouryshed syxteene thousand poor
men, and captives in prison condemned to death, allowyng to every of them daily
for their diet, six of their pence of the smallest valor, A great familye.
and at home in his palace entertayneth as many black slaves.

Of Monkeys and Marmasettes, and other beasts, noisome to men. Cap. 13.
Departing from hence, I returned to the city of Aden in three days journey:
in the midde way, Of Aden read the fourth cap.
I found an exceedyng high and large mountain, where is great pentie of wild
beasts, and especially of Monkeys, which run about the mountain every
where. There are also many Lions, very noisome to men: and therefore it is not
safe to journey that way, but when a multitude of men go together, Monkeys and
Lions.
at the least to the number of a hundred. I passed this way with a great
company, and yet were we in danger of the Lions, and other wild beasts
which followed us: Danger of wild beasts.
for we were sometimes constrained to fight with them with darts, slyngs, and
bows, vsyng also the help of dogs, and yet escaped hardly. When I came to
the city, I feigned my self sick: and in the day time lurked in the temple,
and went forth only in the night to speak with the pilot of the ship (of whom
I have made mention before) and obtained of him a foist or bark to depart
thence secretly.

Of certain places of Ethiopia. Cap. 14.
IN the syxt chapter here before, I have made mention how departing from the
queen I went to the city of Aden, where I couenaunted with a certain pilot
to go with him into India, and that he would not go thither before he had
first made a viage into Persia, and that at my first being in the city of
Aden, he could not yet for the space of a month depart from thence: During
which time, I traueyled the regions and cities, whereof I have spoken, unto
this my return to Aden. Now therefore according to our agreement to travail
diverse countries and regions, committing our selves to the sea, we were by
inconstant fortune and sundry tempests, Tempest.
deterred from that viage: for whereas we were now six days sailyng on our
way to Persia, The viage to Persia. Ethiope.
a sudden contrary tempeste drove us out of our way, and cast us on the coast
of Ethiope. Our barks were laden with rubricke (that is, Rubricke.
a certain red earth) which is used to dye cloth: for yearly from the city
of Aden, depart fyfteene or twenty shyps laden with rubricke, which is
brought out of Arabia Faelix. Being therefore thus tossed with storms, we were
driven into a port, named Zeila: where we remained five days to see the city,
and tarrye until the sea were more quiet.

Of the city Zeila in Ethiopia, and the great fruitfulness thereof: and of
certain strange beasts seen there. Cap. 15.
IN this city, is great freequentation of merchandies, as in a most famous
mart. Gold. Iuery. Black slaves.
There is marvelous abundance of gold and Iuerye, and an innumerable number of
black slaves, sold for a small price: these are taken in war by the
Mahumetan Mores, out of Ethyopia, of the kingdom of Presbiter Johannes, or
Preciosus Johannes, Presbiter Johannes, king of Iacobins and Abyssins. Justice
and good laws.
which some also call the king of Iacobins or Abyssins, being a Christian: and
are carried away from thence into Persia, Arabia Faelix, Babylonia of Nilus or
Alcair, and Mecha. In this city justice and good laws are observed: the soil
bears Wheat, and has abundaunce of flesh, and diverse other commodious
things. It has also Oil, not of Olyues, but of some other thing, I know not
what. There is also plenty of Honey and Wax: there are likewise certain
sheep, Sheep with great tails,
having their tails of the weight of syxeteene pound, and exceedyng fat,
the head and neck are black, and all the rest white. There are also sheep
altogether white, having tails of a cubite long, hangyng down like a great
cluster of grapes: and have also great lappes of skin hangyng from their
throtes, as have Bulls and Oxen, Palearia.
hangyng down almost to the ground. Kyne with Hearts horns.
There are also certain Kyne with horns like unto Hearts horns, these are
wild: and when they be taken, are given to the Soltan of that city as a
kyngly present. I saw there also certain Kyne, Kyne with only one horn*
having only one horn in the midst of the forehead, as has the Unicorne,
and about a spanne of length, but the horn bends backwarde: they are of
bright shynyng red color. But they that have Hearts horns, are enclynyng to
black color. Conye is there good cheepe. The city has an innumerable
multitude of merchants: the walls are greatly decayed, and the haven rude and
despicable. The king or Soltan of the city is a Mahumetan, and entertayneth in
wages a great multitude of foot men and horsemen. They are greatly given to
wars, and wear only one loose syngle vesture, as we have said before of
other. They are of dark ashye color, enclining to black. In the wars, they
are unarmed: and are of the sect of Mahumet.

Of Barbara, an Island of Ethiope. Cap. 16.
AFter that the tempests were appeased, we gave wind to our sails, and in
short time arrived at an Island named Barbara, the Prince whereof is a
Mahumetan. The Island is not great, but fruitful and well peopled: it has
abundance of flesh. The inhabitants are of color enclynyng to black. Al their
riches, is in heardes of cattayle. We remained here but one day, and departing
from hence, sailed into Persia.

The third book entreats of Persia: and of certain towns and parts of
Persia. Cap. 1.
WHen we had sailed the space of twelve days, we aryued at a city called
Diuobanderrumi, Diuobanderrumi.
(that is to say) the holy port of Turks. It is but a little way from the
continent: when the sea ryseth with hye tides, it is an Island environed with
water, but at a low fludde, or decrease of the sea, one may go thither by
land: it is subject to the Soltan of Cambaia. The Governor is named Menacheas:
It is a mart of great merchandies. The Soltan of Cambaia.
There dwell about it four hundred merchants of Turkey: it is well walled round
about, and defended with all sorts of engines. They have barks and brygantines
somewhat less then ours: we remained here two days. Departing from hence, Goa.
we came to an other city named Goa, in the space of three days journey: this
also abounds with merchandies, and is a mart greatly frequented. The soil is
fruitful, with plenty of all things necessary: the inhabitants are
Mahumetans. Near unto this, are two other fair cities and ports, Giulfar.
Meschet.
named Giulfar and Meschet.

Of the Island and city of Ormus, or Armusium: and of an Island of Persia where
pearls are found. Cap. 2.
PRoceedyng on our viage, we came to a city named Ormus, Ormus. Pearls.
very fair. This is second to none in goodlye situation, and plenty of
pearls: it is in an Island dystaunt from the continent twelve miles: It has
great scarceness of fresh water and corn, From other regions, is brought
thither all victualles that nouryshe the inhabitauntes. Three days saylyng
from thence, are geathered those muscles which bring forth the fairest and
byggest pearls: they are taken as I will now declare. Fyshyng for Pearls.
There are certain men that get their living by fyshyng. These having small
Boats, cast into the sea a great stone, fastened to a cord, and this on both
sides of the Boat, to make it as steadfast and immovable as a ship lying at
an Anchor. The Boat thus stayed as it were with weight and balance, an other
appointed to that purpose, casts into the sea a cord with a stone hangyng at
it. In the myddest of the Boat an other having a sack hangyng on his shoulder
before and behind, Diverse under the water.
and a stone hangyng at his feet, hurleth him self into the sea, and swimmeth
under the water even unto the bottom of the sea, for the deapth of fyftiene
pases or more, and there remains until he have geathered the pearl Muscles,
which he puts in his sack, then he casts away the stone that weighed him
down, and comes up by the cord. There are seen sometime almost three
hundred ships, and other kind of vessels, which come thither from many
places and countries. The Soltan of the city, is a Mahumetan. There are above
four hundred merchauntes and factours remaynyng here continually, for the
trafike of merchandies which come from diverse other regions, as silk,
pearls, precious stones, spices, and such like. They live with Rise for the
most part, for they have none other corn.

Of the city named Eri in Chorazani, a region of Persia, and of the riches
thereof: Also of Reubarbarum. Cap. 3.
Departing from Ormus, I went into Persia: And after ten days journey, I came
to a certain city named Eri. The name of the region is Chorazani, Chorazani
or Chorashan.
by which signification we may also name it Flaminia. The King of the region,
dwells in the city: It is fruitful and plentiful almost of all things.
There is seen so great abundance of sylke, that you may in one day bye as
much as may suffice to lade three thousand Cameles. Great abundaunce of silk.
Corn is there never dear, by reason of the great abundaunce. There is great
plenty of Rubarbe, as I geather by this conjecture, that six pound of
Rubarbe, Plenty of corn. Rubarbe of small price.
after our pound of.xii. ounces to the pound, are sold for one croune of
gold. The city conteyneth in circuit about seven thousand houses. They are
of the sect of Mahumet. Departing from hence twenty days journey, I observed
that the continent region or firm land, far from the sea side, is very well
inhabited with many good towns and vyllages.

Of the river thought to be Euphrates. And of Castoreum. Cap. 4.
IN this journey I came to a certain great river, which in the inhabitants
language even at this day is named Eufra, which I verily think to be
Euphrates, The riuen Euphrates.
considering also the large capacity thereof. Proceedyng therefore on my
journey by the river toward the left hand, I came in the space of three days
to an other city, Schira.
named Schyra. This has only one prince, and he a Persian Mahumetan, and
subject to none other. Precious stons The stone Eranon* A Turques.
Here are found all sorts of precious stones, and especially the stone
Eranon, which delyuereth men from witchecraftes, madness, and fearfulness,
proceedyng of melancholy. It is the stone commonly called the Turquesse. They
are brought in great abundaunce from a city named Balascam, Balascam.
where is also great plenty of Castoreum, and sundry kinds of colors.
Castoreum.
And here I notify unto you, why there is found little true Castoreum among
us, because it is adulcerate by the Persians before it come to our hands, for
these people are greatly given to the counterfettyng of such things, as I saw
by experience before mine eyes: for willing on a time to prove the odoriferous
strength of pure Castoreum, The proof of true Castoreu^.
I saw certain, that had experience hereof, do in this manner. They took the
bladder of Castoreum, and four of them one after an other, put it to their
noses to smell.

The favor of it was so strong, that it made their noses bleed: and by this
proof, they knew it to be pure Castoreum, and not counterfect. I asked the
Persian whether Castoreum (as other the like vngments or drugges) would sone
loose his strength. He answered, that the strength of that savor might be
preserved the space of ten yerees, if it were not counterfect. Comendation of
the Persians.
The Persians are very courteous and gentle people, lyberall and gracious one
to an other, and favorable to strangers: and this I speak as I have found and
seen by experyence. During the time that I was there, I found a certain
Persian merchant, who the year before knew me in the city of Mecha: he was
borne in the city of Eri in Corozain. As soon as he saw me, he spoke to me in
this manner, Lodouicke, what God or fortune has sent thee into these
countries? Art not thou he whom not long sense I knew in Mecha? To whom I
answered, I am certaynely the same, and am now come hither for the great desire
that I have to see the world. Praised be God, said he, that I have now found
a companion of my journey, that is taken with the same desire that I have: and
therefore for the space of fyfteene days we remained together in a city named
Squilaz. Squila^.
He exhorted me not to depart from him, but that we should together, by his
guydyng, travail the chief parts of the world. Enteryng therefore on our
journey, we came first to a place named Saint Bragant. Saint Bragant.


Of the city of Saint Bragant, bygger then Babylon. And of the king of
Persia, named the Sophie. Cap. 5.
THey say that the city of Saint Bragant, is bygger then Babylon: the king
of the city, is a Mahumetan. The merchantes say that when it pleases him, he
assembleth an army of threescore thousand Horsemen. An army of threescore
thousand horsemen.
The people are of color enclinyng to whytenesse, and very warrelyke men.
This we say only by enformation of other: for we could not safely pass any
further, by reason of the great wars which the Sophie then made against those
Mahumetans, War between the Sophie^ of Persia and the Turk, for their
religion.
which are of the sect and religon of Bubachar, Othomar, and Omar* These were
the fellows of Mahumet, as we have written before of Mahumet and his fellows.
The Turks hold of Mahumet and his fellows.
The Persians abhor these as heretics and false doctors, although they them
selves also be Mahumetans of an other sect, which is of Mahumet and Hali, The
Persians hold of Mahumet and Hali, or Mortus Hali.
whose doctrine they embrace and esteem for most perfect and true religion.
Here therefore the said Persian, my good friend, and joyful companion of my
journey, said thus unto me, That thou may understand (Lodouike) the
unfeigned good will that I bear thee, and the desire I have that our friendshyp
may be knyt with indissoluble bands, A sure friend in necessity.
and thereby to assure thee that I will not fail thee in thy necessity, I
have a Nyese named Samis, whom I will give thee to wife. Samis in their tongue,
signifies the Sun (for she deserved so to be called for her singular
beauty) and said furthermore, that he did not travail the world for lack
of any thing, but only for his pleasure and desire of knowledge. And therefore
passing no further, by reason of the wars (as we have said) we returned to
the city of Eri, where he enterteyned me in his house honorably: and showing
me his Nyese, instauntly desired me to take her to wife. But I, having my
mind otherwise destinate, would not seem to contemn his so friendly a
profer, but deferred it to a more convenient time. Therefore departing from
thence, within eight days after, we returned to Ormus, and sailed from thence
into India, arryuing there at a certain port named Cheo. Cheo.


Here follows the fourth book, which entreats of India, and of the cities
and other notable things seen there.
Of the city of Cambaia in India, most fruitful in manner of all things.
Cap. 1.
Forasmuch as in the beginning of this work we promised that we would
declare all things briefly, we intend now here to speak only of things
which may seem most woorthye to be known. Entryng therefore into India, we
came to a certain port, which the great and famous river Indus passes by,
and is not far from the city of Cambaia. The river Indus.

The city of Cambaia.


It is situate three miles within the land, toward the South. The Brigantines
or Foystes can have no access to it, except the fludde rise higher then
commonly it is wont to do, which sometimes ouerfloweth the land the space of
four miles. But here the fluddes have contrary courses of increasyng, for
here they increase in the wane of the Moon, Note the increse of ryuers
contrary to ours.
but with us in the full Moon. The city is walled after our manner, and
abounds with all necessary things, especially with wheat, and al sorts of
wholesome and pleasant fruits. There are also certain kinds of spyces, the
names whereof I know not. It has also abundaunce of gossampine or bombassine
cotton. Merchaunts bring from thence yearly so much bombassine and silk, xl.
ships lade^ with sylke and bombasine.
that sometime they lade forty or fyftie shyps to carry into other countries.
In this region is also a mountain where the Onyx stone, commonly called
Corneola, is found: and not far from thence also an other mountain, where
the Calcedony and Diamant are found.

The manners of the people of the city of Cambaia: and of the Soltan thereof.
Cap. 2.
THe Soltan of Cambaia, at my being there, was named Macamut, and had raygned
forty years, after he had expulsed the king of Gugerat. They think it not
lawefull to kill any living beast to eat, Pithagorici.
or to eat flesh. They are no Mahumetans, neither Idolaters, and therefore I
believe that if they were baptized, Good people.
they were not far from the way of salvation, for they observe the exquisite
rule of justice, doing no worse to other, then they would to be done to them.
As touching their apparel, some of them go naked, and other cover only their
priuities. On their heads, they wear fyllettes of purple color. They them
selves are of dark yelowe color, commonly called Leonell color. This
Soltan maynteyneth an army of.xx. thousand horsemen. They may see me the
successors of Darius and Po^us.
Every morning resort to his palace, fyftie men, syttyng on Elephantes. Their
office is, with all reverence to salute the king or Soltan, the Elephantes also
kneelyng down. In the morning as soon as the king waketh, is heard a great
noise of Drums, Tambartes, Tymbrelles, Waytes, and also Trumpettes, The great
pomp of the king of Cambaia.
with diverse other musical instruments, in reioycyng that the king lives. The
like do they while he is at dinner: and then also the men sytting on the
Elephantes, make him the like reverence as before. We will in due place speak
of the wit, Elephantes.
customs, and docilitie of these beasts. The Soltan of this city, has his
upper lyppe so gross, that it is a monstrous thing to behold: Monstruos great
lyppes.
Insomuche that sometime he bears it up with a fillet, as women do the hear
of their heads: his bearde is white and long, even unto the navel. He is so
accustomed to poison from his infancy, A strange history of a king
accustomed to eat poison.
that he daily eats some to keep it in use. And although he him self feel
no hurt thereof by reason of custom, yet does he thereby so impoyson him
self, that he is poison to other: for when he is disposed to put any of his
noble men to death, he causes him to be brought to his presence, and to stand
naked before him. Incontinent^ he eats certain fruits (which they call
Chofolos) like unto Nuttemegges: and eats also the leaves of certain
herbs, which they call Tambolos, A venomus king.
addyng also thereto the powder of beaten oyster shelles. And a while chawyng
al these together in his mouth, he spitteth it upon him whom he desires to
kill, who being sparkled therewith, dies, by force of the poison within the
space of half an hour. He entertaineth about four thousand concubines: for
when soever he has live with any of them, she with whom he has lain, dies
the day following, being by him impoysoned. Belyke he gets no children.
And therefore when he changes his shyrt or other apparel, no man dare wear
it: and for this cause he has great change of apparel. My companion enquired
diligently of the merchants by what means he was of so venomous nature? They
answered, that the Soltan his father brought him so up of a child with poison
by little and little, with preservatives so accustomyng him thereto. But let us
now return to speak of the manners of the people: For the most part they
wear but only one syngle vesture, and are very warrelyke men: also greatly
given to merchandies. The fruitfulness and plentifulnesse of the region can
not be spoken. Great fruitfulness and abundance of merchandies.
It is frequented almost of al nations. Therefore from this city, and from an
other (whereof we will speak hereafter) diverse and innumerable sorts of
merchandies, are transported to almost all the regions of the world, and
especially to the Turks, Syrians, Arabians, Indians: also to diverse regions of
Affricke and Ethiopia: principally exceedyng abundance of sylke and Bombasyne,
Plenty of sylke.
and therefore is this Soltan marvelous rych. He keeps in manner contynuall
war with the king of Ioga, whose realm is fyfteene days journey from
Cambaia, and reaches very far every way. The king of Ioga, an Idolatour.
This king mayntayneth an army of.xxx. thousand fyghtyng men: he and all his
people are Idolatours. He lives in contynual progress, Continual progress.
with a mighty train at the charges of the people: and contynually carries
about with him four thousand tents and pauilions: also his wife, children,
concubines, and slaves, furthermore, four or five of most courageous horses:
Wives and concubines.
likewise muskattes, moonkeys, Parrottes, Leopardes, and hawks. And in this
order he walks almost over all India. The kings apparel, is a double gotes
skin, one coueryng his breast, and the other his back, with the hearysyde
outward: he is of wesel color, enclining to blackenesse, The color of the
Indians.
as are the most part of these Indians, being in manner scorched with heat of
the Sun. They wear al earerings, precious stones, and jewels of sundry
forts: some cover their body with a single, light, and thin vesture, puttyng
out one arm naked. The king and certain of his noble men, paynt their faces
with certain sweet gommes and spices: and some also other parts of their
bodies. They are led with many vain superstitions: for some profess never
to lie on the ground, some to live in continual silence, as though they were
speechelesse, having two or three appointed by signs to serve them meat and
drink.

They have all horns hangyng about their necks: and therefore when they come
to any city, Horns.
they blow their horns all at once, to make the inhabitants afraid, as do
they that with us keep Crows or Rookes out of the corn. Then coming to
talk with the citizens, they demand victuales, and what soever other things
they stand in need of. While the king any time rests a while in one place,
almost all the whole army gardyng his person about his pauylion, five or six
hundred in the mean time raunge abroad together to geat what they can.
Wanderyng nations. Feelde men.
They tarry not past three days in one place, but are ever wanderyng after the
manner of the vagabunde Egyptians, Arabians, and Tartars. The region is not
fruiteful, but rough, with craggie mountains. The houses of the city are
despicable: the city is also without walls. This king is enemy to the Soltan
of Machamir, and vexes him greatly with diverse incursions.

Of the city of Ceull, and the manner of the people. Cap. 3.
Departing from Cambia, in twelve days journey I came to a city named Ceull:
the land that lies between them both, is called Guzerat. The king of this
city, is an Idolatour: Guzerat.
they are of dark yealowe color, or Lion tawnye: some were such slender
apparel as they whom we have spoken of before: other are naked, coueryng
only their pryuyties. They are prompt to the wars, and use swords, bows,
darts, slings, and round targettes. They have engines to beat down walls,
and to make great slaughter in an army: the city has walls, and is distant
from the sea but three miles. A fair river runs by the city, by the which
much merchandies is brought thither. The soil bears almost all manner of
fruits, except Uynes, Walnuttes, and Chestnuttes. It has also Wheat, Barlie,
and other kinds of corn. Here is made great plenty of Bombasyne cloth. They
are such Idolatours as are they of Calecut, Idolatours.
of whom we will speak hereafter: yet are there in the city many merchants
Mahumetans. They exercise justice. The king entertayneth but a small army.
There are many horses and kyne. Two days journey from hence, is a city named
Dabuly, Dabuly.
having a great river runnyng by it. It has walls after the manner of ours.
The soil is fruiteful, and the city beautiful. There are innumerable
merchauntes Mahumetans. The king is an Idolater, and has an army of.xxx.
thousand men. Idolaters.
They are in manners like unto the other, and of the same color.

Of Goga, an Island of India. Cap. 4.
Departing from hence, I came to the Island of Goga, not past a mile destant
from the continent. This pays yearly trybute to the king of Dechan a
thousand pieces of gold, of the value of the Saraphes of Babylon, Tribute.
having on the one side the Image of the dyuell, and on the other side,
certain unknown caractes. Upon the sea coaste of one side of this Island,
Coin.
is a town builded after the manners of ours. The governor is a certain
Captain of soldiers named Sauain: Mamalukes.
he has in his regiment four hundred Mamalukes, and is also a Mamaluke him
self: and therefore when he fyndeth any white men, he entertayneth them
friendly, white men.
and gives them stypende of twenty Saraphes of gold every month. But he
first makes proof of their strength and valiantness by wrestlyng: and if they
be not found meet for the wars, he puts them to handy crafts. This
Captain with only his four hundred Mamalukes, greatly vexes the king of
Narsinga. Departing from hence, in eight days journey by land, I came to the
city of Dechan.

Of Dechan, a very fair city of India. Cap. 5.
THe king or Soltan of Dechan, is a Mahumetan, of whom the foresaid captain
Mamaluke is entered in wages. This city is beautiful in sight, and the soil
very fruitful and plentiful in manner of all things necessary. The king is
accounted a Mamaluke, and with him.xxxv. thousand men of his dominion of
horsemen and footmen. The city is beautified with a marvelous fair palace,
A fair palace.
and the palace adourned with many fair rooms, for before you come to the
kings chamber, you must pass by.xliiii. other chambers, for the sollers of
the chambers are so orderly disposed, that one chamber still gives entrye into
an other, until you come to the last. The city is compassed with a wall, after
the manner of the Christians. Great pomp and magnificence.
The houses are not uncomely. The king uses incredible pomp, and regal
magnificence. They that wait upon his person wear upon their shoes or
starpins Rubies and Diamondes, and such other precious stones. What ouches and
iewelles they wear in their earynges and Condalijs, Carkenettes colors, let
witty men judge, comparyng the feet to the more noble parts of the body.
Six miles from the city is a mountain where Diamondes are dug. Where
Diamuntes are found.
It is compassed with a wall, and kept with a Garrison. The region has plenty
of all things. The people are Mahumetans. Their apparel for the most part is
of sylke: or at the least the sherte or inmost vesture. They wear also thine
buskynnes: and hose like gregascos or maryners slops. Women's faces covered.
Their women, after the manner of the women of Damasco, have their faces
covered. The king keeps in manner continual war with ye king of Narsinga. The
most part of his soldiers are strangers, White men.
enterteyned for wages. They are white men: but the inhabitants, of the
color of the other Indians. The king is marvelous rich, and liberal. He
has also a great navy of shyps. The king of Decham, hates the Christians.
He hates the Christians as much as any other. Thus having traueled this part
of the region, I took my journey toward a city named Bathacala, five days
journey from Dechan. The city Bathacala.
The inhabitants are Idolaters, except certain Mahumetan merchaunts, which
resort thither for merchandise. It has abundaunce of Rise, Sugar, Fygges,
Walnuttes, Wheat, Corn, and many other fruits and roots unknown to us.
They haues Beeues, Kyne, Bulfes, Sheep, Goats, and diverse other beasts, but
no Horses, Mules, or Asses.

Of certain other goodly cities of India. Cap. 6.
Departing from hence, I took my journey toward a city named Centacola, one
days journey from Bathacala. The prince of this city is no lord of great
richesse. There is nevertheless abundaunce of flesh, Rise, Centacola.
and other such fruits as grow in India: many Mahumetans resort hither for
merchaundies. The king is an Idolater, and of Lion tawny color. They go stark
naked, Idolatars. Barthacal.
and wear nothing on their heads. This prince is subject to the king of
Barthacal. Departing from hence two days journey, I came to an Island named
Onor, whose king is an Idolater, The Island of Onor.
and serves the devil, and is subject to the king of Narsinga: He is very
gentle and familier, he maynteyneth eight foystes, which make excursions and
live by rouyng and pyracie. A king a pirate. Naked men.
He is in great frendshyppe with the king of Portugale. The inhabitants cover
their priuities with a sindone, and are beside all naked. The soil bears
plenty of Rise, as in other parts of India. Rise. Beasts.
There are in manner al kinds of beasts, as wild Bores, Hearts, Wolves, Lions,
and sundry kinds of birds and fowls unlike unto ours, Pecockes also and
Parrottes. Birds and fowls.
It has innumerable Kyne of shynyng yelowe color: also sheep exceedyng
fat. There is so great abundaunce of flowers and Roses, that they fail not
in winter. There can not be a more temperate air: Flowers all the year long*
and therefore they live much longer then we do. Not far from this city, is an
other city named Mangolor: from whence, Long life. Myngolor.
about the number of.lx. ships depart yearly laded with Rise. The
inhabitants are partly Idolaters, and partly Mahumetans. Their manner of living
and apparel, is as we have said before. Rise.


Of Canonor and Narsinga, great cities of India. Cap. 7.
Departing from hence, we directed our journey toward the city of Canonor,
being a very goodly city. Afterward he became friend to the Portugales.
Here the king of Portugale has a very strong town. The king of the city is
an Idolater, and no great friend to the king of Portugale.

The city has a port, whyther are brought the horses of Persia: but the
custom for horses is exceedyng great. Departing from hence, and entryng
further into the land, we came to the city of Narsinga, (...)
where many Mahumetan merchauntes do dwell. The soil bears neither wheat,
nor vynes, or few other fruits, except Oranges and Gourdes. ^ranges.
They eat no bread: but live with rise, fyshe, and such walnuttes as the
country bears. In manners and Idolatrye, they are like unto them of Calecut,
Rise.
of which we will speak heareafter. There is found plenty of spyces, as
Ginger, Pepper, Myrobalans, Cardanum, Cassia, Spyces.
and diverse such other. Also many and diverse kinds of fruits unlike unto
ours, and much sweeter. The region is in manner inaccessible for many dens
and diches made by force. Strange fruits.
The king has an army of fyftie thousand gentelmen, which they call Heroes.
In the wars they use swoordes, round Targettes, An army of fyftie thousand
gentelmen. Gunnes.
or Buklers, Lances, Darts, Bows, Slings: and begin now also to use Gunnes.
They go naked, coueryng only their priuities, except when they go to the
wars. They use no horses, Mules, Asses, or those Camels which we commonly
call Dromedaries. Dromedares. Elephantes.
They use only Elephantes, yet not to fight in the battle. Great
merchaundise is used in the city: for thither resort from diverse countres two
hundred ships yearly. Departing from the kingdom of Narsinga, in.xv. days
journey toward the East, we came at the length to a city named Bisinagar.

Of the fruiteful city of Bisinagar in the kingdom of Narsinga. Cap. 8.
THe city of Bisinager is under the dominion of the king of Narsinga, and
subject to him. The city is very large and well walled, situate on the side of
a hill, and eight miles in circuit. A triple wall.
It is compassed with a triple wall, and is a famous mart of all sorts of
rich merchaundise. The soil is marvelous fruitful, and has whatsoever
pertayneth to delicates and pleasures. There is no land more commodious for
haukyng and huntyng, Hawkyng and huntyng.
for it has large playnes, and goodly woods: a man would say it were an
earthly Paradyse. The king and people are Idolaters. He is a Prince of great
power, he has an army of four thousand horsemen. And yet is it to be noted,
the price of a good horse there, An army of four thousand horsemen.
to be no less then four or five hundred of those pieces of gold which they
call Pardais: And sometime it so chances that a horse is sold for eight
hundred of those pieces of gold. Horses of great price.
The cause of which great price is, that they are brought out of other
countries: and that they have no Mares, being forbidden by the commandment of
the kings, straightly chargyng the ports to be kept, least any Mares should
be brought into the country. Four hundred Elephantes.
He has also four hundred Elephantes to serve in the wars: and likewise as
many Camelles, of the kind of those swyfte runnyng Camelles which be commonly
called Dromadarii. Dromedary Camelles.
And here me seems good opportunity to say somewhat of the docilitie,
agilitie, and wit of Elephantes, as we have promised.

Of the docilitie, agilitie, and wit of Elephantes. Cap. 9.
THe Elephant, of all four footed beasts, and next unto man, is most witty
and docible, and not far from humane sense, and surmounteth all other beasts
in strength. When the Indians bring them to the wars, How the Elephantes are
prepared to the wars.
they put great packesaddelles on their backs, such as in Italy they use for
the great Mules. These packesaddelles, they gyrde under their bellyes with two
chains of Iron. Upon the saddelles, they place on every side a little house,
or if you will, rather call them Turrettes, or Cagies, made of wood: every
Turret conteyneth three men. Between the two Turrettes, sits an Indian on
the back of the beast, and speaks to him in his own language, which the
beast understands and obeys: for it is certain that no other beast
approaches so near to the understanding of man. Seven men therefore are thus
placed upon one Elephant when they go to the wars, Seven men fight upon one
Elephant.
and all armed with coats of fence, Targets, Bows, Lances, Darts, and
Slings. Also the trunk or snoute of the Elephant (which of the Latins is
called Promuscis, or Proboscis, and of some, How the Elephant is armed
the hand of the Elephant) is armed, and has a sword fastened to it of the
length of two cubits, very strong, and of a handful in breadth. And thus
furnished, they proceed to the battle. When it is requisite to go
forewarde, or backewarde, the governor sittyng above, gives them an
instruction with such voices as they are accustomed unto: The Elephant
understands the voice of his keeper.
for sometime he says thus to the beast, Stryke here, stryke there, forbear
here, go forewarde there, turn this way, and that way. All which words he
understands and obeys without spur or brydell. But where it so chances
that by casting of fire, The Elephant can not abide fire.
they are with fear driven to flight, they can by no means be stayed. And
therefore these people have many subtle devises how they may fear them with
fire, which this beast, by the sense of nature, fears above all things, and
therefore flies in manner at the sight of fire. And to speak somewhat of their
strength, as I have seen by experience, I remember that when I was in the
city of Canonor, The strength of the Elephant
certain Mahumetans drue a ship aland, turnyng the ship, after the manner of
the Christians, with the fore end toward the land, and laying under it three
rolling beams. Then three Elephantes commodiously applied, drawyng with great
force, and bendyng down their heads to the ground, brought the ship to land.
But many have thought that the Elephantes have no joints in their legs, and
that therefore they could not bend their legs: which thing doubtless is
false, The Elephants have joints in their legs.
for they have joints as have other beasts, but in the lowest part of their
legs. The Females are more fierce then the Males, and much stronger to bear
burdens. Sometime they are taken with fury or madness, and testify the same
by disordinate runnyng here and there. One Elephant exceeds the bygnesse of
three Bufles, and not unlike of hear. They have eyes like swyne, and the snout
or trunk very long, wherewith they put meat and drink into their mouth: and
therefore may it well be called the hand of the Elephant. The hand of the
Elephant.
The mouth is under the throat, much like the mouth of a Sow, and the trunk
is holowe, and can therewith hold fast sticks or slaves, and them rule as it
were with a hand. I saw also the trunk of a tree overthrown by an Elephant,
which xxiiii. men attempting, could not do. The two great teeth or tuskes, The
teeth of the Elephant is Iuery.
are placed in the highest iawe. Each of their ears, are two handfuls byg,
whether the beast be of the bygger or less kind. The feet are like unto such
round thick trenchers of wood as he commonly used. The foot contains five
hoofes, in roundnesse like unto great Oysters. The tail is like to the tail
of a Bufle, four handful long, and of thyn hear. The Females are also bigger
then the Males, they are of sundry bigness, The bygnesse of the Elephant
for some are of.xiii. handfuls high, and other of.xiiii. handfuls, and some
also have been seen of sixtiene handfuls. They go slowly, and walowing, and
therefore some that have not ben used to them, are moved to vomit even as it
were on the sea. Yet is it a pleasure to ride on the young Elephantes, because
they go softly like ambeling Mules. When you mount on them, they stoop and
bend their knees, that you may easily ascend. They are never brydeled, neither
use their keepers any halters to govern them.

Of the ingendering of Elephantes, and of the magnificence and riches of the
king of Narsinga. Cap. 10.
WHen they engender, they resort to the meadows or woods, The natural
shamefastness of Elephantes
for by a certain natural shamefastness they do it not but in secret
places: Although some Aucthours have written that Elephants engender backward.
Some take it for a great present to give the king the member or pissell of an
Elephant, The pissell of an Elephant.
which perhaps they do for the exceedyng great price of Elephantes: For
some are sold there for five hundred pieces of gold, and some (as they say)
for two thousand: which peradventure, is not for their greatnesses of body,
but rather for certain properties, wit, and docilitie, wherein some far
exceed other, even as among men. Men of less. understanding then Elephantes.

The riches of the king of Narsinga.


And I dare well say that I have seen some men much inferior to Elephants in
wit and sense. Therefore the king of Narsinga, in riches and dominion, far
exceeds all kings that ever I have seen or heard of. The city in
situation and fayrenesse, represents the city of Milane, except only that it
is in a declining place, and less equal. Other kingdoms which are subject to
this, lie round about it, as the kingdom of Ausonia and Venice lie about
Milane. A great tribute by the day.
Their Bramini (so are the priests named) told me yt the king receives daily
of that city for tribute or revenue, the sum of twelve thousands of those
pieces of gold which they call Pardios. He maynteyneth an army of many
thousands of men, for he lives in continual war with his borderers.
Idolaters.
He is an Idolatour, and honors the devil, even as does the king of Calecut.
They that are of the rychest sort, use a slender inward apparel or peticote,
not very long, and bind their heads with a phillet or broad band, of sundry
colors, after the manner of the Mahumetans. The common sort, cover only their
priuities, and are beside all naked. The king wears a Cappe of cloth of
gold, of two handfulles long: when he goes to war, he wears a vesture of
bombasine, A rich cloak.
and thereon a cloak adourned with plates of gold, having the borderer guard
besette with all sorts of precious stones and Iewelles. The magnificence of
the king of Narsinga.
His horse with the furniture, is esteemed to be worth as much as one of our
cities, by reason of innumerable Iewelles of great price. When he goes a
huntyng, three other kings bear him company, whose office is to be ever near
him, and guide him. When he makes any journey, or rydeth abroad, he is
accompanied with six thousand horsemen: And therefore it is manifest that not
only for these things whereof we have spoken, but also for diverse other of
like magnificence, he is one of the greatest Kings in the world. Coin of
gold and silver.
He coyneth money and pieces of gold named Pardios. Also other silver money of
less value, which they call Fano, conteynyng the value of sixtiene of the
smallest money of copper. Traueylers may here go safely through all his
dominions, Danger of Lions.
if they can avoid the danger of the Lions. Of their diet and order of
living, I will speak more largely where occasion shall serve to write of
Calecut. The king of Narsinga, friend to the king of Portugale.
This king of Narsinga, is a great friend to the Christians, and is in great
amity with the king of Portugale: and beside him, he knows none other
Christian Prince: and therefore the Portugales are here friendly and honorably
used. When I had remained in this city many days, I returned to the city of
Canonor. And after I had remained there three days, I entered further into the
land, The city of Trompata.
and came to a city named Trompata, about twelve miles from Canonor.

The inhabitauntes are Idolatours. It is near unto the sea, and therefore
there are seen many merchantes Mahumetans. They live moderately, and have in
manner none other riches then nuttes of India, but there are very fair trees to
make ships. There are in the city above fiftiene thousand Mahumetans,
Mahumetans.
although the King be an Idolatour. Departing from hence, Pandara.
I came to the city of Pandara: Capagot.
and from thence passing by the city of Capagot, I came at the length to the
famous city of Calecut. Calecut.
And to be brief, I have here ouerpassed to speak largely of many other
people and kingdoms, as are these, Chianul, Dabul, Bathecalo, Onoue, Bangolor,
Cauonor, Cuchin, Cacilon, and Calonue, which I have done, to the end that I
may entreat more largely of Calecut, as the chiefest, and as it were the head
and metropolitan of all the cities of India. The king of Calecut, a God on the
earth.
For it is certain that the King of Calecut in royal majesty exceeds all
the kings of the East, and is therefore in their language called Samory, that
is to say, God on the earth.

The fyfth book of East India, and first of the famous city of Calecut. Cap.
1.
THe city of Calecut, The city of Calecut.
is situate upon the continent or firm land, and the sea beats upon the
houses of the city. There is no port: but on the South side about a mile from
the city, is a river which runs into the Ocean sea by a narow mouth. This
runs by many branches into the plain feeldes, and is of the inhabitants
by diverse trenches dispearsed to water the ground. It is not past the depth of
three or four foot of water. The course of it bends toward the city, and
runs into it. The city is not compassed with walls, but conteyneth in
circuit six thousand houses, not adherent or ioynyng together after the
manner of ours, Houses divided.
but by a certain space distant one from the other, either for fear of fire,
or by ignorance of the builders. It is a mile of length. The houses are
despicable, Uery low houses.
as no higher from the ground then a man on horseback, and are for the most
part covered with boughs of trees, in the steed of tiles or other coueryng.
The cause whereof they say to be, that in digging the ground five or six
handful depth, water immediately issues forth. And therefore they can lay
no deeper foundations to bear the weight of any greater buyldynges. The houses
of merchandyse, or warehouses, are sold for fyftiene or twenty pieces of
gold. Houses of small price.
But the common houses, are of no greater price then two pieces of gold at the
most, and some for less.

Of the king of Calecut, and of their Idolatry. Cap. 2.
Idolatry and seruyng of the devil.

One God.


THe king of Calecut and his people, are given to Idolatry and seruyng of the
devil: yet deny they not but that there is one great God, maker of heaven and
earth, and first and chief cause of all things: Pseudoplatonici.
But they add thereunto a fable, saying that God could take no pleasure of
his principate or dominion, if he him self should take upon him the
government of the world, and therefore that he gave the vicarage of that
governance to the devil, The devil Prince of this world.
who (they say) was sent from heaven for that purpose, and to judge the world,
renderyng unto men well or evil, according to their deseruyng. This devil
they name Deumo: But the great God him self, they call I amerani. Deumo, quasi
The king has a Chapel in his Palace, where he honors this Deumo: Demon.
The Chapel of the devil.
the Chapel is open on every side the breadth of a vaulte of two pases, and is
no higher from the ground then three pases. The entrance is by a door of
wood, garnished with carved work, conteynyng the diverse monstrous fourmes
and shapes of deuylles. In the myddest of the Chapel, The deuyls chair of
majesty. Difference between the Popes crown and the deuylles. A well
favored Prince.
is a seat of majesty made of copper, with also a devil of copper sittyng in
it. This devil has on his head a crown, after the manner of the bishop of
Rome, but this has overplus four horns, his mouth gapyng, with four notable
teeth, a deformed nose, louryng and grymme eyes, a threatenyng look, crooked
hands like a flesh hook, and feet not much unlike the feet of a Cock: A
monster doubtless horrible and fearful to behold. In every corner of the
Chapel sit such deuylles of shining copper, as though they were of flaming
fire, deuouryng souls miserably. These souls are about the bygnesse of half
a finger, and some little bigger. The deuylles ordinary diet and de^tie meat.
He puts one soul in his mouth with the right hand, and with the left
hand takes an other from beneath. Every morning the priests (whom they call
Bramini) wash the Idol with rose water, Bramini.
and perfume him with sweet savors, and lying prostrate on the ground,
Brachmani.
pray unto him. They sacrifice unto him once a week. Their manner of sacrifice
is this, The manner of sacrifice to the devil.
They have a little cubbarde like unto an Altar, three handfulles high, four
handfuls broad, and five handfuls long: this cubbard they straw with all manner
of flowers and sweet pouders. Then having a great Chafingdyshe, or the like
vessel of silver, full of burning coals, Gallus Esculapio.
they put the blood of the Cock thereon, and also cast thereon innumerable
sweet savors: In the mean time also with sensours in their hands, they go
round about the Altar, making perfume with frankensence, ringyng a little
silver bell all the while of the sacrifice. They kill the Cock with a silver
knyfe, and the knyfe also being rayed with blood, they put often in the fire,
that no part of the blood be lost. Sometime having the knyfe in their hand,
they make certain strange gestures, much like to those which the masters
offense use in giuyng or avoiding of strokes. They never cease puttyng to more
coals and spices or perfumes, until all the blood of the Cock be burnt. The
priest that offers the blood of the Cock, A goodly priest the deuylles
Chaplen.
has his arms and feet garnyshed with silver plates and pendantes, in such
sort, that while he moves, they make a certain noise, much like unto
sonettes or Hawks belles. He has on his breast a certain bosse, A
counterfeete Aaron.
conteynyng I know not what secret figure, which may seem to be the secret
caract or sign of some mystery. The sacrifice being finished, he takes both
his hands full of wheat, Offering of wheat.
and goes from the Alter backward like a Creuice, never mouyng his eyes from
the Alter, until he come to a certain tree: where openyng his hands, he
casts the wheat on the tree. Then holdyng his hands above his head, he
returns to the Alter, and takes away all that is thereon.

Of the manner which the king uses at his meat. Cap. 3.
THe King does not sit down to his meat, before four of the priests offer
it to the devil, in this manner. Lifting their hands above their heads, with
also many other fantastical gesticulations, and murmuryng voices, they offer
the meat to the devil, The devil is served before the King.
and spend long time in those ceremonies, to the end that the king should eat
no meat that is not first offered to the devil. They offer the meat in a tray
of wood, and therein lay it upon the broad leaves of a certain tree. His meat
is Rise, and diverse other things, as fruit, flesh, and fyshe. He sits on
the ground without cloth or Carpet. The priests in the mean time stand
round about him, Chaplens of honor.
but approaches no nearer then four or five pases, obseruyng diligently the
kings words. When the king has left eating, the priests carry away all
that is left, I think the Priests take part with the Crows.
and in a certain place thereto appointed, offer it to certain Crows, which
they keep for the same purpose: And therefore being used to be thus fed,
geather together at a sign given them, and eat up the meat. These crows
are therefore of them esteemed holy: Crows esteemed holy.
and therefore it is not lawful for any man to take them, or hurt them.

Of the Priests of Calecut, called Bramini* Cap. 4.
THese Bramini, are in place with them, as are the chief priests or bishops
with us. The priests ever provide for them selves.
Therefore when the king shall marry, he lies not with his wife before she
be defloured by the Archbishop, yet takes he not this upon him without
reward: A goodly office for a bishop.
for the king gives him for his labor fifty pieces of gold. Only the king
of Calecut keeps this custom.

Of the diverse sorts of Idolaters in the city of Calecut. Cap. 5.
THe chiefest Idolaters, and of the greatest dignity, are the Bramini. They of
the second order, are named Naeri: Priests and gentelmen.
And in the same place with them, as are with gentelmen, whose office is when
they go abroad to bear swoordes, targettes, bows, lances, and other weapons.
The third order consysteth of mecanike or handie crafts men. In the fourth
place, are vitaylers, and such as make provision of fyshe and flesh. Next
unto these, are they that geather Pepper, Wine, Walnuttes, and such other
fruits and spices. The last and basest sort, (named Neraui) are they that sow
and geather Rise. These, as the inferior tribe of men, Poor men have no souls
are in such subjection to the Bramini and Naeri, that in pain of death they
may approach no nearer unto them then.l. pases. And therefore they lie lurkyng
in certain shadows and dark places, and maryshes, lest they should suddenly
chance to meet with them. Wherefore when they come abroad, that they may be
heard a far of, they cry with loud voice I wotte near what, that they may
be heard of the said Bramini and Naeri, least being soddenly betrapped, they
should be put to death.

Of the apparel of the king, queen, and Inhabitants of the city of Calecut.
And of their manner of feedyng. Cap. 6.
THe apparel of the king and queen, is little or nothing differyng from the
other Idolaters: They are not troubled with garderobes, or making them redye
morning and euenyng.
among the which the Mahumetans (as strangers) are not to be accounted. They
cover only their privy parts with bombasine cloth or sylke, and are beside
all naked, barefooted also, and beareheadded. But the Mahumetans wear single
apparel, reachyng only unto the nauel. The women are apparelled even as are
the men, saving only that they let their hear grow very long. The king
and nobility of the city, eat no flesh, except they first ask counsel of
the Priests. But the common people may eat what flesh they will, except the
flesh of Kyne. Bin they of the basest sort, named Nirani and Poliar, may eat
only fyshes dried at the Sun.

Of their custom after the death of the king. Cap. 7.
AFter the death of the king, if he have any male children living, or brethren,
or brothers children, they succeed not in the kingdom: For of ancient law
and custom, the septer pertayneth to the kings systers sons, The kings
children succeed not to inherit the kingdom.
of which if there be none, it comes to the next of the blood: And this, for
none other cause (as they say) but that the priests have defloured the
queen. When the king goes abroad or on huntyng, What pains the priests take
for their living, and what service they do the king.
the priests, be they never so young, keep the queen at home, and remain
near about her: For there is nothing more acceptable to the king, then that
the priests should so keep company with the queen. And therefore the king
may well think that the children borne of her, are not to be numbered amongst
his children, and therefore takes the children of his systers, to be nearest
of his blood, and right inheritours to the crown. Bastordes.
When the king is dead, all his subjects, by cuttyng their beardes and shauyng
their headdes, testify how grievously they take his death. Moornyng for the
death of the king.
Yet hearein they use not all one fashion, for some cut only part of the
hear of their chynne, and some part of the hear of their head, and other
all: and so every man as he does fantasy. During the time that they celebrate
the funerals of the king, they that live by fyshyng, forbear fyshyng for the
space of eight days. And when any of the kings wives dye, they observe the
like ceremonies as for the death of the king. Chastity and abstinence.
The king sometime, by a certain supersticion, absteyneth from venery, or the
company of women, for the space of a year: and likewise forbeareth to eat
certain leaves, which they call Betolas, Meats that move to echerie.
being the leaves of Assyrian apples: which they use not only for dilicates,
but also because their property is to move men greatly to wanton lusts.

For the same purpose also they eat a certain fruit, named Coffolo, somewhat
like unto Dates.

Of their chaungyng of wives. Cap. 8.
THe gentelmen and merchauntes, to show great courtesy and frendshyp one to the
other, use sometime to change wives, Great frendshyppe.
and therein use this manner of speech: My freende, we have now of long time
lived together as faithful friends, and therefore for the last
accomplyshement of our frendeshyppe, if it so please thee, let us change
wives. Content says the other, for I bear thee even as good will. The wives
refuse not to agree to the condition herein also, to please their husbands.
Then the one brings his wife to the other, saying: Woman, this man shall
hereafter be thy husband. The other says the like to his wife also. Thus all
parts being agreed, they depart with friendly embrasyng: But the children
remain with the first husband. These Idolatars have also diverse other
customs: For among some of them, one woman is married to seven husbands, of
the which every of them has his night by course appointed to lie with her:
And when she has brought forth a child, she may give it or father it to
which of them she lysteth: Who may in no case refuse it.

The manner of feedyng of the common people, of the Idolatars, and of their
Justice. Cap. 8.
Diogenistae.
LYing along on the ground they eat their meat out of a traye of copper: For
spoones, they use certain leaves of trees. Their meat commonly, is Rise,
fyshe, spices, and fruits, of the commoner sort. The labouryng men or ruder
sort, eat so fylthyly, The punyshement of murderers.
that puttyng their foul hands in the pot, they take out rise by handfuls,
and so thrust it in their mouths. They use this kind of Justice for homicide.
Where any has slain a man, he is thus punyshed.

They have a kind of galows made in manner of a double cross, where while the
murderer is tied fast, one thrusts a stake through his body, Beatyng.
where the poor wretch so hangs until he be dead: But they that wound or
hurt any man, redeem the fault for money paid to the king. They that are in
debte, are thus enforced to pay the same. A strange manner to demand debte.
The creditour first demands his monye: and if it be found that the
debitour break promysse, then he to whom the money is owyng, goes to one of
the kings scriueners (which are said to be a hundred) and before him making
dew proof of the debte, receives of him a green wande of a tree, with
authority to prosecute his debitour until he have found him, where when he
has arrested him, with these words (go no further before thou pay me)
thryse rehearsed, he says furthermore thus: I charge thee by the head of
Bramini, and by the head of the king, not to stir from this place before thou
pay me. There is no shyfte but either to pay incontinent, or there to loose
his life. But if he be found alone, Death for debte.
and escape after the said words, he is ever after adjudged a rebel, and
therefore shall it be lawefull for any man to kill him whersoeuer he is found,
within the kings dominions.

Of the honoring of Idolles. Cap. 9.
WHen they pray to their Idolles, in the morning before the Sun rise,
Outward clenlynesse.
they resort to the pooles or ryuers to wash them: And so at their coming
home to their houses (where they keep their Idolles) they touch nothing before
they pray to the Idolles prostrate on the ground secreatly: while they pray,
they make certain deuylyshe gesticulations like mad men, so maruelously
defourmyng their faces, eyes, and mouths, that no man can behold it without
horror: and thus continue their prayer a quarter of an hour. When the time of
eating approaches, they may not fall to their vittayles, before some one of the
gentlemen have dressed it, and set it in order. But this custom is observed
only among the gentelmen, or noble men. The women have none other charge or
care, (...)
then to dress and beautify them selves, for their husbands use not to have
to do with them before they be curyously washed, and perfumed with sundry
sweet savors. When the women go abroad, Clenly women.
it is marvelous to behold how they are behanged with jewels and precious
stones, on their ears, arms, and legs.

Of their manner of war. Cap. 10.
THey have in the city certain masters of fence, that teach them how to use
the sword, the target, the lance, Masters of fence.
and such other weapons. When the king proceeds to the wars, The kings
army.
he is furnyshed with an army of a hundred thousand footmen, for of horsemen
there is no use, but only Elephantes: For the king him self rydeth on an
Elephant. They that are next to the king, wear about their headdes, fyllettes
or bands of sylke, of crymisyn or scarlet color. Their weapons are certain
crooked swoordes, targets, lances, Their weapons.

The kings ensign.


and bows. The kings ensign, is a certain thing made of bows of trees,
implicate round like the covering of a tub, borne up on a reed. This is borne
so that ye shadow thereof may cover the king from the heat of the Sun: and is
in their tongue, called Somler. When both the armies approach within three
arrowe shoot, the king sends his Braminos into the tents of his enemies,
The priests* are haroldes. A challenge to cumbatte.
in manner of haroldes to challenge a hundred of them to come forth (if they
dare) to combat against a hundred of his Naeres, which before we said to be his
gentelmen and chief strength of his army: which message done, both sides
prepare them selves to the battle, and in the midway, first a hundred fight
with a hundred. The which if they should feyght continually for the space of
three days, would never stryke with the point, but with the edge of the
swoorde, and for the most part at the head, A great battle and little
bloodshed*
and seldom at the legs. But when five or six are slain, incontinent the
Bramini on both parts make an end of the fight: and by their commandment
the retreat is sounded on both parts. Then again the Bramini (which are the
chief priests as we have said) on both sides, speak unto the kings, and
ask them if they will any more. And thus for the most part make they an end
of the quarrel and battle, without great slaughter of men.

The king sometimes rydeth on an Elephant, and sometimes also is borne by his
noble men, named Naeri. When he proceeds, Minstrells.
there follow him a great multitude of mynstrels, making a great noise, with
Tymberels, Tamberets, and such other instruments. The stypende of the Naeri
is four Carlines* every month in peace, and six in time of war: these have
their teeth very black, Black teeth.
by eating of a certain herb, which they much use. When any of these are
slain, their bodies are burned, The dead gentelmen are burnt, but the poor
men are buried.
with great pomp, and many superstitions, and also their ashes reserved: but
the common sort are buried, in diverse manners, for some are buried in their
houses, some in their gardens, and other in feeldes, meadows, or wooddes. They
coin money here, Coined money.
as in ye city of Narsinga. When I was there, there was in ye city merchants
of almost all parts of the East, and especially a great number of Mahumetans,
Merchauntes resort to Calecut.
and many also of the region of Melacha, and Bangella: other also of
Tarnassari, Pego, and Ciriomandel: some likewise of the Islands of Zeylan, and
Sumatra, which is Taprobana: other of Cholon, Caicolon, and Bathecala: and
almost innumerable other, of nations whose names are better known to us, as
Persians, Arabians, Syrians, Turks, and Ethiopians, and also many of the
kingdom of Narsinga, strangers of so many nations, were in the city of
Calecut while I remained there. Understand furthermore, that the Idolators use
not to sail on the sea, but that is appointed to the Mahumetans, as meeter men
for that purpose. And there is in the city of Calecut more then fyfteene
thousand Mahumetans, Mahumetans of Calecut.
which were borne in the same city.

Of their Ships, and manner of saylyng on the sea. Cap. 11.
Their Ships are made no less then may suffice for the burden of four or
five hundred Tonne, Their ships.
and all open without any couerture. In the joints of their Ships they put
no Low, but join the plankes so artificially, that they hold out water very
well: yet do they pytche the joints, and make them fast with nails of Iron.
They do not forbear Towe for lack thereof, for they have great plenty of
Hemp and Flax. They have plankes or boordes and posts of diverse sorts, for
they have as good wood and better then we. Their sails are of Bombasine cloth,
and doubled in the nether part, whereby they geather more wind, and swell
therewith, like a bag: and in this they pass us, vsyng but only syngle
sails. They use ankers of marble, of the length of eight spannes, Ankers of
marble, on every side two.
and on every side two: these they hang in the sea by double ropes, and beside
these, have none other ankers. They have certain appointed times and seasons
of saylyng: for some times serve best for one coast, and some other, for other
coasts and viages. The changes and also contrariety of times, is there
greatly to be considered: Seasons of the year, contrary to ours.
for when with us al things for heat are almost scorched, then have they
large shewres, as in the months of May, June, and July. Their ships are of
diverse quantities, as with us, and therefore also of diverse names. They have one
sort of vessels made of one whole piece of wood, like a trough, Diverse fashions
of ships and other vessels.
very long, sharp, and narowe: in these they use both sails and ores, and are
therefore swyfter then our Galleys or Foystes. The Pirates use these very much.
The best of their ships are made in an Island named Porcai, not far from
Calecut.

Of the Court or Palace of the king of Calecut. Cap. 12.
THe Palace of the king of Calecut conteyneth no less then a mile in circuit,
A goodly palaice.
the wall is not high, the buyldyng is fair, with beams or pos^es well ioynyng
the frame, and curiously wrought and carved with the figures and shapes of
deuyls on every side. Why the walls be no higher, Images of the devil to
garnysh the kings palaice.
we have declared before, where we have spoken of the low buyldyng of the
houses of the city: the cause whereof (as we have said) is the unstable
ground, so full of water, that they can dygge no deapth to lay fundation to
bear higher buyldynges. But what pearls and precious stones the king wears
upon him, can not be expressed for the greatness of the thing: The rich
jewels which the king wears.
for doubtless it exceeds all estimation. Although at the time of my being
there, he was not given to ioyfulnesse, but lived in grief of mind, as well for
the wars which the king of Portugale made against him, The king of Portugales
wars against the king of Calecut.

The french Pox among precious jewels.


as also that he was diseased with the French pox, which had now entered into
his throat: nevertheless, his ears, arms, hands, legs, and feet, were so
beautyfully and rychly garnyshed with all sorts of jewels and precious stones,
that it can not be spoken. His treasure is esteemed so unmeasurable,
Unestimable treasure.
that it can not be contained in two wonderful great cellars or warehouses.
This treasure consysteth of precious stones, plates of gold, and also so much
coined gold as may suffice to lade a hundred M^les, as their Bramini report,
to whom it is best known. They say also that this treasure was geathered and
reserved by twelve kings which were before him, and that in his treasurye is
a cof^r of three spannes in length, and two in breadth, full of only precious
stones, of price inestimable.

Of the spices of Calecut. Cap. 13.
Pepper.
PEpper is geathered in the feeldes about the subarbes, and also in certain
places within the city. The stalk of pepper is very weak, and like unto
vines, which can not bear it self, The pepper tree.
without the help of a stake or proppe, and is much like unto an Iuie, and in
like manner creeps and embraces such trees as are near unto it. This tree
(or rather bushe) is dispearsed into sundry branches, of the length of two or
three spannes, and has the leaves like unto the leaves of an Assyrian apple,
but that these are somewhat thycker and fatter. On every twigge hang six
clusters, Clusters of pepper.
no bygger then Dates, and like unto clusters of little grapes, and of the
color of unripe grapes, but grow thycker. They are geathered in the month
of October, and November, inclynyng yet to green color, and are so laid on
mattes, and set in the Sun to dry, where in the space of three days, they
become black, as they are brought hither. The fruitefulnesse of these,
proceeds only of the simple goodness of the soil, without help of loppyng
or pruning. This region bears also Gynger, Genger.
which is doubtless a root, and is sometime dygged of the weight of.xii.
ounces, it enters no deeper into the ground then three or four handefuls.
When they dygge it out, they leave the knotte or joint of the root in the
pit, and cover it again with earth, as a seed for more against the next
year. It is found in an equal soil, as are the Myrabolanes: yet is the
earth where it grows, of very read color. The stalk, is much like the
stalk of a young pear tree.

Of the fruits of Calecut. Cap. 14.
IF I should describe all the sorts of strange fruits that are seen there,
it would rather require a volume, Fruits unlike ours.
then a brief rehersall of them particulerly: For they have not only many
greatly differing from ours in form, savor, and taste, but also those of the
kind of such as we have, differ in manner no less. Whereby may the natural
Philosopher consider how those things which are all of one kind, A
philosophical consideration of the difference of things of one kind.
differ according unto the nature of the soil and diverse situation under the
heavens. By which natural cause, and alteration, some fruits and seeds, by
transplanting into a better soil, become more perfect in their kind, as
bigger, fayrer, sweeter, and more fruitful: As also contrariwise, the
contrary, by transplantyng into a worse soil, or colder region: which
diversity is seen, not only in plants and herbs, but also in beasts, and
even in man kind. It is very strange to consider how diversely trees bear
their fruits and seeds, as some in one part of the tree, and some in an
other. There is in Calecut a fruit which they name Iaceros: the body of the
tree, is of the bigness of a Pear tree: A great fruit growyng out of the
body of the tree.
the fruit is of the length of two handfuls and a half, and as byg as the
thygh of a man. The fruit grows out of the body of the tree under the
branches, and some even in the very myddest of the tree, and other yet lower
also. The color is green, and in form, in manner like unto a Pyne apple, but
with less grains or knobbes: when it is ripe, it becomes black. It is
geathered in the month of December. Ripe fruits in December.

A fruit of sundry tastes.


It has the taste of a Pepon, and the savor somewhat like Castoreum. It
seems in eating to give diverse and sundry pleasant tastes: as sometime the
taste of a Peache, sometime of a Pomegranate, and leaves at the end a taste
so sweet, that you would think it to be new honey combs. Under the skin,
it is like unto a Peache. And within the body contains an other frui, One
fruit within an other
not much unlike soft Chestnuttes, and being roasted, has the same taste, and
is therefore certaynely one of the goodlyest fruits that I know. I will here,
to be brief, omit to speak much of their Nuttes, and Walnuttes, Almons,
Prunes, Peaches, Quinces, Gourdes, Melons, and such other fruits known to
us, and yet much more pleasant and fayrer then are ours. There is one fruit
worthy to be known, which they call Apolanda. The tree grows to the height
of a man, A tree with very broad leaves.
it bears not past four or five leaves hangyng by certain slyppes, every
leaf is able well to cover a man from rain, and the heat of the sun: In
the myddest of the leaf, A very goodly fruit.
rises a twyg or stalk, like the stalk of a bean, which brings out
flowers and also fruits of a handful long, and of the bigness of a man's
arm: these fruits are geathered unripe, Two hundred fruits on every slyppe.
because they become ripe in keepyng. Every slyp bears about two hundred
fruits, a thing certaynely wherein is greatly seen the fruitfulness of
nature. They touch one an other, and cluster together. They are of yelowe
color, and have a verry thyn codde, and are in eating delicate and wholesome.
There are three sorts of this kind of fruit, of the which one is of evil
taste, and therefore not so much esteemed. It is yet more strange, A tree
that never bears fruit but once.
that this tree bears fruit but once, yet when it dies, there rise about
the root thereof fyftie or threescore young slyppes, which renew the life of
their parent, that he dye not without succession. The gardeners or graffers
transplante these in other places, Fruits and flowers geathered at all times
of the year.
for within the space of one year they bring forth fruit. They are geathered
in great abundance almost all the whole year, and are therefore very good
cheap, and of small price, as twenty for a penny. The same soil bears
likewise innumerable and most fair and sweet flowers all the year long, and
especially Roses, both white, read, and yelowe.

Of a most fruitful tree of all the world. Cap. 15.
THere is also an other tree, most worthy to be known, the which in
fruitfulness, and sweetness of the fruit, passes all the trees of the
world. This tree in the west India, is called Coccus.
It bears certain fruits like unto great Dates or Nuttes, and generally
brings forth ten commodities: For it bears wood most apt to nourishe
fire, Ten commodities of one tree.
and Nuttes very pleasant to be eaten, also cords or ropes which may well
serve for sailors: Likewise very fine cloth, which when it is colored, shows
like silk: The wood is the best that may be found to make coals, it yeldeth
also wine and odoriferous water: Furthermore also, oil, and sugar. The boughs
of the tree, are commodious to cover houses in place of tyles or thetche: for
by reason of the closeness and fatness of the leaves, they keep out the
rain very well. The fruit of this tree (as we have said) is in form like
unto great Dates or Nuttes. One tree bears about two hundred of those
fruits. Nux Indica.
Taking away the first ryme, they put it in the fire, They are as big as a man's
fy^t, and some bygger.
where it burns quickly and with great flame. The second fruit under the
said first ryme, is much like unto bombasine or silk, and is like unto flax
when it is wrought. Of the flowers, they make a certain kind of cloth, not
unlike silk. The towe or refuse of the first flax, they spinne and make
thereof a grosser cloth, and small ropes or cords: and of the smallest,
wreathed together, they make greater ropes, which may serve for ships. That
part of the Nut which is under the third ryme, conteyneth also a substance
apt to make coals. The last ryme, includes the substance or cornell of the
Nutte, very delicate to be eaten. This ryme or bark, is of the thickness of a
man's little finger. Very sweet and clear water within a Nutte.
As the Nutte grows in bigness, so does also the water contained therein.
So that the Nutte coming to his full rypenesse and bygnesse, the water
occupies the inner part: and sometime is found so much water in the Nutte,
that you may take out of every Nutte two or three cups of water, very sweet
to be droonke, and as clear as Rose water, of the which also b^ing thickened
by seethyng, is made very fat oil. The Nutte likewise it self, Oil made of
water.
is of very pleasant taste. They suffer but one part of the tree to bring
forth fruit: For on the other part or side, they cut and wound the tree
in diverse places every morning and evening, Wine of cut branches of a tree.
and power into the wounded places a certain liquor, which draws out of the
tree a ioise, which falls into vessels placed to receive it, and so receive
they every day and night in every vessel, a cup of most precious liquor,
which sometimes also they sees at the fire, putting ever more unto it, until
it come to the strength of Aqua vitae, and troubles the brain both in savor
and drynkyng, as does most strong wine. On an other branch of the same tree,
they geather likewise sugar, but not very sweet. The tree bears fruit
continually: for there are seen on it both the old and dry fruits of the
season paste, A tree that bears fruit continually all the whole year.
and also green fruits of the new spring. It bears not before the fifth
year. These trees are found in the space or distaunce of about two hundred
miles. They are so greatly esteemed, that in the myddest of most cruellest
wars, it is not lawful for any man to hurt them, even in the lands of their
enemies. They live but to the age of.xxv. years. They prosper best in sandy
ground, and are set or planted as are Walnuttes. This region has also other
fruits whereof they make good oil. Oil.


How they sow Rise. Cap. 16.
Ploughing of the ground.
THey till the ground and plough it with Oxen as we do: when the time
approaches to sow Rise, they testify the ioyfulnesse of that day with all
sorts of instruments, singing and dancing. And in the way of their good
speed, that all things may prosper the better (as they believe) they disguise
ten men in apparel, A dance of deuylles.
to the similitude of the three deuylles, and dance about them with all the
noise of their instruments. Solemn suum oriri facit super bonos et malos. etc.
And thus celebratyng the festival day, they pray the deuylles good grace to
send them plenty of Rise.

How their Physicians visit sick folks. Cap. 17.
WHen any merchaunt of the Idolaters is sore grieved with any disease, and in
manner near unto death, then certain of them, which they take for physicians,
called to visit the patient in this extremity, come thither in the silence of
the night, The devil a Physician.
apparelled like the devil (as is aforesaid) carrying fire sticks in their
mouths and hands. And there, with a mad cry and howlyng, and with the
iangelyng of certain instruments, makes so horrible a noise in the ears of
the sick man, that it were enough to make a whole man sick. Such a Physician
such physic
And this is all the remedy and comfort which their Physicians bring to their
sick men, which is none other, then in the article of death to present unto
them the similitude of him whom they (worse then deuylles) honor for gods
vicare: Either meaning perhaps by this means, to call again the sick man
almost dead. A remedy (...) surfetyng.
When the inhabitants have so ingorged them selves with to much meat, that
they be sick in their stomach, they take the powder of the roots of ginger,
and making it in form of a sirupe, with puttyng some liquor unto it, drink
it all up, and within three days recover their health.

Of their Exchaungers, bankers, and Brokers. Cap. 18.
THeir exchaungers and bankers, have weyghtes and balances so little, that the
box, Fine weightes and balances.
with the weightes and all that parteineth thereto, passes not the weight of an
ounce, and are made so just, that the weight of a hear will cast them. When
they will try true gold from false, or base from fine, they use the touch
stone, as we do, but have this more then we: They have a ball composed (I know
not whereof) and like unto wax, and when they have first rubbed the gold on
the touch, they rub likewise the touch on the said ball, where then the
spots of the gold remain, and thereby they know a more exact proof of
the finenesse or baseness of the gold. A strange experiment to know the fine
gold from base.
When the said ball is full of gold, they melt it in the fire, and geather the
gold which it had imbibed. These exchangers are but gross witted men, and
ignorant of the art which they profess. In buying and selling of merchandies,
they use this manner. They have a broker, whose help they use in these
affairs. Proxeneta.
Therefore when the merchauntes come thither, then the broker, A superstitious
manner of buying and selling.
having with him a veil or scarf, takes the seller by the right hand, and
covers it with the veil. Then does the merchant number on his fingers, from
one unto a hundred thousand, privily and secretly, and then the seller also
with like numbryng of his fingers and joints, until he come to the number of
the price of his merchandies. Then the broker goes again to the buyer, and
coueryng his hands with the veil in like manner, and numbryng of his fingers,
certifieth him how much the seller demands for his ware, then the buyer
again, by feelyng and numbryng the brokers fingers, signifies what he will
give the seller for his merchaundies. And thus the broker goes to and fro,
showing both their meaning with silence until they be agreed. They sell their
cloth by measure: but their spices and Iewelles by weight.

Of the inhabitants of Poliar and Hiraua, and how they nourysh their children.
Cap. 19.
THe women weane their children when they come to the age of three months,
and afterward nourysh them with Goats milk: Little pain or cost for noursing
of children.
and when in the morning they have given them milk, they tomble them in the
sands all foul and filthy, where they let them lie all the day, and are so
scorched of the Sun, that far of they seem like Bufles Calves, I never
saw more deformed or filthy creatures: at euenyng, their mothers give them
milk again. By this kind of wild bringing up, they become men of marvelous
dexterity in swiftness of runnyng, Funambuli.
and other things of great agilitie, as to walk upon ropes, swimming,
leapyng, vaultyng, and such like.

Of four footed beasts, fowls, and birds of Calecut. Cap. 20.
THere are many beasts and kinds of birds, as Lions, wild Bores, Hearts,
Hyndes, Bufles, Kyne, Goats, and Elephantes: yet not all engendered there, but
brought thither partly from other places. Popingayes or Parottes.
There are also parottes of sundry colors, as green, purple, and other mixte
colors. There is such multitude of them, that there are men appointed to keep
them from the Rise in the fields, as we use to keep Crows from the corn. A
great noise of birds.
They are marvelous crying and chattering, and of small price, as one sold
for two pense, or half a souse. There are many other birds much unlike to
ours, which every morning and euenyng make so great a noise and sweet singing,
that nothing can be more pleasant or delectable to hear, and therefore the
inhabitants live in great pleasure, and in manner as it were in an earthly
Paradyse, An earthly Paradyse. Continual spring, and temperate air.
in continual spryng and florishyng of flowers, herbs, and trees, all the
year long: beside also the goodly and wholesome temperatenesse of the air,
being neither extreme hot nor cold, but in manner in temperature of
continual spring time. That region has also Monkeys, Monkeys do much hurt.
which are there of small price. These are very hurtful to husbandmen, and
such as live by tillage of the ground: for they clyme the trees of those
goodly Indian Nuts and precious fruit, whereof we have spoken here before, of
the which they make wine, which these beasts do spill, and cast down the
vessels that are made fast there to receive the said liquor of wine.

Of certain Serpents which are seen in Calecut. Cap. 21.
THere are certain Serpents, of such bigness, that they are equal to swine,
their heads are much greater then the heads of Bores: they are four footed,
Crocodiles without poison.
and of the length of four cubits, and are engendered in marshes. The
inhabitants say that they are without poison, and do not otherwise hurt, then
by biting. There are furthermore three kinds of Serpents: of the which, some
are of so strong poison, that if they draw never so little blood, present death
follows, Three kinds of Serpents.
which thing chanced oftentimes whilst I was there Of these kinds of
serpents, some are of the bigness of an Aspe, and many much bigger. Of these
there are a very great number. The cause whereof (they say) is this: That the
king of Calecut, Serpents superstitiously kept and nourished.
of a certain foolish superstition, makes so great account of these
Serpents, that he causes little houses or cottages to be made for them,
beleeuyng that they have virtue against over much rain and ouerflowing of
rivers, and therefore if a man kill any of them, he is punished with death, as
though he had killed a man: Death for kyllyng a Serpent or a Cow.
and the like punishment is also for him that kills a cow. They greatly
esteem these Serpents, because (as they say) they came from heaven, and
therefore they take them for heavenly spirits, which they affirm, for that
only with touching, they bring present death. And this is ye cause that there
are many serpents, being thus permitted by the commandment of the king.
These serpents know the Idolaters inhabitants from Mahumetans or other
strangers, Because they go naked.
and will sooner venture upon them. When I was there, I came into a house where
eight men lay dead and greatly swollen, which the day before were killed by
these serpents, yet do they esteem it for good luck, when going abroad, they
meet with any of them. Superstition.


Of the lights and Lamps which are seen in the Palace of the king of
Calecut. Cap. 22.
IN the kings Court or Palace, are diverse mansions, and very many chambers,
and therefore in the euenyng when it waxes dark, there are seen innumerable
burning Lamps.

Goodly candelstickes of laton.
In the hall of the palace, are seen ten or twelve candelstickes of laton,
very fair, and of cunnyng workemanshyp, much like unto goodly fountaynes, and
of the heyght of a man. In each of them are diverse vessels, and in every
vessel three candels light, of two spannes length, Polyxines et Polychni.
and great plenty of oil. In the first vessel, are many Lamps made of
cords of bombasine cotton. In the myddle part, is seen a narower vessel, also
full of lamps and lights. In the lowest vessel also the like number of
lights. But in an other vessel in the top of all the candelsticke,
Innumerable lyghtes and Lamps.
are in manner innumerable lights, mainteyned with oil, and have matches of
bombasine cotton. The devil serves in the kings chamber.
At the angles or corners of these candelsticks, are the Images of devils,
which also hold the lights that are in the kings presence. When any of the
kings blood dies, he sends for all the Bramini or priests of his realm,
and command them to mourn for the space of a year. Mourning the space of a
year.
At their coming, he banqueteth them three days together, and at their
departing, gives each of them five pieces of gold.

Of the great multitude of Idolaters which resort to Calecut, for pardon of
their sins. Cap. 23.
The Temple of sacrifyce to Idolles.
NOt far from the city of Calecut, is a certain church or Temple, compassed
about with water, like an Island, builded after an ancient fashion, having a
double order of pillars, much like the Temple of saint John De Font in the
city of Rome. In the midst of the Temple, is an Altar of stone, where the
people sacrifice to Idolles. Between the pillars on high, is a Boat of the
length of two pases, and full of oil. Trees behanged with Lamps.
Also round about the Temple, are many trees with an innumerable multitude of
Lamps and lights hanging on them: The temple also it self, is as full of
lyghtes. The.xxv. day of December, resorteth thither an infinite multitude of
people, from all parts, even for the distance of.xv. days journey, and
especially of the priests, to whom parteyneth the order of sacrificeyng: But
they do not sacrifice unto their Idolles before they wash them selves in the
water which is about the Temple. Washyng before sacrifice.
When the priests assende to the place whereas is the boat filled with oil
(as we have said) they spryncle the people with the said oil, but annoynte
only their heads: Who being so anointed, Holy oil in the stead of holy
water.
may then proceed to the sacrifice. On the one side of the altar, where they
sacrifice, is seen a most horrible form of a devil, to whom the people,
prostrate on the ground, pray unto, and then depart to their houses and
countries. Sacrifice to the devil for forgiveness of sins.
By this means they believe that all their sins are quite forgeuen them, and
therefore for the space of three days, they live there in safegarde, as if it
were in Sanctuary: and for that time, is it not lawful for any man to arrest
or trouble an other for what so ever quarrel. Sanctuary. Large is the way that
leads to perdition. etc.
Certainly I never saw in any place a greater multitude of people assembled,
except in the city of Mecha.

The syxt book contaynyng the voyage of India.
Of the Cities of Caicolon, and Colon. Cap. 1.
MY faithful companyon Cociazenor the Persian (of whom I have made mention
here before) consyderyng that by the means of wars and imminent dangers,
there was now no place for merchaundies, especially for that the Portugales
had made sore wars and great slaughter in the city of Calecut, The king of
Portugals wars in the city of Calecut.
by occasion that the inhabitants of the city had conspired with the
Mahumetans for the murder of eight and forty Portugales (which was done at
my being there) I thought it best in time to depart from thence. This fact so
greatly moved the king of Portugale to revenge, that he has since that time
kept hostile wars against them, and greatly consumed them, and defaced their
city. We therefore departing from thence by a very fair river, Caicolon.
came to a city named Caicolon, distaunte from the city of Calecut fifty
leagues: the inhabitants are idolaters. There is great abundance of
merchaundies, and great frequentation of merchauntes: the soil bears plenty
of the best kind of pepper. Pepper.
The king of the city is not very rych. In apparel and manners, they differ
little from them of Calecut. Here we found certain merchantes, Christians of
the profession of saint Thomas.
Christians, named of the profession of saint Thomas the Apostle. They observe
the fasting of forty days, as we do, and believe in the death and
resurrection of Christ, as we do, and therefore celebrate Easter after our
manner, and observe other solemnities of our religion, after the manner of the
Greeks. They are commonly named by the names of John, James, Matthias, and
Thomas. Departing from thence, in the space of three days journey we came to an
other city, Colon.
named Colon, about twenty miles distant from the aforesaid. An army of.xx.
thousand horsemen.
The king is an idolater, and a prince of great power, having ever an army of
twenty thousand horsemen: there is a very fair port. Near to the sea side
the soil bears no corn, yet great abundance of fruit and pepper, as in
the city of Calecut: but by reason of the wars we remained no longer here.
Not far from hence, we saw men fyshe for pearls, in manner as we have said
before of the city and Island of Ormus. Pearls.


Of Cyromandel, a city of India. Cap. 2.
THe city of Cyromandel is by the sea side, and distant from the city of
Colon seven days saylyng. The city is very large, but without walls: it is
subject to the king of Narsinga, Zeilon.
and is within the sight of the Island of Zaylon. After that you are past the
point of Comerin, Comerin.
the soil bears plenty of Rise. This city is in the way to diverse great
regions and cities: It is inhabited with innumerable Mahumetan merchantes,
resortyng thither from many countries. There are no spyces, but abundance of
fruit, as in Calecut. I found there certain Christians, who affirm that the
body of saint Thomas the Apostle is there in a certain place, about twelve
miles from this city, The body of Thomas the Apostle.
and also that there are certain Christians which relygiously observe the
holy body: and that the Christians are evil used, because of the wars which
the king of Portugal has made against the people of these countries. The king
of Narsinga friend to the Portugalls.
Also that the Christians are sometime murdered secretly, lest it should be
known to the king of Narsinga, who is in amity and frendshyppe with the king
of Portugal, and greatly favors the Christians. The cause whereof (as they
say) is also partly by reason of a certain miracle, which was this. A
miracle at the sepulcher of S. Thomas.
The Christians on a time had a great conflicte with the Mahumetans, where one
of the Christians being sore wounded on his arm, resorted incontinent to the
sepulcher of saint Thomas, where making his prayers, and touching the holy
place, his arm was immediately healed. Whereupon (as they say) the king of
Narsinga ever after greatly favored the Christians. Here my companion sold
much of his wares. But by reason of the wars between the kings of Narsinga
and Ternaseri, we determined to depart from hence. And therefore saylyng over a
gulf of.xx. leagues with great danger, we arrived at an Island named Zailon,
very large, as containing in circuit a thousand miles.

Of the Island of Zailon, and the precious stones found there. Cap. 3
IN this Island are four kings of great dominion, by reason of the largeness
of the Island. Four kings in one Island.
But because of the wars among them at my being there, I could not tarry
long to have particular knowledge of the region and manners of the people. There
are in the Island many Elephantes. There is also a very long mountain, at the
foot whereof, Elephantes. Rubie stones,
are found many precious stones, named Piropi, commonly called Rubines, or
Rubies. The merchauntes iewelers, come by them by this means.

First, going to the king, they bye of him a certain measure of that ground
where such stones are found, of the largeness of a cubite every way. The
price of this, is five pieeces of gold: yet with such condition, that in
dyggyng the ground, there is ever one present for the king, to the end that
if in dyggyng be found any of those precious stones exceedyng the weight of x.
Caractes, Precious stones.
the same to be reserved for the king. And the rest that are found under that
wayght, to apparteyne to the merchaunt. Not far from the said mountain, are
found diverse other sorts of precious stones, as Iasynthes, Saphires, Topases,
and such like. Hard by the mountain, runs a great river. The soil
brings forth the sweetest fruits that ever I saw, especially cloves, and
apples of Assiria, of exceedyng sweetness, and all other, as in Calecut.

Of the tree of Cinamome in the Island of Zaylon. Cap. 4.
THe tree of Cinamome is not much unlike a Baye tree, especially the leaves, it
bears berryes as does the Baye tree, but less, and white: It is doubtless
therefore none other then the bark of a tree, and is geathered in this manner.
How Cinamome is geathered.
Every third year they cut the branches of the tree. Of this, is great
plenty in the said Island. When it is first geathered it is not yet so
sweet, but a month after when it waxes dry. A certain Mahumetan merchaunt
of the Island, told my companyon, that there in the top of a high mountain is
a certain den, whyther the inhabitants of the country resort to pray, in
memory of our first father Adam, who (they say) after he had sinned by
breakyng the commandment of God, A den where Adam lived in penance.
lived in that place in continual penitence. Which thing they affirm by this
conjecture, that there is yet seen the print of the steps of his feet, of
the length of almost two spannes. The inhabitants are subject to the king of
Narsinga, and pay him tribute. Temperate regions under the Equinoctial line.
The region is of temperate air, although it be situate in manner under the
Equinoctial line. The people are of dark tawny color. Their apparel, are
certain single clokes of bombasine cloth, which they wear, bearyng ever the
right arm out all naked, as is the manner of all the Indians. They are no
warrelyke men, neither have they the use of Iron. Here my companyon sold to
the king much Saffran and Coralles. Saffran and Coral.


Of Paleachet, a city of India. Cap. 5.
Departing from the Island of Zailon, in three days saylyng we came to a city
named Paleachet, subject to the king of Narsinga. It is a famous mart of
rich merchaundies, and especially of jewels and precious stones, brought
thither from Zailon and Pego. There is also great plenty of spices. There
dwell in the city many Mahumetan merchauntes, where we being received in one
of their houses, told him from whence we came, and what merchaundies we
brought, as Saffran, and Coralles, whereof he was very glad. The city has
great scarsnesse of corn, but plenty of Rise: and in other fruitefulnesse of
the soil and manner of the people, much like unto Calecut. But because they
were at dissension with the king of Tarnassari, and prepared wars against
him, we departed from thence, and in.xiii. days saylyng, arrived at the city
of Tarnassari, a hundred miles distant.

Of Tarnassari, a city of India. Cap. 6.
THis city is not far from the sea, and situate on a meetly equal ground,
well walled, having also a famous port, and a very fair river runnyng on the
North side of the city. The king is an Idolatour, and a prince of great power.
He keeps continual war with the kings of Narsinga and Bangella. He
brings to the feelde a hundred Elephantes, of the fairest and byggest that
ever I saw. Elephants.
He has an army of an hundred thousand pencionarie footmen, An army of a
hundred thousende footmen.
and as many horsemen. Their weapons are swoordes, round targettes, peltes,
bows, darts, and iauelins of great and long reeds. They are also armed with
iackes made of bombasine cotton, wrought very hard, and closely couched. Their
houses are walled, and continent in order as ours are. The region brings
forth wheat, bombasine, sylke, of sundry kinds of colors, Brasile, and
sundry kinds of fruits, much like unto ours. Also apples of Assiria,
Oranges, Limons, Citrons, Gourdes, Cucumbers. Fruits.
etc.

Of the wild and tame beasts of the city of Tarnassary. Cap. 7.
THis region brings forth many beasts both wyld and tame. The tame beasts,
are Oxen, Kyne, Sheep, Gotes, Hogs, Hearts, and Hyndes. The wild beasts,
Wild beasts.
are Lions, Wolves, Cattes of the mountain, and also Muskecattes. In the
feeldes are many Peacockes, and those kind of Egles which we call Falcons.
Peacockes. Falcons. Popingayes.
Popingays also or Parrottes, marvelous fair, of the which some are white,
and other of seven colors. There is likewise great plenty of Hares, and
Partriges, and diverse other sorts of great birds living by pray, A great and
fair foul.
much bygger then Eagles: for of the upper part of their beckes, they make
haf^es for swoordes. The beck is of yelowe color, distinct with crimsine,
very fair and beautiful to be seen. But the bird is black and purple, with
certain white feathers intermyxt. There are also the byggest Hens and Cocks
that ever I saw: Cock fyghting.
and therefore thinhabitants and Mahumetans which dwell there, take much
pleasure in Cockefyght, and lay great wagers in that kind of sport. I have
seen them fight for the space of six hours, and yet sometimes they kill one
an other at the first stroke. There are certain Gotes far exceedyng ours in
byggenesse, Fruitful Gotes.
and much fayrer: these are so fruitful, that at one birth they bring forth
four young kyddes. There is so great abundaunce of beasts, that twelve
weathers are sold for one piece of gold to the value of a crown or pistole^.
There are also certain weathers or rams with horns like unto buckes horns,
Rams with buckes horns.
and are much bygger and fyercer then ours.

Their Buffles are not so fair as ours. The region has also abundaunce of
fyshe, very bygge and good, and of small price. These people eat all manner of
beasts, except Kyne. They eat on the ground without carpet or other cloth:
yet have they vessels of woodde artificially made. Their drink is water and
sugar: their beds are raised from the ground, after the manner of ours. Their
couche is of bombasine cotton, and the couerynges of sylke. Their apparel, is
a cloak or mantell of bombasine or sylke, with one arm out, all bare. But some
of the merchauntes, wear inner vestures or shirtes of sylke or bombasine
cloth. They go all barefooted, except the priests, which wear on their heads
certain rayles or crestes of two spannes long, with a knotte on the crown
like unto an Acorne, and sparkled with gold. They delyght also in earinges:
but wear neither rings nor braslettes. The color of the inhabitants
inclyneth to white, for the temperature of the climate or air, is colder then
at Calecut. Their manner of tyllage, and geatheryng of fruit, is like unto ours.

Of the manner which the king of Tarnassarie uses, when he permits his wife
to be defloured of white men. Cap. 8.
THis king uses not to give his wife to the priests to be defloured, as does
the king of Calecut, but commits this fact to white men, as to the
Christians or Mahumetans, for he will not suffer the Idolaters to do this. The
inhabitants likewise have not to do carnally with their wives, before some
white man, of what so ever nation, have first the breakyng of them.

The manner of burning dead bodies in the city of Tarnassary. Cap. 9.
WHen the king or any of the priests or gentlemen dye, their bodies are burnt
in a great fire made of a pile of wood: then all the while they sacrifice unto
the devil. Their ashes are reserved in certain pottes of the earth of Samos,
and buried in their houses. They sacrifice in ye shadows of trees as do they of
Calecut. Whilst the bodies are burning, they cast in the fire all manner of
sweet sauoures, as Aloes, Myrre, Frankensence, Storax, Sandals, Coral, and
innumerable such other sweet gummes, spices, and trees. These make the fire
much greater, encreasyng the flame by reason of their gummositie: in the mean
time also they never cease to make a great noise with Trumpettes, Pipes,
Canonisyng of saints.
Drums, Tambarells, and such other instruments, not much unlike the
ceremonies which in old time were used among the gentiles in canonisyng their
saints. Furthermore, during these funerals, there are.xv. or.xx. disguised
like deuyls, which continually walk round about the fire, with many strange
gesticulations, after the manner of reioycyng. The wife also of the burned king
or priest, stands by the tire alone, without the company of any other woman,
lamentyng and beatyng her breast. These ceremonies are done the second watch
of the night. Within fyfteene days after, the wife bids to a banquette all
her husbands kynsfolkes, The wife burns her self after the death of her
husband.
and when they come at a day appointed, they go al to the place where her
husband was burnt, and at the same hour of the night: then comes forth the
wife, garnyshed with all her jewels and best apparel, vsyng therein the help
of all her kynsfolkes. In the same place is made a pytte, no deeper then may
serve to receive the woman: This pytte, is set about with reeds, and the
reeds are covered with a cloth of sylke, that the pytte may not be seen. In
the mean time also a fire is made in the pyt, with sundry sorts of sweet
woods: and the wife, after that her gestes have well banqueted, eats very
much of a certain meat which they call Betola, which troubles her mind
as though she were half mad or drunken. In the mean while, a great company
of such their musitions as we have spoken of before, apparelled like deuyls,
Daunsyng deuylles.
with burning sticks in their mouths, dance first about the pytte, and then
make sacrifice to the great devil Deumo. The wife also in ye mean season
runs up and down like a mad body, Sacrifice to the devil.
with countenaunces of dauncyng and reioycyng. Then turnyng her to them that
are disguised like deuyls, she commends her self to their devout prayers,
desiryng them for her to make intercession to the great Deumo, that after this
transitory life, it may please him to receive her into the company of his
Angels. After the ceremonies are fynished, she takes her leave of all her
kynsfolkes, which stand round about her, and near unto the pit, The high
way to hell.
then with sudden outrage and a loud cry liftyng up her hands, she hurleth
her self into the burning pit, which done, her kynsfolkes, standing near unto
the fire, cover her with little fagottes of sweet wood, hurlyng also thereon
much pitche, that the body may the sooner be consumed: and except the wife
should do this after the death of her husband, Great respect of fame and
honesty.
she should ever after be esteemed an evil woman, be hated of all men, and in
fine, in danger to be slain both of her own kynsfolkes and her husbands, and
therefore she goes to it the more willingly. The king him self is present at
these pompes: which are not commonly used for all men, but only for the kings,
priests, and noble men.

Of the justice which the inhabitants of Tarnassari observe. Cap. 10.
IF any kill a man, he is adjudged to death, as in the city of Calecut. Of
giuyng and receyuyng, justice is ministered, as proof may be made by writing or
witness. Writing.
They write in parchement like unto ours, and not in barks of trees as do
they of Calecut. When they contend for any thing, they resort to the
governor of the city, to whom the king has given full authority of
jurisdiction: and if any merchaunt stranger dye there without children, he may
make no inheritour, but all his goods is due to the king: when the king is
dead, his children succeed in the kingdom. When the inhabitants dye, their
goods are equally divided among their children.

How the Mahumetans are buried in the city of Tarnassari. Cap. 11.
WHen any of the Mahumetan merchantes dye, they are embaulmed with many spices
and sweet gummes, and their bodies put in Coffins of wood: with chief regard
that their heads lie toward the city of Mecha, Mecha.
which is from thence Northwarde.

Of the diverse sorts of their ships or other vessels. Cap. 12.
THey have Brigantines very shalowe, and with flat bottoms, which draw but
small depth of water. Some also use Foistes, having two or double forepartes,
and two Mastes, and are open without any couerture. There is an other kind of
ships of burden: Of the which, some bear the burden of a thousand tons.
In these they carry Botes and other smaller vessels, to the city of Melacha,
when they go for spices.

Of Bangella, a great and rich city of India, and of the great power of the
king. Cap. 13.
IT is now time to speak further of our viage, and of our proceedyng therein.
Therefore packyng up our wares, and commityng us to the sea, we came in twelve
days saylyng to a city named Bangella, The city of Bangella.
distant from Tarnassari seven hundred miles. This city in fruitfulness and
plentifulnesse of all things, may in manner contend with any city in the
world. The kingdom and dominion of this city is exceedyng large. The king
has an army of two hundred thousand footmen and horsemen Mahumetans, An army
of two hundred thousand men.
and is of so great power, that he keeps sore wars with the king of
Narsinga. The region is so plentiful in all things, that there lacks
nothing that may serve to the necessary uses or pleasures of men: for there
are in manner all sorts of beasts, good and wholesome fruits, and plenty of
corn: Spices also of all sorts. Spices and silk.
Likewise of bombasine and silk, so exceedyng great abundance, that in these
things, I think there is none other region comparable with this, and
therefore here are very many rich merchantes. Rich merchantes.
For every year depart from hence, fyftie ships laden with clothe of
bombasine and silk, into the cities and countries of Turchia, Syria, Arabia,
Persia, Ethiopia, and India. There are also many merchaunt strangers, Precious
stones.
which buy precious stones of the inhabitauntes.

Of certain Christian merchauntes, which exercise merchandies there. Cap. 14.
HEre we found many Christian merchantes which were borne in the city of
Sarnau, as they told us. Christians.
They resort thither, as to a great mart, with cloth of silk, Lignum Aloes.
and wood of Aloes, and Laser, Laserpitium.
which yeldeth the sweet gum named Laserpitium, commonly called Belzoi,
Belzoi.
being a kind of myrre. They bring also Castoreum, Castoreum.
and diverse other sweet savors. The said Christians told us also, Christian
Princes under the great Cham of Cathay.
that there be in that kingdom, many Christian Princes, subject to the great
Cham, of the city of Cathai. The apparel of these Christians, was Chamlet,
loose and very full of pleytes, and lyned with bombasine cloth. On their heads
they wear certain coppen or sharp poynted cappes, of two handful high, of
scarlet color. They are white men. They acknowledge one God in Trinity, and
are baptized after our manner. They believe the doctrine of the Apostles and
Evangelists. They write backewarde, after the manner of the Armenians. They
celebrate the birth and burial of Christ, and observe fasting the forty
days of Lent as we do. They celebrate also certain saints days. They use
no shoes, but wear loose hose of silk, garnished with diverse Jewels. On
their fingers they wear Ringes, with stones of incomparable splendor. At
meat, they use no table, but eat lying on the ground, and feed of all
sorts of flesh.

They affyrmed also, that there are certain Christian kings (which they call
Rumi) of great power, Christian Princes near the Turks dominions.
confinyng or borderyng on the dominions of the great Turk. When these
Christians had seen the precious merchaundies of my companion, and specially a
great branch of Coral, Coral of great price.
they earnestly desired him, to go with them to a certain city, where they
promised him that by their procurement he should sell his ware at great
auantage, Rubies.
if he would buy Rubie stones, and that he might thereby easily geat above
ten thousand pieces of gold: Affirming that those kind of stones were of
much greater value in Turkey. Whereunto my companion answered, that he would
go with them if they would depart in short space. We will (said they)
depart even to morrow: for here is a Foist which departs hence to morrow,
Pego.
and takes her viage to the city of Pego, whyther we desire to bring you. My
companion consented the rather to his request, because he was advertised that
he should find there certain Persians, his country men. Therefore with this
good company departing from the city of Bangella, and saylyng over a great
gulf lying on the South side, we came at the length to the city of Pego, a
thousand miles distaunt from Bangella.

Of Pego, a famous city of India. Cap. 15.
THe city of Pego, is not far from the sea, and is situate upon the
continent or fyrme land. A very fair river runs by the city, by the which
merchandies are carried to and fro. Idolaters.
The king of the city, is an Idolater. The inhabitauntes, in apparel, living,
and manners, are like unto them of Tarnassari: but of whiter color, as in a
colder region, somewhat like unto ours. White men.
The city is walled, and the houses well builded, and very fair, of stone and
lyme. The king has a myghtie army both of footmen and horsemen, and has in
his army Pensionarie Christians, borne even in the same region. Christians.


Their wages, is every month six of those pieces of gold which they call
Pardaios, and is paid them out of the Kings treasury. They have abundance of
corn and flesh, as in Calecut. Here are but few Elephantes, yet other beasts
and fowls, as in Calecut. Here are also trees for buyldyng, and to make
ships, the fairest that ever I saw: Also exceedyng great Reeds, Great
Reed^^*
as byg as the body of a gross man, or a tubbe. Here are likewise siuit
Cattes, or Musk Cattes, and of small price, Musk catte^*
as three for one piece of gold. There are few merchandyes in this city,
except precious stones, and specially Rubies: Precious stones and spices.
which nevertheless are brought thither from an other city named Capela,
being toward the East thirty days journey, Capela.
where are also found precious stones named Smaragdes or Emeraldes. Smaragdes
or Emeraldes.
When we arrived at Pego, the king was absent five and twenty days journey,
in a place where he kept war against the king of Aua. But shortly after, he
returned with great tryumphe for the victory which he had against his enemy.

Of the munificence, humility, and great richesse of the King of Pego. Cap. 16.
THis king uses not such pompes and magnificence as does the king of
Calecut: But is of such humanity and affability, that a child may come to
his presence and speak with him, being nevertheless very rich. It is in
manner incredible to speak of the rich Iewelles, Great riches of Iewelles and
precious stones
precious stones, pearls, and especially Rubies, which he wears, surmounting
in value any great city. His fingers be full of Ringes, and his arms all full
of braselettes of gold, all beset and most gloriously shinyng with such
precious stones: His legs also and feet being garnyshed in like manner. His
ears likewise are so laded with such Iewelles, that they hang down half a
handful. The splendor or shinyng of these Iewelles is so great, that if one
see the king in the dark night, A king shinyng with earthly stars.
he shines in manner as it were the beams of the sun. At good opportunity
the Christian merchantes spoke to the king, and certified him that my companion
had brought sundry merchaundies of great estimation. The king answered, that
they should come to him the day following, The king sacrifyceth to the devil.
because that, that present day, he should sacrifice to the devil. Therefore
the next day he sent for us, willing that my companion should bring with him
such merchandies as he had. The which the king took great pleasure to behold,
and not without good cause: for among other things, there were two great
branches of corrall, Coral.
of such bigness and fayrenesse, as no man there had ever seen the like. The
king astonished at these things, asked the Christians what men we were. They
answered that we were Persians. Then said the king to his interpretour, Ask
them if they will here make sale of their merchandies. To whom then my
companion said thus, Most honorable Prince, all these are yours, take them,
and use them at your pleasure. Then said the king again, These two years
paste I have kept continual war with the king of Aua, and therefore my
treasure of money is consumed: But if you will bargain by the way of
exchange, for precious stones, and especially Rubies, I will so deal with
you, that it shall not repent you. Then said my companion to the Christians: I
pray you give the king to understand, The king and the merchant contend of
liberality.
that I desire none other thing then the benevolence of his highness, and
therefore that I desire him to take of my merchaundies what lyketh him best,
and that without money, or permutation of any other thing. When the king heard
this, Commendation of the Persians.
he answered, that he had heard by report that the Persians were very
curtuous and liberal men, and that he never knew so liberal a man as this
was, and swore by the head of the devil, that by this occasion he would prove
which of them two should be most liberal, and therefore calling unto him a
Page of his chamber, A casket full of Rubies.
commanded him to fetch a casket of precious stones. This casket was of the
breadth of a spanne and a half, every way square, and full of Rubies: having
also within it sundry receptacles or boxes, where the stones were sorted in
order. When he had opened the casket, he commanded it to be set before the
Persian, willing him to take of those precious stones as many as he would. But
my companion the Persian, yet more moved to liberality by this the Kings
munificence, spoke to the king these words, O most honorable Prince, I
perceive your benevolence to be such toward me, that I swear by the holy
head of Mahumet, and all the mysteries of his religion, whereunto I am
professed, that I freely and gladly give unto you all my merchaundies: For I
do not travail about the world for gaynes of richesse, but rather of desire
to see the world. In the which thereto, I never found any thing wherein I so
greatly rejoiced, as in the benevolence and favor which your majesty has
showed me. The king answered, Wylt thou yet contend with me in liberality?
And with those words, took out of the casket, (of every box some) as many
Rubies as he could hold in his hand, and with this reward (which was two
hundred Rubies) showed his kyngly munificence and benevolence toward the
Persian, saying unto him, Take these, I pray thee, for thou shall not refuse
them. He gave also to each of the Christians two Rubies, which were worth a
thousand crowns to be sold: but those which he gave the Persian, were
esteemed worth a hundred thousand crowns. A Princely gift.
This king therefore doubtless in munificence passes all the kings of the
world, and in manner no less in richesse: for he receives yearly of his
subjects two hundred thousand pieces of gold. This region brings forth all
sorts of colors, Colors.
and great plenty of bombasine and silk: but these great riches, the king
consumes on his soldiers. Not long after, news were brought that the king of
Aua was coming with a myghtie force, whom the king in manner with an
innumerable army went to resist. Here also in certain places we saw women
burned, aft^r the manner of Tarnassari.

Of the city of Melacha, and the great river of Gaza. Cap. 17.
Within two days after, taking ship, we sailed westwarde toward the city of
Melacha, and arrived there in eight days saylyng. Not far from this city,
is a famous river named Gaza, the largest that ever I saw, conteynyng xxv.
miles in breadth. On the other side, is seen a very great Island, A river
of.xxv. miles broad. The Island of Sumetra or Taprobana.
which they call Sumetra, and is of old writers named Traprobana. The
inhabitauntes say that it conteyneth in circuit five hundred miles. When we
came to the city of Melacha (which some call Melcha) we were incontinent
commanded to come to the Soltan, being a Mahumetan, and subject to the great
Soltan of Chini, Chini or China.
and pays him tribute. Of which tribute, they say the cause is, that more
then fourscore years past, that city was builded by the king of Chini, for
none other cause, then only for the commodity of the haven, being doubtless
one of the fairest in that Ocean, and therefore it is lykely that many ships
should resort thither for merchandies. The region is not every where
fruitful, yet has it sufficient of wheat and flesh, and but little wood.
They have plenty of fowls, as in Calecut: but the Popingays are much fayrer.
There is also found Sandalum, Popingayes. Sandalum, Tyn.
and Tynne. Likewise Elephantes, horses, sheep, kyne, Pardalles, Bufles,
Peacockes, and many other beasts, and fowls. They have but few fruits, and
therefore there is no merchandies to be sold but spices and silk. Spices and
silk.
The people are of blackyshe ash color. Their apparel is like to the
Mahumetans of the city Memphis, otherwise named Cayr, Alchayr, or Babylon of
Nilus. They have very large foreheades, round eyes, and flat noses. It is
dangerous there to go abroad in the night, the inhabitants are so given to
murder and robbery, Unruly people.
for they kill one another like dogs, and therefore the merchantes remain in
their ships all the night. The people are fierce, of evil condition, and
unruly, for they will obey to no governor, being altogether given to sedition
and rebellion, Anarchia.
and therefore say unto their governors, that they will forsake the country,
if they strive to bind them to order, which they say the more boldly, because
they are near unto the sea, and may easily depart into other places. For
these causes, we spent no long time here: but hyring a Brigantine, we sailed to
the Island of Sumatra, where in few days saylyng, we arrived at a city of
the Island named Pyder, distaunt about fourscore miles from the continent or
firm land.

Of the Island of Sumatra, or Taprobana. Cap. 18.
WE have said here before that the Island of Sumatra, conteyneth in circuit
five hundred miles. The Island of Samatra or Samotra.
The city where we first arrived in the Island, is named Pider, having a very
fair port. I believe verily this Island to be Taprobana, as also most autours
do agree. It is governed by four kings, and all Idolaters, in fashions,
apparel, and manner of living, Four kings in one Island.
not much differyng from the king of Tarnassari. The women burn them selves
after the death of their husbands, as do they of whom we have spoken before.
They are of whityshe color, Women burns them selves.
with large forheades, round eyes, and of brasyll color. They wear their
hear long, and have very broad and flat noses, and are of despicable
stature. Justice is there well observed. Their money is of gold, silver, and
tynne. The gold coin, Justice. Coined money of gold, silver, and tynne.
Elephantes.
has on the one side, the graven head of a devil: and on the other side, a
wagon or charrette drawn with Elephantes. The silver money has the like coin:
ten of these, are valued for one of gold. But of the tynne coin.xxv. make
the value of one of gold. Here are seen more Elephantes, bygger, and fayrer
then in any other place that I have been. This people has no experience of
wars, but are given altogether to gaynes and merchandies. They are
hospitable, and enterteyne strangers friendly.

Of an other kind of Pepper. Also of sylke, and the precious gum called
Laserpitium, or Belzoe. Cap. 19.
IN the said Island is a kind of long Pepper in great abundance. Pepper in
their language, is called Molaga, Long Pepper.
and is much longer and whiter then that which is brought hither: yet lighter
and hotter: it is sold there not by weight, but by measure as wheat with us. It
is there in so great abundaunce, that there is carried from hence yearly
twenty ships laden with Pepper. This is carried to Cathay, and is there well
sold, Cathay or Catai a cold region.
by reason of the coldness of the region. The tree that bears this kind of
pepper, has a greater body, and larger and fatter leaves, then the pepper tree
of Calecut. Sylke of the trees.
This Island bears also plenty of sylke, which for the most part, is made
after our manner. There is an other sort, which the trees bring forth of them
selves in the wooddes and feeldes, without menage or dressyng: but this is
worse then the other. Here also grows the Laser tree, which brings forth
the precious gum named Laserpitium or Belzoe, Laserpitium or Belzoe.
as the inhabitants and merchauntes told us: but because I have not seen it,
I will speak no more of it.

Of three sorts of the tree of Aloes. Cap. 20.
FOrasmuch as variety delights, and the well disposed mind can never be
satiate with contemplation of the marvelous and sundry works of God in
nature, therefore that the reader may take the more pleasure, or at the least
feel less tediousness in the reading of these things, I have thought good to
write somewhat more of such things as I have seen. You shall therefore
understand, that there is no great plenty of true Aloes or Laserpitium
brought to us, Little true Aloes or Laserpitium.
because it is brought hither from the furthest parts of the world.
Understande furthermore, that there are three kinds or sorts of Aloes,
greatly differyng in goodness. The perfectest, they call Calampat, which the
aforesaid Island brings not forth: But it is brought from the city of
Sarnau, Sarnau.
not far from the place where the said Aloes Calampat is engendered, as the
Christian merchauntes or companions told us. There is an other kind of Aloes,
named Iuba (or Luba) brought hither by this river, I know not from whence. The
third kind, is named Bochor. The said Christian merchants told us also, that
none of the first and best kind of Aloes is brought unto us, because it
comes from the kingdoms of Cathay, Chini, Macym, Sarnau, and Grauay,
countries much rycher then ours, Cathay, and other rych countries.
having much greater abundance of gold, and kings of greater power and
richesse then are ours: And also that the said kings take great pleasure in
such kind of sweet sauoures, and use them much more then our princes do: So
that by this means, the true kind of Aloes is worth even in the city of
Sarnau, ten crowns the pound weight.

How the gummes of Aloes and Laserpitium, are proved. Cap. 21.
WE came by certain experience to the knowledge of the two sweet gummes of
Aloes and Laserpitium, as we were taught by the said Christian merchants our
companyons: For one of them had a certain portion of them both, and had of
that best sort of Aloes, named Calampat, about the quantity of two ounces: Of
the which, my companion taking a piece in his hand, and holdyng it fast and
close for the space that one may thryse say the Psalm of Miserere mei Deus,
the Aloes thereby being heat, Aloes of very sweet savor.
at the openyng of his hand gave a sauoure of incredible sweetness, and
such as I never felt of any other thing. He took also of the common
Laserpitium or Belzoe, the quantity of a Walnutte, The proof of Laserpitium.
and again half a pound of that which comes from the city of Sarnau, to
compare the one to the other: And so puttyng them both in sundry chafyng
dyshes, with burning coals in a close chamber, that which was of the byggnesse
of a Walnutte, in sweet savor far exceeded the other which was half a pound
in weight, and would doubtless so have done though it had been of two pound
weight. In this region is also found Lacca, or Lacta, wherewith is made a
shynyng read color. Lacca, merchantes wax.
It is the gum of a tree, not much unlike our Walnutte tree. There are also
sundry kinds of beasts, such as we have.

Of diverse merchantes in the Island of Sumatra, or Taprobana. Cap. 22.
IN the said city of Pyder, in the Island of Sumatra, I saw many curious
works, very artificially wrought, as fine Cophines or baskets, garnished with
gold, sold for two crowns the piece: I saw also there in one streate five
hundred exchangers: there are so many bankers. Hither, as to a famous mart,
resort innumerable merchantes. The inhabitants wear Mantels of sylke, and
Syndone, made of Bombasine. The region has plenty of wood, and trees, very
commodious to make such ships as they call Gunchos, Ships of a strange
fashion.
having three mastes, two fore parts, and also two sternes or gouernals on
both sides. When they sail in the Ocean, and have now given wind to the
sails, if afterward it shall be needful to have more sails, not changyng the
first, they go backward without turnyng the ship, and vsyng only one mast.
Swymmers.
They are most expert swymmers, and have skyll to make fire in an instant.
Their houses are of stone, and very low. In the place af couerynges or tyles,
they use the skynnes or hydes of a fyshe, Great hydes of fyshes.
called Tartaruca, found in that sea of India. I saw so hugious a hyde of this
monster, that it wayed a hundred and three pounds. I saw there also great
teeth of Elephantes, Great teeth of Elephantes. Great Serpents.
as one waying three hundred and thirty pound weight. Likewise Serpents of
incredible bygnesse, and much bygger then in Calecut. Here our companions, the
Christian merchants, for affairs they had to do other ways, would have taken
their leave of us. Then my companion the Persian spoke unto them in this manner:
Although (my friends) I am not your countreyman (yet being all brethren, and
the children of Adam) I take God to witness that I love you as if you were
mine own brethren, begotten of the same parents: and therefore, consyderyng
how friendly we have kept company together so long time, I assure you I can
not, without great grief of mind, bear your departing from us. And although
you would depart from me, will you now forsake this my companion, a man of
your faith and religion? Then said the Christians, How has this man, being
no Persian, received our faith? Then said my companion, Truly he is now a
Persian, and was once bought at Jerusalem. The name of Jerusalem in reverence.
When the Christians heard the holy name of Jerusalem, they lyfted up their
hands to heaven, and prostratyng them selves on the ground, kyssed it thryse:
then rysyng, they asked him of what age I was, when I was brought from
Jerusalem. Of the age of fyfteene years said my companion. Then said they
again, He may then remember his country. Then answered my companion, He
does remember it in deed, and I have taken great pleasure of such things as
he has told me of his country. Then said the merchauntes, Although of long
time we have desired to return to our country, being more then three hundred
miles hence, nevertheless at your request we will bear you company to the
place whyther you desire to go. Preparyng therefore all things parteynyng to
the voyage, we took shyppyng, and in.xv. days saylyng, came to an Island
named Bandan.

Of the Island of Bandan, where Nuttemegs and Mace are found. Cap. 23.
IN this voyage to the Island of Bandan we found about.xx. Islands, some
inhabited, and some desarte. This Island is very saluage, barren, and very
low, Anarchia.
and conteyneth a hundred miles in circuit. It has neither king nor
governor, but is inhabited with a rascal and beastly kind of men, living
without law, order, or government. They have low houses, Lawless people.
or rather cotages of wood, rysyng but little from the ground. Their apparel is
only a sherte. They go bareheadded and barefooted, with their hear hangyng
down, and have broad and round forheaddes. They are of color inclynyng to
white, and of despicable stature. They are Idolaters, and worse then are the
inhabitants of Calecut, called Poliar, and Hyrana. They are also of dull wit
and little strength, and in kind of living altogether beastly. The soil
bears no fruits, except only Nuttemegges: the body of the Nuttemegge
tree, is like to the body of a Peache tree, and has like branches and leaves,
Idolaters. The Nuttemegge tree. Mace.
but the leaves are somewhat narower. Before these Nuttes come to rypenesse,
the Mace florysheth like unto a red rose: but when the Nutte waxes ripe, the
Mace closes it self and embraseth the Nutte and shel, and are so geathered
together without order or distribution, by scamblyng, catch that catch may,
All things common.
for yt al things are there common. The tree yields fruit of his own
fruitefulnesse, without graffyng or cuttyng, or any other art. These Nuttes are
sold by weight, Nuttemegges of small price.
and.xxvi. pound weight, is sold for the value of three souses (that is)
half a Carline, of such money as is used in Calecut. This people has none
other order of justice, The law of nature.
then by the law of nature, and therefore they live without such contentions as
proceed of thine and mine. When we had been here three days, my companion
asked the Christian merchantes, where was the region which brought forth
Cloves? They answered, That Cloves were found in an Island named Monoch, six
days saylyng from thence. Therefore proceedyng on our voyage, we came thither
in the space of seven days.

These Islands of spyces, are called Moluccdae, and in them is seen the rare
bird named Manucodiata, or paradisea.
Of the Island of Monoch, where Cloves grow. Cap. 24.
THis Island is very narowe, yet in length exceeds the Island of Bandan. The
inhabitauntes are much worse then they of Bandan: for, were it not only for
man's shape, they should in manner differ nothing from beasts. Their color is
whyter, and the region colder. This Island brings forth Cloves, as do also
many other little and desolate Islands lying about it. The Cloue tree.
The body of this tree, is not much unlike the Box tree, and has leaves like
unto the Cinamome tree, but rounder, and almost like the Bay leaf. When they
wax ripe, the inhabitauntes beat them down with reeds, laying first mattes
under the trees. The ground is sandy, and the region so low under the
Horizon, that the North star can not be seen there. They sell Cloves for the
double price that Nutmegs are sold, Cloves dearer then Nutmegs.
and sell them by measure: for they are utterly without knowledge of weyghtes.

Of the Island of Bornei. Cap. 25.
AS we were together talkyng of our voyages, the Christian merchantes spoke
unto me in this manner. Our dearly beloved freende, forasmuch as by the grace of
God, we are come thus far in safety, if it please you, we will go see one of
the fairest Islands in the world, and very rich, and such as I believe you
never saw: The Island of Gyaua.
but we must first go to an other Island named Bornei, for there shall we have
bygger vessels: for we must needs pass a deep and rough sea. Bornei*
Then said my companion, Do as shall please you, for we are contented to go
with you. Therefore hyryng a greater Foyst, we directed our journey to that
Island both by day and night, sailing always southwarde: By the way we passed
forth the time with pleasant talk. The merchaunt men asked me many things of
the ceremonies and solemnities of the Christian religion used among us:
Veronica or Vernacle.
And when I made mention of the Veronica (commonly called the Uernacle of the
face of Christ) and of the heads of Peter and Paul the chiefest of the
Apostles, The headdes of Peter and Paul.
and also of many other saints, they aduertysed me secretly, that if I would
go with them, I should become a great man for the knowledge of such great
things. But being deterred by the greatness of the journey, and fearyng that
then I should never have come home, I refused to go with them. At the length we
came to the Island of Bornei, distant from Monoch about two hundred miles, and
is somewhat bygger, The Island of Bornei. Idolaters.
but much lower beneath the Horizon or Equinoctial. The inhabitants are
Idolaters, of sharp wit, and manner of living not greatly to be discommended.
Their color inclyneth more to whytenesse. They wear not all one manner of
apparel, for some wear shirtes of bombasine cloth, other mantells of chamlet,
and other also sharp cappes of red color. They observe justice and good
order. This Island yields yearly great abundaunce of Camphora, which they
said to be the gum of a tree: but I dare not affirm it, Camphora.
because I have not seen it. Here my companyon hired a light ship or bark
for a hundred pieces of gold.

Of the observations used in the navigations to the Island of Giaua. Cap. 26.
AFter that we had made provision of vittayles sufficient for the voyage, we
directed our journey to the Island of Gyaua, and came thither in the space of
five days, saylyng ever toward the south. Our Pilot used the maryners box or
compass, with also the lode stone and sea card, The north star.
after the manner of ours. Therefore when my companyon saw that the
Septentrions or north stars could not be seen there, he asked the
Christians how they could sail on that sea without they guide of the north
star? and asked also, by what other star they were guided? The Pilote
answered, that the inhabitants of these regions observe principally five
stars, The stars about the pole Antartike.
and also one other star, opposite or directlye contrary to the Septentrions
or North stars, whereby they governed their viages in these regions: The lode
stone serves in the south regions beyond the Equinoctial line.
and said, that he also used the lode stone, because it ever moves to the
North: and said furthermore, that on the other side of that Island, is a
certain people, which in saylyng observe certain stars, contrary to the
Septentrions, for that the said people are Antipodes to them of Europa
Sarmatiae, and that they inhabit as cold a region and climat, Antipodes.
and as near unto the pole Antartike, as is manifest by the shortness of the
day, being but four hours long in their winter: of which talk we took
great pleasure.

Of the Island of Gyaua, and the manners of the people. Cap. 27.
Therefore proceedyng on our journey five days saylyng, we came to the said
Island, being very great and large, and having in it many kingdoms, and
kings, being all Idolaters, Idolaters.
and of diverse manners of living: for some of them honor Idolles, after the
manner of Calecut: some also honor the Son, and some the Moon: other take
Kyne for their Idolles: and some, the first thing that they meet in the
morning, The Image of the devil.
take for the Idol of that day: other also honor the picture or similitude of
the devil. This Island brings forth sylke, which grows of it self in
the wooddes, Sylke of trees, Smaragdes. Gold. Copper.
and also the fairest Smaragdes or Emeraldes that are in the world: there is
likewise plenty of Gold, and Copper. The soil is fruitful of Corn, and
all sorts of fruits, as in the city of Calecut. There is great abundance of
flesh of all sorts, as with us. The inhabitants are faithful, White men
good people.
and true dealyng people: they are of the ^ame color and stature that we be,
but have larger forheades, very great eyes, and of brasyll or read color, and
flat noses, wearyng their hear long. There is a great multitude of fowls
and birds, Birds and fowls.
but unlike unto ours, except Peacockes, Turtle dooue, and Crows. They greatly
observe justice, and good order. For their apparel they use mantels, or clokes,
of Bombasine cloth, or sylke, or Chamlet, ever wearyng out one arm. They use
no coats of fence, or armure, because they have no wars: but when they
traueyle on the sea, they use bows, Impoysoned arrows.
and impoysoned arrows made of Reeds. They use also certain long and holowe
staves (which we call Trunkes) through the which after our manner, they blow
little arrows, Trunkes.
so infected with poison, that if they raise never so little blood, death
follows incontinent. They have no Gunnes or other ingines. They eat all
sorts of flesh, fyshe, and fruits: yet some feed of one kind of meat, and
other of other, as them lists.

Of their cruel manners in selling their parents to the Anthropophagi to be
eaten. Cap. 28. Anthropophagi eat man's flesh. In the West India, they are
called Caniballes.

THe inhabitants of the said Island (they I mean which feed of flesh) when
they see their parents so feeble by age, that they serve for no use, but are
tedious both to them selves and other, they bring them to the market or fair,
and sell them to the Anthropophagi, which use to eat man's flesh. They that
buy them, kill them out of hand and eat them. Likewise when any young person
among them, falls into any such sickness, A strange pity.
that by the judgment of their wise men he can not escape, to the end that he
should not unprofitably linger in pains, his brethren and kyns folks sell him
to the Anthropophagi. When my companion, being deterted with these cruel
manners, showed in countenance that he detested this horrible inhumanitie, a
certain merchaunt of the inhabitants said thus unto him: O Persians, no
sacrifice can redeem your sins, Rather to butchers then woormes.
in that you give so fair flesh to the woormes to be eaten. Therefore
abhorryng these beastly manners, we returned to our ship, not intendyng any
longer to tarry there.

Of the strange course of the sun in the Island of Gyaua. Cap. 29.
While we remained here, the Christian merchantes, ever desirous to show us
new and strange things, which we might declare at our return into our
countries, said thus unto us, My friends, make report in your country of a
strange thing which I will now show you. Behold (said they) the place of
the Sun in the South at high noone, and thereby consider how far this
region is from your country. We then beheld the Sun to run toward the
right hand: and again, to show or mark a sphere, about two handfuls broad,
toward the left hand, which doubtless seemed to us very strange. And this
(as they say) is ever seen in the month of July. But I now scarsely bear
this in mind, for I there forgot even the names of our months. But this is
certain, that in this region, the times and seasons of the years are like
unto ours, and of like temperature of heat and cold. Here my companion bought
two fair Emeraldes for a thousand pieces of gold, Emeraldes of great price.
Gelded children.
and also two gelded children for two hundred pieces of gold: for here are
certain merchantes that buy none other ware, then such gelded children.

Of our return from the Island of Gyaua. Cap. 30.
AFter that we had remained here fyftiene days, weary of the manners of the
inhabitants, and of the coldness of the country that time of the year, we
determined to proceed no further: for this cause also, that there remained in
manner none other region worthy to be seen, and therefore hyring a light
ship, we departed from thence, sailing Eastwarde for the space of fyftiene
days, and came at the length to the city of Melacha, where remaining three
days, we took our leave of our companions the Christian merchauntes, with
friendly embrasinges, and sorrowful minds. Which departure (I take God to
witness) grieved me so sore, that if I had been a single man without wife and
children, I would never have forsaken such friendly men. We therefore
departed, and they remained there, saying that they would shortly return to
the city of Sana: Sana.
and we taking a Foist, returned to the city of Cyromandel. Seven thousand
Islands. Malacha or Melacha.
By the way, the governor of the ship told us, that about the Islands of
Gyaua and Taprobana, there are above seven thousand little Islands. When we
arrived at Melacha* my companion bought as much spices, sweet savors, and
silk, as cost him five thousand pieces of gold: But we came not to the city
of Gyromandel in less space then fyftiene days saylyng. There we vnladed our
Foist, and after we had remained there twenty days, hyring an other Foist, we
came at the length to the city of Colon, where we found.xxii. Christians,
Colon. Portugales.
of the realm of Portugale. And fearyng that they would take me for some
espion, I began to imagine how I might depart from thence: But seeing that
they were so few in number, I changed my purpose, especially for that there
were many merchaunt Mahumetans which knew that I had been at Mecha, to see
the body of Mahumet. But within the space of twelve days, we came to Calecut
by the river.

Again of the city of Calecut after our return thither. Cap. 31.
AFter so many long and dangerous peregrinations and viages, in the which we
have been partly satisfied of our desire, and partly weeryed by many such
occasions of inconveniences as chance in the way (as they can well consider
that have been used to such long iourneyes) we determined to proceed no
further, but to think only of our safe return into our native country, and
therefore I will breefely declare what chanced to me in the way: the rather
that other men, taking example by my traueyles, may know the better how to
govern them selves in the like, if like ardent affection shall move them to
take such viages in hand, as I am sure noble spirits of many valiant men
will move them thereto. Therefore enteryng into the city of Calecut, Two
Christians of Milan in Calecut.
we found there two Christians, borne in the city of Milan, the one named
John Maria, and the other Peter Antonie. These were Iewellers, and came from
Portugale with the kings license to buy precious stones. When I had found
these men, I rejoiced more then I am able to express: for we went naked after
the manner of the inhabitants. At our first meetyng, seeing them to be white
men, I asked them if they were Christians. They said, yea. Then said I, that
I was also a Christian, by the grace of God. Then taking me by the hand, they
brought me to their house, where for joy of our meetyng, we could scarsely
satisfy our selves with tears, embrasynges, and kyssyng: for it seemed now
to me a strange thing to hear men speak mine own language, or to speak it
my self. Shortly after, I asked them if they were in favor with the king of
Calecut. We are (said they) in great favor with him, and very familier. Then
again I asked them what they were minded to do. We desire (said they) to
return to our country, but we know not the means how. Then said I,
Return the same way that you came. Nay (said they) that may not be: for we
are fled from the Portugales, The Christians have made a rod for their own
arsse.
because we have made many pieces of great ordinance, and other Gunnes for the
King of Calecut, and therefore we have good cause to fear, and now
especially, for that the navy of Portugale will shortly be here. The Navy of
Portugale.
I answered, that if I might escape to the city of Canonor, I doubted not but
that I would geat their pardon of the governor of the Navy. There is small
hope thereof (said they) we are so famous and well known to many other kings
in the way which favor the Portugales, and lay wait to take us, for we
have made more then four hundred Gunnes, little and great, and therefore we
are out of all hope to escape that way. In which their talk, I perceived how
fearful a thing is a guilty conscience, and called to remembrance the saying
of the Poet.

Multa male timeo, quia feci multa proterue. That is, I fear much evil,
because I have done much evil. For they had not only made many such pieces
of artillery for the infidelles, to the great damage of Christians, and
contempt of the holy name of Christ and his religion, but had also taught the
Idolatours both the making and use of them. And at my being there, I saw them
give a model or moulde to certain Idolatours, whereby they might make brazen
pieces, of such bygnesse, A great piece of ordinance.
that one may receive the charge of a hundred and five Tankardes ( Cantaros) of
powder.

At the same time also, there was a Jew, A Jew that made Gunnes and ships,
was drowned.
which had made a very fair Brigantine, and four great pieces of artillery
of Iron. But god shortly after gave him his due reward: for when he went to
wash him in the river, he was drowned. But to return to our said Christians.
God is my witness how earnestly I persuaded them, never thereafter to make
any more artillery or Gunnes, to the great contempt and indignation of God,
and detriment of our holy faith. When I had said these words, the tears
fell from the eyes of Peter Antonie. Repentance.
But John Maria (who perhaps had not so great desire to return to his
country) said that it was all one to him, to dye there, or in the city of
Rome: Predestination.
and that God knew what he had decreed of him. Within two days after, I
returned to my companion, who marueyled where I had been, fearing lest I had been either sick, or departed. I told him that I was all night in the Temple,
lest he should suspecte my great familiarity with the Christians.

Of the coming of the Portugale ships, to the city of Canonor. Cap. 32.
While I remained here in the lodging of my companion, there came to him two
Persian merchants from the city of Canonor, saying that they had some evil
news to tell him: wherewith seemyng to be somewhat troubled, he asked what was
the matter? There are come (said they) twelve ships of Portugale, which we
have seen with our eyes. Then said he, What manner of men are those? They are
(said the Persians) Christians, armed with harness of shining Iron, A
fortress of the Portugales in the city of Canonor.
and have builded an inexpugnable fortress in the city of Canonor. My
companion hearing those words, turned to me, and said, Lodouicke, what manner
of men are the Portugales? To whom I answered, that they were a nation of
mischeeuous people, given to none other thing then piracie and robbyng on the
sea. He was not so sorry to hear this, as I was glad of their coming.

How I playde the Physician, and counterfect holiness, lest by my color I
should be taken for a spy for the Portugales, before I could come to their
ships. Cap. 33.
Hypocrisy.
AFter the rumor was spread of the Portugales arryuyng, I began to think what
was best to be done, and thought nothing more safe and easy among this people,
then to geat some opinion of holiness by hypocrisy, and therefore all the day
time, I lurked in the Temple, living without meat, as all the people thought:
but in the night, I ate flesh in the house of Peter Antonie, and John Maria.
And by this means, none had other opinion of me, A Saint by hypocrisy.
but that I was a Saint, and therefore might after a few days go abroad in
the city without suspicion: and to help the matter withal, it chanced in
the mean time, that a certain rich Mahumetan of the city of Calecut was very
sick* having his belly so bound, that he could not (...) of nature. And
because he was a (...) my companion, and his disease (...), he asked me if I
had any skyll in physic? I said, that my father was a Physician, and that I
had learned many things of him by experience. Then I pray you (said he) do what
you can to help this my friend. We went therefore together to the sick man,
whom my companion asked where he felt him self most grieved. In my head (said
he) and my stomach, having also my belly so sore bound, that I can not go to
the stool. Then my companion again in his presence, desired me to consider
his infirmity, and take upon me to minister unto him some medicine. My
companion had told me before, that he was a great eater and drinker.
Therefore, taking him by the hand, and feelyng his pulse, I said that his
stomach and bowelles were full of choler, by reason of surfetyng, and
therefore that it should be good for him to take a glister. Then said the
sick man, Do what you will, I will abide your order. Then made I a glister of
eggs, A glister.
salt, and sugar, adding also butter and certain herbs, such as came first
to my memory upon the sudden, and in the space of a day and night, I gave him
five glisters, but all in vain: for beside the pains which he endured, he was
rather worse then better, insomuche that it repented me of mine enterprise:
But it was now best to set a good face on the matter, and attempt an other
way, A strange ministering of a glister.
but the last error was worse then the first. Yet still putting him in good
hope, I used him thus. I made him lie grouelyng on his belly, and then tying
cords on his feet, I raised up the hinder parts of his body, so that he
rested only upon his breast and hands, and as he lay, ministered a glyster
unto him, and let him so hang for the space of hallfe an hour. My companion
beholding this strange kind of practice, said unto me, Lodouike, is this the
manner of mynistring to sick folks in your country? It is, said I, yet never
but in case of extremity. Then smylyng, he said, I believe it will heal him
one way or an other. In the mean time the miserable man cried, saying in his
language, It is enough, it is enough, for my soul now departs. We comforted
him, desiryng him to have patience yet a while. In manner immediately after, his
belly was losed, and avoided matter as if it had been out of a gutter. More
good hap then cunnyng.
Then when we had let down his body, he avoided as much as might almost
fill a payle, and shortly after, the pain of his head and stomach, and also
the fever, ceased: whereof we were all very glad. And by this aduenturous
cure, I began to be in great credit among them, by the means also of my
counterfect holiness, and therefore whereas he would have given me ten
pieces of gold, I would take but only two, and gave them also incontinent to
the poor. Sely souls.
These sely souls believed so much in my hypocrisy (which I showed no less
in countenance and gravity, forbearyng also openly to eat flesh) that well
was he that might have me in his house, or kiss my hands and feet. The
report also of my companion, affyrmyng that he met with me first at Mecha,
where I was to see the body of the holy Prophet Mahumet, increased greatly
(and specially among the Mahumetans) the opinion they had conceived of my
holiness. But in the mean time, secretly in the dark night, I resorted
privily to the aforesaid Christians, by whom being advertised that twelve of
the Portugale ships were now arrived at Canonor, I considered that now
would be good opportunity to escape: And therefore remaynyng there yet seven
days, I learned all that I could of the preparations which the king of
Calecut and his people made against the Portugales, both touching his army,
artillery, and other things parteynyng to the wars. But before I come to
speak of my manner of departing, it will here not be from the purpose, to
declare how the Mahumetans call the people to their churches, and of their
manner of praying.

How the Mahumetan priests call the people to their Churches. Cap. 34.
Their priests and other ministers of the Temple (of the which there is a
great number) observe this manner to call the people to the church. Certain of
these ascend to the highest Tower of the Temple, where first blowing three or
four brazen Trumpets, Trumpettes in the steed of belles.
in the steed of belles, they cry to the people with a loud voice, to
resort to the Temple to prayers. Then stopping one ear with their finger,
they say in their own language these words: Alla u eccubar. That is to say,
God is great. Not all thac say, Lord, Lord. etc.

Some of them say that he is risen.


And again, God is great: Come to the Temple of the great God, Come to pray to
the great God: God is great, God is great, God was, God is, Mahumet the
messenger of God shall rise. They invited me also to the Temple, and desired me
to pray to God for the Mahumetans, which I did outwardly, but of much other
meaning then they did.

Of the manner of praying among the Mahumetans. Cap. 35.
THey have certain daily and usual prayers, as we have, in the which they
call God their father, God the father. The virgin Marie.
and vouchsafe to name the virgin Marie, full of grace. They pray not before
they have been washed. Then standing in order, after the priest has prayed,
they pray also in their own language. Here to my companion, I feigned my self
sick, and found diverse other occasions to depart from thence, and to go to
Canonor. Well said he, It shall not be long ere I come thither to you, and in
the mean time, with my letters I will commend you there to a friend and
country man of mine, a rich merchant, who for my sake shall give you good
intertaynement.

What subtlety I used to depart from Calecut, to go to the Portugales. Cap.
36.
THe day before I departed from thence, I made the said Christians privy of
my intent. In the mean time my companyon joined me in company with two other
Persian merchauntes, which were minded also to go to Canonor: Merchantes of
Calecut.
for there was in the city of Calecut many merchauntes of Persia, Syria, and
Turchia. Therefore the first day of December, I, with the other two Persians,
hyryng a light ship, gave wind to our sails to proceed on our voyage. But
see what chanced suddenly, we had scarsely sailed as far as a man may shoot
an arrowe, but four of the inhabitants of the order of them which they call
Naeros (of whom we have spoken before) cried to the governor of the ship to
draw near the land in the kings name. Noeros are gentlemen of the kings
guard.
When they understood who we were, they asked why they carried me away without
making the king privy thereto? Then said the Persians, This Mahumetan that is
here with us, is a holy man, and goes in our company to the city of Canonor.
They aunsweared, that they knew me to be a man that had wrought miracles.
Nevertheless, that because I could speak the language of ye Portugalles, it
was to be suspected least I should bewraye their secrets to them, and tell
them of the navy and army which the king prepared against the Portugales,
and therefore commanded the governor of the ship to carry us no further. He
obeyed their commandment, and left us on the shore. Then said one of the
Persians, Let us return to Calecut. To whom I aunsweared, Take heed what you
do, for so shall you be in danger to loose all your sylkes if it be known that
you have paid no custom to the king. Then said the other Persian, What then
(by your advise) is it best for us to do? I answered, that it was best for us
to go somewhat further by the shore, until we might find some bark: whereunto
they agreed. Therefore we, and our slaves laden with our fardells, went so.xii.
miles along by the shore. But what fear I was in, in the mean season, I
commytte to wise men to judge. But as God would, we found there a poor fysher
man with a boat, with whom we agreed to bring us to Canonor, where we arrived
late in the euenyng. Incontinent we went to the merchaunt Persian, to whom I
had letters of commendation from my companyon. The tenor of the letters was,
that he should receive me into his house, and enterteyne me friendly, until his
coming: Also that whatsoever frendeshyp he showed unto me, he would asscribe
it to be done unto him self: Furthermore, that I was a holy man, and joined
with him in near amity and frendeshyp. When the merchaunt had read the
letters, he laid his hand on his head, and said unto me, By this head you are
welcome to me, and shall be here in safety, and caused a good supper to be
prepared for us. After supper, the Persians said unto me, Let us go walk to
the sea side. I agreed: and in short time we came to the place where the
Portugales shyps lay at anchor. I am not able to express the secret joy
which I felt in my self at the sight of these ships. In the way, I marked
well the place where the Portugales had builded their fortress, determynyng to
come thither the next day.

How I fled to the Portugales from the city of Canonor. Cap. 37.
THe day following, when I saw best opportunity, I went toward the fortress
of the Portugales: and by the way, meetyng with two Portugales, in the Spanyshe
tongue I asked them where was the fortress of the Portugales. Then said they
to me, Art thou a Christian? I am (said I) by the grace of God. Then said
they again, From whence come thou? From the city of Calecut said I. Then
come with us (said they) for we will bring thee to the governor. This
governor was one master Laurentius, son to the Uiceroye. So I went with
them to the fortress, which is not past four furlonges from the city. At
the time of our coming, the governor had not yet dined. The Gouernoure of
Portugales fortress.
When I came to his presence, I fell down on my knees, and prayed him with all
humility for Christ's sake, to whom I was consecrated by baptism, to have
compassion upon me, and to deliver me from the hands of those infidel dogs.
When it was now noysed in the city that I was escaped to the Christians,
there began a stir and mutiny, in manner of a tumulte. Which when the
governor understood, commanded al his Captains, soldiers, and other
officers, to pla^^ their artilerie, and order all things in redynesse, least
the (...), sudden rage should attempt any thing against the (...) al things
were pacified in short time. Then (...), taking me by the hand, brought me
into (...), and there demanded of me, what the king (...) of Calecut imagined
or devised to do (...)? I infourmed him of all things, as (...), having
diligently searched to understand all (...). When the governor was thus by me
(...) secrets, he appointed a galley to bring (...), who was then in the city
of Cusin. The (...) the gallie, was named Johannes Seranus* When (...) saw me,
he received me very favorably. I (...) also of al things: Saying furthermore
unto him, The Viceroy of the king of Portugal in India.
(...) might by his favor obtain pardon and assurance for (...) said two
Italians, Peter Antonie and John Maria, which (...) made artillarie for the
infidel princes, I would procure that they should return to the Christians,
and do them right good service, and that I was well assured, that they did that
by constraint: Also yt they desired none other thing then safe conduct and money
for their charges. He was glad of this, and granted my request. Whereupon
within three days after, he sent me with letters to his son, the governor
in the city of Canonor, with commandment to deliver me as much money as
should suffice for the charges of the Christian exploratours or espions of the
city of Calecut. I went therefore incontinent to Canonor, where I agreed with
one of the idolatours (who for poverty had gaged his wife and children) to
carry letters to Calecut to John Maria and Peter Antonie. The content of which
letters was, that the Uiceroye had granted them pardon and safe conducte, and
also money for their charges: Aduertisyng them to make none privy of this
thing, and especially to beware least it should be known to their slaves or
concubines (For each of them had a concubine, a child, Concubine^ and slaves.
and a slave) Furthermore to leave al their goods behynd them, except things
of great price, as money and iewelles: For they had a very fair Diamond of the
weight of.xxxii. caractes, (...)
esteemed to be worth.xxxv. thousand crowns. They had also a pearl of the
weight of.xxiiii. caractes. Furthermore, (...) thousand rubies: of the which,
some were of the weight (...), and some of one and a half. They had
also.lxiiii. (...) garnyshed with many iewelles: Beware of covetousness.
likewise in redye (...) and five hundred pieces of gold. But see (...) much
covetousness. While they thought to have (...) all, and their lives therewith:
For not contentyng (...) with the aforesaid riches, they would needs also
(...) (notwithstanding the advertisement we had given (...) Gunnes, three
Munkeis, two Muskecattes, and two of (...) wherewith precious stones are
polyshed. All which (...) the only cause of their death; For whereas so many
(...) not be secretly conveyed, one of their slaves (...) (...) of Calecut
hereof, who at the first would scarsely (...) (...) for the good opinion he
had conceived of them: Yet sent four (...) his guard (of them which are
called Naery) to (...) true. But the slave, perceyuyng that the king would
(...) favorably with them, went to the high priest or Bishop of the faith of
the Mahumetans (whom they call Cady) and told him all that before he had told
the king of Calecut: The Bishop of the Mahumetans.
Addyng moreover, that the said Christians had disclosed their secrets to the
Portugales. When the Bishop understood these things, he called a counsel of
all the Mahumetan merchauntes, wyllyng them, The Mahumetans conspire the death
of the Christians.
of the common treasury, to give a hundred pieces of gold to the king of
Gioghi (who was then at Calecut) and to speak to him in this manner. It is not
unknown to you (most noble prince) how a few years past, when your majesty
came hither, we received you with more honorable enterteinement then we are
now able to do: The cause whereof, is no lack of good will or knowledge of our
deuetie toward your highness, An Oration.
but rather the great and manyfolde injuries and oppressions which we have
sustained, and do daily sustain by our mortal enemies the Christians, whereof
we have, at this present, example of two Christian traitors of this city,
which have disclosed to the Portugales al our secrets, and therefore we make
most humble petition unto you to take of us a hundred pieces of gold, to
command them to be slain. When the king of Gioghi heard these words, he
consented to their petition, and forthwith appointed two hundred men to commyt
the murder: And that they might be the less suspected of the Christians,
meaning soddenly to kill them in their house, came by ten and ten as though
they came to demand their accustomed reward. But when the Christians saw so
great a company assembled about their house, they suspected that they sought
somewhat else then their reward or offering, and therefore incontinent taking
their weapons, they fought so manfully at the wyndowes and doors of their
house, that they slew six men and woounded forty. But at the length, some of
ye Gioghi, shot at them certain iron arrows out of cross bows, with the
which they were both slain, The death of John Maria and Peter Antonye.
the one being sore wounded in the head, and the other in the body. As soon
as they saw them fall down, they cut their throtes: and taking the hot
blood in the palms of their hands, drunk it up, with contumelious words
against the Christians. After this murder, the concubine of John Maria came to
Canonor, with her young son, whom I bought of her for eight pieces of gold:
and causyng him to be baptized, named him Laurence, because it was saint
Laurence day: But within a year after, The french pox.
he dyed of the french pox, which disease had then dispersed almost through
all the world. For I have seen many infected with it four hundred miles
beyond Calecut. They call it Pua. And they affirm that this disease was never
seen there past xvii. years before. It is there more grievous and outrageous
then with us.

Of the Navy of the city of Calecut, and of the memorable conflicte between
the Christians and Mahumetans. In the which the Portugales with incredible
valiantness gave their enemies the overthrow. And how the king of Canonor
rejoiced at their victory. Cap. 38.
IN the year of our Lord.1506. the fourth day of March, word was brought
us of the death of the said Christians. The navy of the king of Calecut
against the Portugals*
The same day, from the cities of Calecut, Pauan, Capagot, Pandaram, and
Trompatam, departed a great navy of two hundred and eight ships, of the
which fourscore and four were great ships, or ships of burden, and the
rest were driven with Ores, The Mahumetan soldiers.
after the manner of Foystes, which they call Parao. The Navy was manned with
in manner innumerable Mahumetans, showing themselves very brave in apparel of
purple sylke and Bombasine, with also their high and sharp cappes, after their
manner, of the same color, lyned with sylke: wearyng also on their arms many
bracelettes, and on their hands had gloves, embrodered and garnyshed with
diverse kinds of works: for weapons, they had Turkey bows, swoordes, lances,
peltes, and all sorts of gunnes, after our manner. When we saw their Navy
proceedyng in order, and well instructed, it seemed far of like a wood, the
mastes presentyng the similitude of trees: Which thing seemed so little to
deter us, that we were in sure belief, that our God and Christ would give
us the victory against the blasphemers of his holy name, the Idolatours and
Sarasens, old enemies of our religion. And therefore the valiant knight and
governor, the son of the honorable lord Don Francisco Dalmeda, viceroy of
India, who had there the supreme government of twelve ships, with the
assistaunce of the Admiral of the Navy, when he saw the great force of the
enemy, myndfull of his accustomed virtue, The oration of the governor to the
Christian soldiers.
with sound of trumpet assembled all the soldiers, and spoke to them in this
manner. My dear friends, and brethren in one God, and one faith of Jesus
Christ, now is the time come when you ought to remember, that as Jesus
Christ spared not, neither feared to give his precious body to death for our
sakes: even so, except we will show our selves most unkind, and unworthy so
great grace of God, it shall be our duties to spend our lives in the defense of
his glory, and our holy faith, assuring our selves of the victory against
these dogs, hateful to God, and progeny of the devil. Now therefore fyghtyng
in his name, and under the banner of his holy cross, show your selves manfull
and valiant: for now is in you the powwer to geat eternal fame, in mainteyning
the quarrel of our savior. Therefore with me, lyftyng up your hearts to God,
and your arms with force and courage, let us give the onset on these dogs.
When the governor had said these words, the priest went up to the highest
part of the ship, and holdyng in his hand ye picture of Christ nailed on the
cross, showed it unto the soldiers, exhortyng them to remember the
commandments of God, and the holy faith and baptism whereby they were
consecrated to God, puttyng no doubt in the forgiveness of their sins, dying
in so godly a quarrel: and then blessyng them, with invocation of the name of
God, he pronounced the sentence of absolution and forgiveness of their sins.
The exhortation of the priest, so moved the hearts of all men, that the tears
ran from our eyes for joy and great desire we had to die in ye quarrel. In the
mean time the nauye of the Mahumetans made sail toward us. The navy of the
Mahumetans.
The same day our Admiral with two Foystes made toward them, and passing
between two of their greatest shyps, discharged his ordinance on both sides:
which the Admyrall did, to prove the strength of those ships, which they
chiefly esteem, The Admiral of the Christians.
and trust most unto: But this day was nothing done worth ye memory. The day
following, the Mahumetans with full sails drew near the city of Canonor, and
sent us word by a messenger, that if we would permytte them to go whither
they would, they would not have to do with us. Our Admiral answered, that
the Christians could not so forgette the perjury of the Mahumetans, The
quarrel and occasion of the war.
in violatyng their faith and promise made by common consent, when they would
not suffer the Christians to pass that way, but contrary to their faith and
promise slew.xlvii. Christians, and robbed them of four thousand pieces of
gold: and therefore badde them pass further if they durst, and they should
well know of what reputation and spirit the Christians are. Then said the
Mahumetans, Mahumet will defend us, and confound the Christians: and with
those words, assaulted us all at once with incredible fury, The Mahumetans
give the onset.
thynkyng to have passed through, having no further to sail then.x. miles from
the shore. But our Admiral of purpose suffered the enemies to come nearer until
they were right oueragainst ye city of Canonor, meaning there to set on them
with all his force, that the king of Canonor beholding the conflicte, might be
witness of the valiantness of the Christians. Then when the trumpetter of the
Admirals ship sounded the battle, and gave the sign, incontinent he
assaulted two of their greatest ships.

Here I am not able to express the exceedyng noise of their Drums,
Trumpets, Tambarels, and other such innumerable, The valyantnesse of the
Admiral.
which they use in this case. The Admiral him self, in manner contemnyng all
their mean ships, passed through their navy, and invaded one of their
greatest ships, castyng thereon chains and grasples, to fight with them at
hand strokes: but they cast of the chains thryse, yet the fourth time the
chains took such hold, that the Christians entered into the ship, where they
made such havoc and slaughter, that all the Mahumetans of that ship (which
were six hundred in number) were slain, A great slaughter of the mahumetans.
insomuche that there was not one left alive to tell news. The Admiral
encouraged by this victory, invaded another of their great ships, which had
chayned it self with a Foyst of the Christians, where was also a great
conflict, in the which were slain above five hundred Mahumetans, and their
ship sunk. The Mahumetans discouraged by this defeat, assaulted our twelve
Foystes with all their force, and carried them away. But here the manhood and
valiantness of John Seranus, the captain of the Galley, The valiantness of
John Seranus.
showed itself, who only with one Gally made such a slaughter among the
Mahumetans, that it may seem incredible: for he so fiercely invaded them that
had carried away the Foystes, that he recovered them all, and sunk two other of
the Mahumetan ships. In these wars, God of his grace so prospered the
Christians, that few of them were slain, but many wounded. Few Chrians slain.
The conflict continued from morning, until the darkness of the night made an
end of the battle. I may not here forgeat to speak of the marvelous
adventure and Godly zeal of Simon Martin, captain of one of our ships: For
it so chanced, that the Brigantine in the which I was, departing somewhat from
our navy, gave occasion to our enemies to pursue us, for incontinent four of
the Mahumetan ships assailed us, and put us to much trouble, insomuch
that.xv. Mahumetans had now entered into our Brigantine, and we were
constrained to flee to the Poupe, as to the safest place: But the valiant
captain Simon Martin, seeing the danger that we were in, The valiantness of
Simon Martin.
and that the Mahumetans were entered into our Brigantine, leapt into it
fiercely, and calling upon the name of Jesus Christ, fought so valiauntly, that
he slew six of the Mahumetans: whereby we, being encouraged, assisted him in
such sort, that the Mahumetans cast them selves into the sea, where some were
drowned, and some escaped by swimmyng. Therefore when the Mahumetans knew yt the
Christians had the victory, they sent.iiii. other Foistes to help the first.
But when the captain of our Brigantine saw this, he took certain empty
Tubbes, A Stratageme.
in the which gunne powder had been kept before, and stoppyng them with flax,
placed them in such sort, that they seemed far of, like pieces of great
artillery: then laying a little gun powder by the flax, and holding a fire
stick in his hand, as though he would put fire to the Gunne, the Mahumetans
thinking that it had been a gunne in deed, were thereby put in such fear, that
they departed. Ten Mahumetan shyps soonke with the shot of great artillery.
The Admiral yet further pursuing the enemies, gave them an other great
overthrow, and took seven of their Foistes, laden with all sorts of
merchandies, and soonke ten other with the shot of great artillery, of the
which one was laden with Elephantes. Therefore when the Mahumetans saw the sea
now almost covered with the bodies of their slain men, and their chief
ships some taken, some soonke, and some spoiled, were out of all hope to
recover, and therefore saved them selves by fleeing. The Christians had the
victory
But the Christians, seeing yet hope of further victory, and the Mahumetans so
discouraged, thought it not best to leave them so, but rather upon such
prosperous success, to take the opportunity, and utterly to destroy them: and
therefore the Admiral, seeing his men joyful of the victory, and desirous to
pursue the enemy, followed the Mahumetans, and gave them a new battle, An
other great conflicte.
which lasted all day and all night, whilst the Christians in the night time
slew them even in their fleeing, and soonke almost all their ships. In the
mean time certain of our Foistes saw a ship of burden of the enemy,
wanderyng out of the way, and made sail thither with all have. The Mahumetans
slain in swimming.
But the enemies in short space seeing them selves ouermatched, hurled all
their cariages into the sea, and trusting to swimmyng (wherein they are most
expert) cast them selves after. But our men followed them even to the shore,
with lances, crosbowes, and stones, so killing them as they swamme, that the
sea was colored and polluted with their blood. The Mahumetans expert in
swimmyng.
Yet by swimming many escaped, by estimation about the number of two hundred,
for they are in youth so brought up in swimming, that they swamme in the sea
almost twenty miles, oftentimes so diuyng under the water, and remaynyng there
so long, that they deceived our sight: for sometimes we thought that they were
soonke, and sometime again seeing them flote on the water, it so troubled our
sense, that we thought we had seen some fantasy or vision: but they were in
manner all destroyed by one mischaunce or an other, and especially a great
number in the great ships which were soonke by shot of the great artillery.
The day following, the Admiral sent certain Brigantines and Galleys to the
shore, to number the dead bodies, which the sea had cast up: they were found
to be about three thousand, beside them also which the sea had devoured. The
king of Canonor.
The king of Canonor, beholding all these things, was greatly in love with the
Christians, and commended their valiantness and virtue, and not unworthily:
The valiantness of the Portugales.
For to speak that I have seen, I have been in many sore wars, yet never
saw I more valiant men, then the Portugales here showed them selves to be.

But when we thought that we had now made an end of these Tragidies, The
death of the king of Canonor.
we had in manner a worse to begin: For it so chanced, that in few days
after, the king of Canonor, who favored us, dyed: In whose place succeeded an
other mortal enemy to the Christians, and friend to the king of Calecut, by
whose help and richesse, he was advanced to the kingdom of Canonor. He
therefore assembled his power to make new war against the Christians, A new
expedition against the Christians.
with great expedition and haste, because he supposed that a great part of
their munitions was now wasted, and they also sore weeryed, and for the most
part wounded. And to further his attempt, the king of Calecut sent him
xxiiii. pieces of great artillery. This war began the seventh day of
April, Long wars.
and continued until the.xx. of August, before all things were pacified. It
were here to long to declare how in these wars also the Christians behaved
them selves manfully against the Mahumetans, Great odds. The Mahumetans
artillery.
which never encountered with them fewer then five or six and twenty thousand
in number, having also with them a hundred and forty pieces of artillery,
and were armed after the manner of the inhabitauntes of Calecut: but the
Christians with harness after our manner.

These Infidelles use this order in their wars. They divide their army into
many wings, The order of the Mahumetans Camp.
every wyng conteynyng the number of two or three thousand men, and only one
wyng proceeds to the battle, the rest attendyng what end or success^ they
have, before they attempt any further. But whilst these wings are now
marchyng to join in battle, it passes all imagination to think, with how
great a noise of innumerall musical instruments, after their manner,
Instruments.
they fill the ears of all the army, to encourage them to fight, while in the
mean season also, a great number runs before the army with marvelous
flames of artificial fyres: and in fine, give the onsette with such
outrageous fury and outcry, Outrageous out cry.
that two thousand of them were able to fear ten thousand that had no
experience of these things. But see the goodness of God, who never forsakes
them that believe faithfully in his holy religion. Even now in the extremity
of these troubles, our men being in manner ouercharged with the multitude of
their enemies, and long wars, The arryuyng of a new Navy of Portugales.
sudden news was brought that a new navy of Portugales was arrived at
Canonor by the conducte of the valiant knight Don Tristan de Cugna: Whom we
immediately aduertysed with how grievous wars we were oppressed. Who
incontinent sent us, in certain Barks, three hundred valiant Soldiers,
well armed with harness, after the manner of the Christians. When we saw
these, we recovered our spirits, in such sort, that if our Admiral would
have permitted, we would have burnte the city of Canonor. The Mahumetans
seek to make peace with the Christians.
But when the Mahumetans understood the new succors that we had, all
discouraged in mind, they sought all means to make peace with the Christians,
and assygned one named Mamalmaricar, a man of great riches and wisdom among
them, to be intermediatour, and to make the conditions of peace. He therefore
under safe conducte, came to us to common of the matter. We told him, that we
could make no peace without the consent of the Uiceroye, who was then in the
city of Cucin. The Admiral thought it best not to contempne the conditions
of peace, for for that during the time of the wars, they could not send
their ships laden with merchaundies into Portugale, and therefore by the
consent of the Uiceroye, The peace concluded.
the peace was concluded.

But now, to myngle some delight with these sorrows, you shall hear a pleasant
fable worthy to be put in memory. A pleasant fable.
Therefore all things being pacified, as I walked in the city of Canonor, I
met with certain merchantes Idolatours, with whom I was acquaynted before the
wars, who in their language said thus unto me, Are you our friend? Yea
said I. Then we pray you in the way of friendship, Saint Christopher, the
Christian Giant.
show us that Christian which is much higher and stronger then any other of
the Christians, and killed in manner every day about twenty of the Mahumetans,
and resisted the darts of fifty Naeros (these are of the guard) and escaped
without hurt? I answered, that that Christian was not now in the city, but
was gone to Cucin to the Uiceroye. But when I better considered the matter, I
said thus unto them, Are you my friends? Yea, we are, said they. Then said
I, That soldier that fought so valiauntly in the battle, was no Portugale.
Then said they: Of what country was he then? I answered again, that he was
the God of the Portugales, and the great God of all the world. Then said they,
Uerily you speak the truth. For we heard the Mahumetans say, The enemies
confess that God gave the victory.
that it was not the Portugales, but the Portugales God, that gave them the
overthrow, and therefore we think your God to be better then theyrs,
although we know him not: And by this means it was brui^ed over all the
country, that the Mahumetans were overcome rather by the assistaunce of God,
then by the strength of men. For these people are very simple and ignorant,
Simple and ignorant people.
and astonyshed in manner at every thing. For some when they saw one of our
company having a little bell in his hand, and heard the noise of the bell
when he moved his hand, and no noise when he set it down, they took it for a
miracle, saying one to an other: doubtless their God is the greatest God,
Messis multa, sed operarii pauci. etc.
for when they touch the bell, it speaks, and when they touch it not, it
says nothing. They took pleasure and admiration to behold the solemnities
of the Mass. The Mass.


And when the priest lyfted up the holy bread or host, I said unto them,
behold here the God of the Portugales, and of all the world. Then said they,
You say truly: but we can not perceive it. This have I said, No more can wyser
men then they.
that you may hereby know what simple and ignorant people these are: yet are
they very great inchaunters, and can inchaunte Serpents, whose poison is so
strong, that they kill only with touching. Inchaunters, and of great agilitie.
They are also of incredible agilitie, and therefore excel in vautyng,
leapyng, runnyng, swimming, tumblyng, walkyng on ropes, and such other
exercises of lyghtnesse and agilitie.

The seventh book, entreating of the viage or Navigations of Ethiopia. Cap. 1.
THey that will take upon them to write any history, had need to bear well
in memory what they have promised and taken in hand, lest for their pains
and well meaning, they be reward with shame and rebuke, and therefore whereas
in the beginning of this book, I promised to write of the Navigations of
Ethiope, I will with the description of this viage, make an end of my long
traueyle, and speak of such things as I saw there by the way, in my return
from India into my long desired country, in the company of the Portugales.

Of diverse and many Islands of Ethiope. Cap. 2.
THerefore the seventh day of December, we directed our journey toward
Ethiope, traversing first the great gulf, and saylyng four hundred miles,
came to an Island named Monzambrich, The Island of Monzambrich.
under the dominion of the king of Portugale. But before we arrived there, we
saw by the way many towns parteining to the Portugales, and also many strong
fortresses in the kingdoms of Melinda and Mombaza. Melinda.
The king of Portugale, The king of Portugales dominion in Ethiopia.
has also certain fortresses in Monzambrich and Zaphala.

But if I should here speak of the memorable factes of the valiant knight
Tristan de Cugna, The conquestes of Tristan de Cugna.
at his return from India, I should take in hand a thing far above my
reach: being such, as deserve rather the commendations of Homer and Uirgil,
for he invaded and subdued the great cities of Gogia, Pati, and Craua, with
also the goodly Island of Sacutara, Sacutara.
where the king of Portugale has erected certain fortresses, and omit also to
speak of many other Islands which we saw in the way: as the Island of
Cumeris, Cumeris.
and six other which bear plenty of ginger, sugar, and diverse other goodly
fruits, and abundance of flesh: also the most fruitful Island of Pende, Pende.
likewise subject to the king of Portugale.

Of the Island of Monzambrich, and the inhabitants thereof. Cap. 3.
THis Island (as we have said) is subject to the king of Portugale, Zaphala.
as is also Zaphala. From the Island of Monzambrich, Gold.
is brought much gold and oil, but is brought thither from the firm land.
The Island is not byg, and is inhabited with black Mahumetans, Black
Mahumetans.
living in manner in necessity of all things, yet has it a commodious port.
They have no corn but that is brought from the continent, where also we went
alande to see the country, where we saw nothing but a vagabunde and rascal
kind of black men, Trogloditae. Ethiopes.
coueryng only their priuities with leaves of trees, and are beside naked, and
the women in like manner. Their lyppes are two fingers thick, their foreheades
very large, their teeth great, and as white as snow. They are fearful at the
sight of every thing, and especially when they see armed men. Therefore seeing
their fearfulness, and knowing them to be without weapons that can do any
great hurt, only six of us well armed* bearyng also with us Hargabuses, and
having in our company a black slave that somewhat knew the country, we
began to enter further into the land: and when we had gone forward one days
journey, we found many heardes of Elephantes. Here the slave that was our
guide, Heardes of Elephantes. Elephantes are afraid of fire.
gave us counsel to take fyrebrandes in our hands, because these beasts
fear fire above all things. But we once chanced to find three Female
Elephants, which had very lately brought forth their Calves, and therefore
feared not the fire: but without all fear, followed us so far, that we were
feign to flee to a mountain to save us from the beasts. When we had entered
about ten miles into the land, we found a certain den on the side of a
mountain, where some of the black inhabitauntes lurked. These spoke so
confoundedly and chatteringly like Apes, An Apyshe language.
that I am not able to express their manner of speech: Yet to go the nearest
thereto that I can, their speech is lykest to the evil favored voice which the
Muleters of Sicilia use when they drive their Mules: and such manner of
blabberyng use these people in their speech. Here the Pilot of the ship
asked us if we would buy any kyne, saying, that here we should have them
good cheap. But we, thinking that either he had mocked us, or that agreeing
with the inhabitauntes (whom he knew before) he would have deceived us of our
money and wares, said that we had no money. Then said he unto us, These
people desire nothing less then money, having much more plenty of gold then
we have, which is found not far hence. Then said we to him, What desire
they then? They love (said he) despicable things, Rych merchandies for gold.
and of small value: as pynnes, knyues, sysers, lookyng Glasses, Hawks belles,
bags, or boxes, to keep their gold in, copper Rings, iangelinges to hang
at their Tymberelles, bosses, laces, broches, copper chains, carkenettes,
braselettes, and such other tryfles to trymme their wives and children. We
answered, that we were content to give them such wares for their kyne, if
they would bring them to the next mountain. Then said our Pilot again,
They will bring them with us to the mountain: but no further in any condition:
Therefore speak what you will give. Then one of our companions said, that he
had a bosse of graven copper, and also a little bell. But I, because I had no
such merchaundies, yet being desirous to eat flesh, said that I would sell
one of my shertes for kyne. Then said the Pilot, Let me alone with the
matter. Then calling unto him five or six of the Inhabitauntes, he showed them
our goodly Iewelles, and demanded for them three hundred kyne.

But the inhabitants, not much differyng from beasts, made signs that they
would give only fyftiene. Kyne very good cheap.
In fine, we agreed, yet suspectyng some deceit, nevertheless they kept their
promise, and sent us fyftiene kyne by two of their companions. We were scarsely
departed, but we heard a noise and tumulte in their dens, Trogloditae.
and were partly afraid lest these Troglodites would follow us, and therefore
leauyng our kyne, we took us to our weapons. But they made signs unto us to
fear nothing. Then our pilot told us, that their tumulte was only which of
them should have the bosse of copper Then recovering our kyne, we drove them
forward to the top of the mountain, and there dismissed the two black
slaves that came with them. While we were thus driuyng our kyne by the side of
a little wood, we met again with the Elephantes, whereof being in great fear,
we forsook our kyne, and trusted to our feet. Therefore departing from hence,
we returned to the Island, where making provision for our vyage, we sailed
toward the Cape, Cabo de Buena Speranza. The Island of Saint Laurence or
Madagascar.
called Caput Bonae Spei, passing the Island of Saint Laurence (otherwise
named Madagascar) being fourscore leagues distant from the nearest continent
or firm land. I suppose that in short time the king of Portugale will be
Lord of this Island: For having now burned and destroyed many villages and
towns of the Island, his name is fearful among them. And as far as I can
conjecture by my peregrinations of the world (especially of India and
Ethiopia) I think that the king of Portugale, The king of Portugale.
if he continue as he has begun, is like to be the rychest king in the
world, and doubtless not unworthily for the dignity and godly zeal of so
noble a prince, The Christian religion spread^th in India.
as by whose means the Christian faith is daily greatly increased. For it is
certain that in India, and especially in the city of Cucin, where the
Uiceroye remains, every holy day, ten or twelve Idolaters or Mahumetans are
professed to our religion, whereby we may conceive good hope, that in time our
faith shall there be greatly enlarged by the grace of God, who has there
given such supernatural victories to the Christians, and therefore all
professers of Christ's holy name, ought to pray to almyghtie God to assyst him
in so godly an enterprise.

Of the Cape called Caput Boneae Spei. That is, the Cape of good hope. Cap. 4.
Departing from the Cape named Caput Bonae Spei, when we had now sailed about
two hundred miles, Tempest.
there rose suddenly a tempest with contrary wind. The cause whereof was,
that we had on the left hand the Island of Saint Laurence, and many other
little Islands, from whence blows for the most part a great gale of wind. And
therefore for the space of seven days, being here daungerously tossed to and
fro by the rages of the sea and wind, at the length we escaped, by the grace
of God. But proceedyng about two hundred leagues, a new tempest rysyng so
scattred our ships in the space of six days, that we met not together
again until we arrived at Luxburne in Portugale. I was in the ship of
Barthelmewe, a Florentine, citizen of Luxburne. The ship was named Saint
Uincent, An exceedyng great ship and great riches of spyces.
a vessel of exceedyng capacity, and laden with seven thousand tonnes of all
sorts of spyces. In the way, we passed also by an other Island, named the Island
of saint Helen, where we saw certain fyshes of such enorme and monstrous
byggenesse, Great Whale fyshes.
that one of them was as bygge as a great house. When they rise above the
water, they yane or gape so wide, that ye upper iawe covers all the forehead,
as it were a soldier in shynyng harness. Again when they swymme on the
brymme of the water, the forhead is seen the breadth of three great paces. And
when they swymme in the sea, they so trouble the water, and come so near the
shyps, that we were feign to discharge al our artillarye to drive them away.
Shortly after we found an Island, The Island of Ascension.
named the Island of Ascension, where we saw many fowls, about the byggnesse
of our Duckes, so simple, without suspicion or fear, that we took them with
our hands: but shortly after they were taken, they showed an incredible
fierceness. I think verily that they never saw any man before, they so
beheld us before they were taken, and were as still as if they had been
astonyshed: For in that Island we saw no living creature, save only
innumerable fyshes, and the said birds. After we had passed this Island many
days sailing, as though we were now come to our own world, the North
star, and guardions of our maryners, appeared unto us. And here opportunity
serves well, to confute the opinion of them that think that men may not
sail in regions subject to the pole Antartike or south pole, by the guide of
the north star. Saylyng by the north star in regio^s beneath the
Equinoctial line.
For it is certain, that the Portugales sail by the guide of the north
stars, although they be utterly out of sight by the elevation of the pole
Antartike. Yet do they sometimes refreshe the virtue of the needle, with the
stone which ever naturally respects the north pole. A few days after, we
arrived at the fair region, where are seen many Islands, named the Islands of
Astures, so named for the multitude of those Egles which we commonly call
Astures. These Islands are diuersely named: for some are named Pici, Martij,
some, De Coruo: also De Floribus, Sancti Georgij, Gratiosa, and Feial.
Departing from hence, we came to the Island of Tertiera, where we remained two
days. All these Islands are marvelous fruitful, and have plenty of all
things necessary for man's life. Departing from hence, in seven days saylyng,
we came to ye goodly city of Luxburne, or Vlisbona in Portugale. A^ my coming
thither, I was brought to the kings presence, whose hands kissing with most
humble reverence, I thanked his majesty for the great favor I had found at
the hands of his subjects and officers in India. He entertained me most
graciously in his court, until I had infourmed him of all things which I
had observed in my voyage to India. A few days after, I showed his highness
the letters patentes whereby his Lieuetenante the Uiceroye of India, gave me
the order of knyghthod, desyryng his majesty to confyrme the same by his great
seal: which my petion, he immediately granted. And thus departing from thence
with the kings pasporte and safe conducte, at the length after these my long
and great trauayles and dangers, I came to my long desired and native country,
the city of Rome, by the grace of God, to whom be all honor and glory.

FINIS.
Of the higher East India, called India Tercera, or Treciera.
IN this India, which the portugales call Tercera, are very great kingdoms:
as the kingdoms of Beugala, Pegu, Berma, Erancangui, Dausian, Capelam, and the
great kingdom of Malacha, called of the old writers Aurea Chersonesus,
Malacha.
whose chief city is also called Malacha, and was in old time named Tachola.
Under this kingdom are infinite Islands called Maluche, whereof the principal
are these, Iaua the greater, Iaua the less, Polagua, Mendana, Cuba, Cailon,
Tachola. The Islands of Malucha.
Huban, Bur, Tenado, Anbon, and Gilolo, with infinite other. On the Southwest
part from Malacha, is the great Island of Samotra, called in old time
Taprobana, The Alande of Samotra.
in the which are the kingdoms of Pedir, Biraen, Pazer, Ardagni, and Ham.
This Island, and all the other called Maluche, bring forth great quantity of
Cloves, Cinamome, Nuttemegges, Maces, and all other kinds of spyces, except
Pepper, Spices.
which grows in the province of Calecut, and the Island of Ceilam. All these
sorts of spices are carried to Malacha to be sold. But the greatest part of
them is carried to Cathay and China: Calecut. Ceilam. Cathay. China.
and from thence to the North parts of Tartarie. This kingdom of China, is
very great, and was in old time called Sina. Here is found great plenty of
precious stones. The people are very subtle and rich. They are al apparelled
either in sylke or cloth, or vestures of other woorkemanshyppe, and are of good
civility. They do not gladly permit the Portugales or other strangers to
traficke in their kingdom: Precious stones. Sylke.
whose most famous place upon the sea side, is named Cantan, and the sea
Machiam, called of the old writers, the sea of Sina. Cantan.


Of the prices of precious stones and Spices, with their weightes and measures,
as they are accustomed to be sold both of the Moors and the gentyles: And of
the places where they grow.
Forasmuch as in diverse places of this history, mention is made of precious
stones, I have thought good to declare somewhat as well of their prices, as of
the places of their generation, that we may not utterly be ignorante of the
things which we so greatly esteem, and buie so dear.

Of the Rubie.
THe Rubies grow in India, and are found for the most part in a river named
Pegu. These are of the best kind and finest, which they of the land of
Malabor call Nunpuclo, and are well sold, if they be fair and clean without
spots. The Indians, to know their finenesse, put them upon their tongues,
comptyng that to be best that is could and most hard. And to see their
finenesse: they take them up with a piece of wax by the sharpest point, and
lookyng against the light, epsy in them every small spot or flake. They are
also found in certain d^epe fosses or pittes, which are made in mountains
that are beyond the said river. They are scoured and made clean in the
country of Pegu: yet can they not square and polyshe them, but for this
purpose send them to diverse other countries, and especially to Palcacate,
Narsinga, Calecut, and the region of Malabor, where are many cunnyng Lapidaries.

And to give you intelligence of the value of these stones, ye shall
understand that this word Fanan, signifies a weight, somewhat more then two
of our Carattes: and.xi. Fanans and a quarter, is one Mitigal: and.vi Mitigals
and a half, make one ounce. This Fanan, One caratte is iiii. graynes*
is also a kind of money which is in value one ryall of silver, and therefore
after this account I say that. Eight fine Rubies of the weight of one Fanan
(which are in all, about two carattes) are in value. Fanan.x. Which is one
crown of gold.
Four Rubies that wey one Fanan, are worth. Fanan.xx. Two that wey one Fanan.
Fanan.xl. One that weyeth three quarters of one Fanan. Fanan.30. One that
weyeth one Fanan. Fanan.50. One that weyeth one Fanan and a quarter. Fanan.65.
One that weyeth one Fanan and a half. Fanan.100. One that weyeth one Fanan and
three quarters. Fanan.150. One that weyeth two Fanans. Fanan.200. One that
weyeth two Fanans and a quarter. Fanan.250. One that weyeth two Fanans and a
half. Fanan.300. One that weyeth two Fanans and three quarters. Fanan.350. Of
three Fanans. Fanan *400. Of three and a quarter. Fanan.500. Of three and a
half. Fanan.550. Of three and three quarters. Fanan.600. Of three and three
quarters and a half. Fanan.630. Of four Fanans. Fanan.660. Of four and a
quarter. Fanan.700. Of four and a half. Fanan.800. Of five Fanans. Fanan.1000
Of five and a half. Fanan.1200 Of six Fanans, which are about twelve Carats.
Fanan.1500
which make a hundred and fyftie crowns of gold. And these are commonly the
prices of perfect Rubies. But such as are not perfect, and have any spots in
them, or are not of good color, are of less price, according to the
arbitriment and estimation of the buyer.

Of the Rubies which grow in the Island of Zeilam.
IN the Island of Zeilam, being in the second India, are found many Rubies,
which the Indians name Manecas, the greatest part whereof do not arryue to the
perfection of the other aforesaid in color, because they are read, as though
they were washed, and of fleshy color, yet are they very cold and hard. The
perfectest of them are greatly esteemed among the people of the Island, and
are reserved only for the king him self, if they be of any great quantity.
When his Iewellers find any bygge piece of this Rock of the best kind, they
put it in fire for the space of certain hours: which if it come out of the
fire incorrupt, it becomes of the color of a burning cole, and was
therefore called of the Greeks, Anthrax, which signifies a burning cole. The
same that the greeks call Anthrax, the Latins call Carbunculus* These they
greatly esteem. When the king of Narsinga can get any of them, he causes a
fine hole to be bored in the undermost part of them, to the myddest, and
suffers none of them to pass out of his realm, especially if they have been
tried by the said proof. These are of greater value then the other of Pegu,
if they be in their natural perfection and cleanenesse.

Of these, one that wayeth a Carratte (which is half a Fanan) is worth in
Calecut. Fanan.30 Which are.iii. crowns of gold.
One of two Carattes. Fanan.65 Of three Carattes. Fanan.150 Of three Carattes
and a half Fanan.200 Of four Carattes. Fanan.300 Of four Carattes and a
half. Fanan.350 Of five Carattes. Fanan.400 Of five Carattes and a half.
Fanan.450 Of six Carattes. Fanan.530 Of six Carattes and a half. Fanan.560
Of seven Carattes. Fanan.630 Of seven Carattes and a half. Fanan.660 One
of.viii. Carattes, that has been well proved in the fire, is worth Fanan.800
Of.viii. Carattes and a half. Fanan.900 One such of ten Carattes.
Fanan.1300 One of.x. Carattes and a half. Fanan *1600 Of.xii. Carattes.
Fanan.2000 Of.xiiii. Carattes. Fanan 3000 Of.xvi. Carattes. Fanan 6000
Of the kind of Rubies. called Spinelle.
THere is also found an other kind of Rubies, which we call Spinelle, and the
Indians, Caropus. They grow in the self same country of Pegu where as are
the fine Rubies, and are found in the mountains in the upper crust or flower
of the earth. These are not so fine, nor of so good color as are the true
Rubies, but have somewhat the color of a Granate, which we commonly call a
Garnet: yet of these, such as are perfect in their color, are of value half
less then true Rubies.

Of the Rubies called Balassi.
BAlassi are of the kinds of Rubies, but are not so hard: their color is
somewhat like a Rose, and some are in manner white: they grow in Balassia,
which is a region within the firm land, above Pegu and Bengala, and are
brought from thence by merchants of the Moors to Calecut, where they are
wrought and pullyshed, and are sold of the same price that are Spinel.

Of the Diamondes of the old mine.
THese Diamondes are found in the first India, in a kingdom of the Moors
named Decan, from whence they are brought to other regions. There are also
found other Diamondes, which are not so good, but somewhat white, and are
called Diamondes of the new mine, which is in the kingdom of Narsinga. They
of the old mine are not pullyshed in India, but in other places. There are
made likewise in India other false Diamondes, of Rubies, Topases, and white
Saphires, which appear to be fine, and are also found in the Island of
Zeilam: these stones differ in none other, saving that they have lost their
natural color. Of these, some are found that have half the color of Rubies,
and other of Saphires, other also of the color of a Topase, other have al
these colors myngled together. They bore a fine hole in these through the
mids, whereby they appear like the eyes of a Catte. Of the whytest, they
make many small Diamondes, which can not be known from the true, saving by
touching, of such as are skillful in that practice. They are sold by a poyse or
wayght, which they call Mangiar, which weyeth two Tar, and two thirdes,
which amount to two thirdes, or third parts of one Carat: for four Tarres
wey one Fanan, which is about two Carattes. Eight Diamondes that wey one
Mangiar, which is two third parts of a Carat, are in value Fanan *xxx. which
are three crowns of gold. Six Diamundes that weigh one Mangiar. Fanan.40.
Four that weigh one Mangiar. Fanan.60. Two that weigh one Mangiar. Fanan.80.
One that weygheth one Mangiar. Fanan.100. One of one Mangiar and a quarter.
Fanan.165. One of one Mangiar and a half. Fanan.180. Of one Mangiar and three
quarters. Fanan.220. Of two Mangiars. Fanan.320. Of two Mangiars and a quarter.
Fanan.360. Of two Mangiars and a half. Fanan.380. Of two Mangiars and three
quarters full perfect. Fanan.420. Of three Mangiars of like perfection.
Fanan.450. Of three Mangiars and a half. Fanan.480. Of four Mangiars.
Fanan.550. Of five Mangiars. Fanan.750. Of six Mangiars. Fanan.800. Of seven
Mangiars. Fanan.1200. Of eight Mangiars. Fanan.1400.
And thus they proceed, increasyng the price, as they increase in weight.

Of Saphires.
IN the Island of Zeilam, are found the best and most true Saphires, being
very hard and fine, and of the color of Azure. They are of price as follows.
A Marcell, is a silver coin of Venice, of.xi. vn^es.iii.d. with (...),
whereof.x. make an ounce.
One that weighs one Caratte, is of value. which are about two Marcels of
silver. Fanan.2. One of the weight of two Carattes. Fanan.5. Of three Carattes.
Fanan.10. Of four Carattes. Fanan.15. Of five Carattes. Fanan.18. Of six
Carattes. Fanan.28. Of seven Carattes. Fanan.35. Of eight Carattes. Fanan.50.
Of niene Carattes. Fanan.60 Of ten Carattes. Fanan.65. Of eleven Carattes.
Fanan.70. Of twelve Carattes. Fanan.75. Of.xiii. Carattes in all perfection of
color. Fanan.115. Of.xiiii. Carattes. Fanan.160. Of.xv. Carattes. Fanan.180.
Of.xvi. Carattes. Fanan.200. Of.xviii. Carattes. Fanan.250. One that weighs a
Mitigall, which is.xi. Fanans and a quarter, that is about.xxiii. Carattes.
Fanan.350.
Likewise in the Island of Zeilam, is found an other sort of Saphires, which
they call Quinigelinam. These are not so strong, of darker color, and of much
less value then are the other of the best kind, whereof one is worth thirtiene
of these of equal poyse. Also in the kingdom of Narsinga, in a mountain above
Bacanor and Mangalor, is found an other sort of Saphires, more tender and of
worse color, which they call Cinganloam. These are somewhat white, and of
small value: So that the most perfect of this kind, weighing.xx Carattes, is
not worth one Ducate. Their color is inclynyng somewhat to yelowe. There is
likewise found an other kind of Saphires, upon the sea coasts of the
kingdom of Calecut, in a place named Capucar. These the Indians call
Carahatonilam. They are of a dark Azure color, not shynyng but in the clear
air. They are also tender and brickle, and of small estimation among the
Indians. They seem on the one syd^ like glass.

Of Topasies.
THe natural Topasies grow in the Island of Zeilam, and are named of the
Indians Purceragua. It is a hard and fine stone, and of equal estimation with
the Rubie and the Sapphire, because all these three are of one kind. The
perfect color of this, is yelowe, like unto fine beaten gold, and if it be
perfect and clean, whether it be great or little, it is worth in Calecut as
much fine gold as it weighs. But if it be not perfect, it is worth the
weight of gold the Fanan, which is less by the half. And if it be in manner
white, it is worth much less. And of these, are small Diamundes counterfecte.

Of Turquesses.
TUrquesses are found in Exer, a place of Siech Ismaell. Their Mine is a dry
earth, that is found upon a black stone, which the Moors take of in small
pieces, and carry them to the Island of Ormus, from whence they are brought to
diverse parts of the world by sea and by land. The Indians call them Perose.
They are soft stones, of small weight, and not much cold: and to know that
they are good and true, in the day they shall appear of the very color of the
Turquesse, and in the night, by the light, they shall appear green. They that
are not so perfect, do not so change their color to the sight. If these
stones be clean and of fine color, they have underneath, in the bottom, a
black stone, upon the which they grow. And if any little vain rise upon
the said stone, it shall be the better. And to know more certainly that they
are true Turquesses, they put on the tops of them, a little quick lyme,
tempered with water, after the manner of an ointment. So that if the quick lime
appear colored, they are judged perfect, and are of value as follows. One
that weighs one Caratte, is worth in Malabar. Fanan.15 One of two Carattes.
Fanan.40. Of four Carattes. Fanan.90. Of six Carattes. Fanan.150. Of eight
Carattes. Fanan.200. Of ten Carattes. Fanan.300. Of twelve Carattes. Fanan.450.
Of fourtiene Carattes. Fanan.550.
Of greater then these they make none account, because they are lyghter pieces
and of greater circuit. These of the byggest sort the Moors carry into the
kingdom of Guzerath.

Of Iacinthes.
IAcinthes, grow in the Island of Zeilam. They are tender stones, and yelowe.
They are best that are of deepest color. The greatest part of these, have in
them certain pimples or burbuls, which diminyshe their fayrenesse. And they
that are in their perfection cleave from this deformity, are nevertheless of
small value: For in Calecut where they are polyshed, they that weygh one Fanan,
are worth no more then half a Fanan. And they of.xviii. Fanans, are not
worth.xvi. Fanans.

There are also found other stones like unto cattes eyes, as Chrisolytes, and
Amethystes, which they do not much esteem, because they are of small value, as
also the stones called Giagonze.

Of Smaragdes or Emeraldes.
SMaragdes grow in the country of Babylon, where the Indians call the sea
Dieguan. They grow also in other parts of India. They are stones of fair
green color, and are light and tender. Of these stones, many are counterfect.
But lookyng on them curiously toward the light, the counterfectes show
certain burbuls, as does glass: but in the true, there is no such seen,
but rather there appears to the eye, a certain verdour, shynyng like the
beams of the Sun: and being rubbed upon the touch stone, they leave the
color of copper. And the Smaragde of this forte, is the best and most true,
and is in value in Calecut, as much as a Diamunde, and somewhat more: And this
not by weight, but by greatness, because the Diamunde quantity for quantity,
is of greater weight then the Smaragde. There is likewise found an other kind
of Smaragdes, which are green stones, but not so much esteemed.
Nevertheless, the Indians reserve these to set them forth with other precious
stones. They leave not any green color upon the touch.

Of diverse kinds of Spices, where they grow, what they are worth in Calecut,
and whyther they are carried from thence.
Of Pepper.
First in all the kingdom of Malabor and Calecut, Pepper grows, and is sold
in Calecut by every CC. Bahars, fine, for.CCxxx. Fanans, every Fanan (as I have
said) being in value one ryall of place of Spain, which is as much as one
Marcell of silver in Uenice. Bahar, weighs four Cantares of the old weight
of Portugale, by the which they sell all spices in Lisbona. Cantare is in
Uenice.Cxii. pound weight, of the gross pound (being xviii. ounces) and of
the subtyle pound.Clxxviii. So that the said.712. pounds of Uenice subtle,
will cost about.xx. french crowns of gold: which amount to about two
Marchetti (which make one penny) the pound. They pay also to the king of
Calecut for custom.xii. Fanans, every Bahar by the lode. They that buy them,
are accustomed to bring them to Cambaia, Persia, Aden, and Mecha, and from
thence to Alcayr and Alexandria. Now they pay custom to the king of Portugale
after the rate of 6562. Maruedies the Bahar, which are.193. Fanans. Maruedies
are Spanyshe coins, whereof six go to a penny. This do they, partly because
there arryueth no more so great diversity of merchauntes to buy them, and
partly by the agreement which the said king of Portugale made with those
kings, and the Moors, and merchauntes of the country of Malabar.

Much pepper grows likewise in the Island of Sumatra, near unto Malaca,
which is fayrer and bigger then that of Malabar, but not so good and strong.
This is brought from Bengala to China, and some part to Mecha, privily and by
stealth, unawares to the Portugales, which would not otherwise suffer them to
pass. It is worth in Sumatra, from.iiii.C. unto.vii.C. Maruedies the Canter
of Portugale, of the new weight. And from the new to the old weight in
Portugale, the difference is two ounces in the pound weight: For the old
pound consists of.xiiii. ounces, and the new pound of xvi. ounces.

Of Cloves.
Cloves grow in the Islands of Molucca, from whence they are brought to
Malacha, and then to Calecut, and the country of Malabar. They are worth in
Calecut every Bahar (which is.712. pounds, of the subtle pound of Uenice)
from.500. to.600. Fanans (which are about fyftie french crowns) which are in
value about twelve Marchetti the pound weight, and being clean from stalks
and husks are in value.700. Fanans. To carry them from thence into other
regions, they pay for pasporte. xviii. Fanans the Bahar, which is worth in
Malacca from.x. to.xiiii. Ducades, according to the rate and custom of the
merchauntes.

Of Cinamome.
CInamome of the best sort, grows in the Island of Zeilam, and in the
country of Malabar grows the woorst. That of the best kind, is of small
price in Zeilam, But in Calecut (if it be choice and fresh) it is worth 300.
Fanans the Bahar, which are about five Marchetti the pound.

Of Ginger, called Beledi.
GInger Beledi, grows on every side about Calecut, from six to ntene miles,
and is worth the Bahar.xl. Fanans, and sometimes fyftie, which is less then
one Marchetto the pound. They bring it from the mountains, and out of the
country, to the city, where they sell it by retayle to the Indian
merchauntes, who geather it together in great quantity, and keep it to such
time as the Moors ships arryue there, to whom they sell it, by the price
of.xc. Fanans, to.Cx. which is less then two Marchetti the pound, because the
weight is greater.

Of Ginger Mechino.
GInger Mechino grows, beginning from the mountain of Deli, unto Canonor. It
is small, and not so white nor so good as the other. It is worth the Bahar in
Canonor, about.60. Fanans, which is about one Marchetto the pound. They pay
for the Bahar six Fanans in money for the custom. It is sold uncleansed or
unpurged.

Of green Ginger in conserues.
IN Bengala is found great plenty of Ginger Beledi, of the which they make
much Ginger in conserues with Sugar, and carry it in stone pottes from
Martabani, to be sold in the country of Malabar, and is worth the Farazuola
(which is.xxii. pounds and six ounces) after the rate of.xiiii.xv. or.xvi.
Fanans.

That that is fresh and made in conserues, is worth in Calecut.xxv. Fanans
the farazuola, because Sugar is dear there. Green Ginger to put in conserues,
is worth in Calecut three quarters of one Fanan the farazuola, which is about
two pounds for one Marchetto.

Of the Apothecaries drugges, and of what price they are in Calecut and Malabar.
LAcca of Martabani, if it be of the best, is worth the farazuola, which
is.xxii. pound weight and six ounces of Portugale, after sixtiene ounces the
pound (which is about forty pound weight of the subtle pound of Uenice) and
is in value eightiene Fanans: which are eightiene Marcels of silver. For one
Fanan, is in value about one Marcell of silver.

Lacca of the country, is worth the farazuola. Fanan. 12 Borace that is good
and in great pieces, is worth the farazuola. Fanan.30 to.40. and 50. Camphire
that is gross in cakes, is worth the farazuola. Fanan.70. to.80 Camphire to
annoint Idols, * * * Camphire for their children to eat, is worth the
Mytigall. Fanan.3. Aguila is worth the farazuola. Fanan.300. to.400. Lignum
aloe, black, heavy, and fine, is worth. Fanan.1000. Musk of the best, is
worth the ounce Fanan.36. Benjamin of the best, is worth the farazuola.
Fanan.65. Tamarindi being new, are worth the faraz. Fanan.4. Calamus
Aromaticus, the farazuola. Fanan.12. Endego to dye silk, true and good, the
farazuola. Fanan.30. Mirre, the farazuola. Fanan.18. to.20. Frankensense good
and in graynes, is worth the farazuola. Fanan.15. Frankensense in paste of the
basest sort, the faraz. Fanan.3. Ambracan or Amber grease that is good, is
worth the Metigall. Fanan.2. to.3. Mirabolanes in conserve of sugar, the
faraz. Fanan.16. to.25 Cassia, fresh and good, the farazuola. Fanan one and a
half. Read Sanders, the farazuola. Fanan.5. to.6. White Sanders and Citrine,
which grow in the Island of Timor, the farazuola. Fanan.40. to.60.
Spikenarde, fresh and good, the faraz. Fanan.30. to 40. Nuttemegges, which
come from the Island of Bandan, where the Bahar is worth from.viii. to ten
Fanans, (which importe vi. pounds weight to the Marchetto) are worth in
Calecut, the faraz. Fanan.10. to.12. Mace which is brought from the Island of
Bandan, where the Bahar is worth fyftiene Fanans (which import about one
Marchetto, the pound are worth in Calecut, the farazuola. Fanan.25. to.30
Turbithes, are worth the farazuola. Fanan.13 Woormeseede of the best kind,
called Semenzana, is worth the farazuola. Fanan.18. Zerumba, the farazuola.
Fanan.2. Zedoaria, the farazuola. Fanan.1. Gum Serapine, the farazuola.
Fanan.20. Aloe Cicotrine, the farazuola. Fanan.18. Cardamome in graynes, the
farazuola. Fanan.20. Reubarbe grows abundantly in the country of Malabar,
and that which comes from China by Malacha, is worth the farazuola. Fanan
40. to.50. Mirabolani Emblici, the farazuola. Fanan.2. Mirabolani Belirici, the
farazuola. Fanan one and a half. Mirabolani citrini and Chebuli, which are all
of one sort. Fanan.2. Mirabolani Indi, which are of the same Citrine trees.
Fanan.3. Tutia, the farazuola. Fanan.30. Cububes, which grow in the Island of
Iaua or Giaua, are there of small price, and sold by measure without weight.
Opium, which is brought from the city of Aden where it is made, is worth in
Calecut the faraz. Fanan.280. to 320. Opium of an other sort, which is made
in Cambaia, is worth the farazuola. Fanan.200. to.250.
Of the weyghtes of Portugale and India: And how they agreee.
THe pound of the old weight, conteyneth.xiiii. ounces. The pound of the new
weight conteyneth.xvi. ounces. Eight Cantares of the old weight, make.vii. of
the new. And every new Cantare, is of.C.xxviii. pounds, after xvi. ounces to
the pound.

Every old Cantare, conteyneth three quarters and an half of the new Cantare:
And is of.C.xxviii. pounds, after.xiiii. ounces the pound.

One Farazuoles, is.xxii. pounds of.xiiii. ounces, and.vi. ounces more, with two
fyfte parts.

Twenty Farazuoles, are one Bahar.

One Bahar is.iiii. Cantares of the old weight of Portugale. All the Spices
and drugges, and al such other things as come from India, are sold in
Portugale by the old weight and all the rest by the new weight.

Herby may we well consider, that as we ought to rejoice and give God thanks
for the abundaunce of all these things, which he causes the earth so
plentifully to bring forth to our use, so may we lament the abuse of men,
whose covetousness causes great dearth and scarsenesse in the myddest of
abundaunce: herein no less offendyng the law of nature, then do such as by
witchcrafte do entermingle poison with things created for the health of man,
or by inchauntment corrupt the seeds in the ground: yea rather, as the
unnatural mother, who destroys the child whom she has long nuryshed.

Of the voyage made by the Spanyardes round about the world.
THe voyage made by the Spanyardes round about the world, is one of the
greatest and most marvelous things that have been known to our time. And
although in many things we excel our ancient predecessors, in this especially
we so far exceed al their inventions, that ye like has not heretofore ben
known to this day. Don Peter Martyr.
This viage was written particulerly by Don Peter Martyr of Angleria, being one
of ye counsel of themperours Indies, to whom also was committed ye writing of
the history and examination of al such as returned from thence into Spain to
ye city of Siuile, Rome sacked.
in the year.1522. But sendyng it to Rome to be printed, in that miserable
time when the city was sacked, it was lost, and not found unto this day, or
any memory remaynyng thereof, saving such as some that read the same have
borne in mind. And among other notable things by him written as touching that
voyage, A day lost in three years and one month.
that is one, that the Spanyardes having sailed about three years and one
month, and the most of them notyng the days, day by day (as is the manner of
al them that sail by the Ocean, they found when they were returned to Spain,
yt they had lost one day: So that at their arryuall at the port of Siuile,
being the seventh day of September, was by their account but the syxte day.
And whereas Don Peter Martyr declared ye strange effect of this thing to a
certain excellent man, who for his singular learning was greatly advanced to
honor in his common wealth, and made Themperours ambassador: this worthy
gentleman, who was also a great Philosopher and Astronomer, answered, that it
could not otherwise chance unto them, having sailed three years continually,
ever following the Sun toward the West: and said furthermore, that they of
old time observed, that all such as sailed behynd the Sun toward the West,
did greatly lengthen the day. And albeit that the said book of Peter Martyr
is peryshed, yet has not fortune permytted that the memory of so worthy and
marvelous an enterprise should utterly be extincte: It is now found with one
master Harold, a prebend in wyndsor. Antonie Pigafetta.
forasmuch as a certain noble gentelman of the city of Vincenza in Italy,
called master Antonie Pigafetta (who being one of the company of that voyage,
and after his return into Spain in the ship Victoria, was made knight of
the Rhodes) wrote a particular and large book thereof, which he gave to
Themperours Majesty, and sent a copy of the same into France, to the lady
Regent, mother unto the French king, who committed it to an excellent
philosopher, called master Iacobus Faber, Iacobus Faber.
having long studied in Italy, wyllyng him to translate it into the French
tongue. This book therefore was printed first in the French tongue, and then
in the Italian, with also an epistle to the Cardinal of Salsepurge as touching
the same voyage, written by Maximilian Transiluane secretary to Themperours
Majesty, in the year 1522. And doubtless among all the cities of Italy,
Maximilian Transiluane.
the city of Vincenza may herein much glory, that beside the ancient
nobility, and many excellent and rare wits which it has brought forth,
as well in learning as discipline of war, it has also had so worthy and
valiant a gentleman as was the said master Antonie Pigafetta, who having
compassed about the ball or globe of the world, has likewise described that
voyage particularly. For the which his so noble and wonderful an enterprise
so happily atchiued, The reward of noble enterprise
if the same had been done in the old time, when Thempyre of the Greeks and
Romans floryshed, he should doubtless have been rewarded with an Image of
marble or gold, erected in a place of honor, in perpetual memory, and for a
singular example of his virtue to the posterity. In fine, this may we boldly
affirm, The antiquity had no such knowledge of the world as we have.
that the antiquity had never such knowledge of the world, which the Sun
compasses about in.xxiiii. hours, as we have at this present, by the
industry of men of this our age. But before I speak any thing of the vyage, I
have thought it good first to add hereunto the Epistle of Maximilian
Transiluane, which he wrote to the Cardinal of Salsepurge, as a preface to his
said book.

The Epistle of Maximilian Transiluane, secretary to the Emperors Majesty:
written to the right honorable and reverend lord, the lord Cardinal of
Salepurge, of the marvelous and wonderful navigations made by the Spanyardes
round about the world in the year of Christ.M.D.xix.
IN these days (my most honorable and reverend lord) returned one of those
five ships, which, the year before Themperours being at Saragosa in Spain,
were at his majesty's commandment sent to the new world, The Islands of
Molucca.
heretofore unknown unto us, to seek the Islands of spices. For albeit the
Portugales bring us great quantity of Spyces from that part of East India,
which in old time was called Aurea Chersonesus (where is now thought to be
the great rych city of Malaccha) yet in East India grow none of those Spyces,
Aurea Chersonesus.
except Pepper. Malaccha.
For other Spyces, as Sinamome, Cloves, Nuttemegs, Spices.
and Mase (which is the husk that covers the shell of the Nut) are brought
from other far countries, and from Islands scarsely known by their names:
from the which Islands they are brought in ships or barks made without any
Iron tools, and tied together with cords of Date trees, with round sails
likewise made of the small twigges of the branches of Date trees weaued
together. These barks they call Giu^che: with the which barks and sails,
they make their viage with only one wind in the stearne, or contrarywyse.
Neither yet is it a thing greatly to be marueiled at, that these Islands where
the Spices grow, have been unknown so many worlds past unto our time, The
Islands of Spices unknown in old time.
forasmuch as all such things as unto this day have been written of old
autours of the places where spices grow, are all fabulous and false: Insomuch
that the countries where they affirm them to grow, are now certaynely found
to be further from the place where they grow in deed, then we are from them.
For lettyng pass many other things that are written, I will speak more of
this which Herodotus (otherwise a famous auctoure) affirms, that Sinamome is
found in the tops of the nestes of certain birds and fowls that bring it
from far countries, and especially the Phenyx, the which I know no man that
ever has seen. But Pliny, The Phoenix. Pliny.
who might more certaynely affirm things by reason that before his time many
things were known and discovered by the nauigations of great Alexander and
other, says, The nauigations of great Alexander. Ethiope. Trogloditi.
that Sinamome grows in that part of Ethiope which the people inhabit called
Trogloditi. Nevertheless it is now found that Sinamome grows very far from
all Ethiope, and now much further from the Trogloditi, which dwell in caves
under the ground. But to our men which are now returned from those parts and
the Islands of spices, The navigations about the world.
having also good knowledge of Ethiope, it was necessary to pass far beyond
Ethiope before they come to these Islands, and to compass about the whole
world, and many times under the greatest circumference of heaven. The which
nauigations made by them, being the most marvelous thing that ever was done by
man upon the earth sense the first creation of the world, and never found
before, or known, or attempted by any other, I have deliberated faithfully to
write to your honorable lordeshyppe, and to declare the whole success thereof.
As touching which matter, I have with all diligence made inquisition to know
the truth, as well by relation of the Captain of that ship, as also by
conference with every of the maryners that returned with him. All which, gave
the se^fe same information both to Themperours Majesty, and diverse other: And
this with such faythfulnesse and sincerity, that not only they are judged of
all men to have declared the truth in all things, but have thereby also given
us certain knowledge, that all that has hitherto ben said or written of old
autours as touching these things, are false and fabulous. For who will believe
that men are found with only one leg. The old autours.
Or with such feet whose shadow covers their bodies? Or men of a cubite
heyght, and other such like, being rather monsters then men? Of the which,
neither the Spanyardes, Monsters. The wages of the Spaniards and Portugales.
who in our time saylyng by the Ocean sea, have discovered all the costs of
the land toward the West both under and above the Equinoctial, nor the
Portugales, who compassyng about all Affryke, has passed by all the East, and
likewise discovered all those costs unto the great gulf called Sinus Magnus,
nor yet the Spaniardes in this their last navigations, in the which they
compassed about the whole earth, did never in any of their viages write of such
monsters: which doubtless they would not have omytted, if they might have had
certain knowledge thereof. But now intendyng to speak of the whole world, I
will not be long in my preface, but begin my narration as follows.

A brief declaration of the viage or navigations made about the world.
Geathered out of a large book written hereof by master Antoni Pigafetta
Vincentine, knight of the Rhodes, and one of the company of that vyage in the
which Ferdinando Magalianes a Portugale (whom some call Magellanus) was
general captain of the navy.
ALthough Sebastian Munster in his universal Cosmographie in the fyfth book
of the lands of the greater Asia (which I translated into English about.24.
years sense) has written of the vyage of Magellanus, Sebastian Munster.
declaryng therein how the Spanyardes by the West, and the Portugales by the
East, sailing to the Islands of Molucca, compassed the whole globe of the
world between them, The Islands of Molucca.
yet have I here thought it good to make a brief repeticion of this vyage,
addyng hereunto diverse notable things which were not touched of Munster, as I
have geathered them out of the books of Antoni Pigafetta, and Transiluanus,
writing of the same vyage. For albeit in deed it was a strange and wonderful
thing that the Spanyardes and Portugales compassed the whole circumference of
the world between them, yet is it more marvelous, that the same was done
with one ship, and one company of men, as did the Spanyardes in this viage,
who keeping their continual course by the west, returned into Spain by the
east: a thing doubtless so much more woonderful and strange, then if they had
returned from the half circumference by the same way they went, in how much
they were ignorant in the vyage never attempted before, beside the thousand
dangers and perils which they were daily like to fall into, as well by
wandryng in unknown coasts, as also by falling into the hands of the
Portugales, Controversy between the Spanyardes and Portugales.
by whose dominions in the East they should needs pass of necessity, not
trustyng to their gentleness for the controversy which had been long
between them for the Islands of Molucca. I will therefore (as I have said) make
a brief rehearsal of this viage, from the beginning to the endyng, omittyng
nevertheless many notable things, which are more largely described in the
books of Maximilianus Transiluanus, and Antonius Pigafetta.

The tenth day of August, Ferdinando Magalianes.
in the year of our Lord.1519. Ferdinando Magalianes* departed from the port
of Siuile in Spain, with a navy of five ships, and 237. men, well furnished
with all things necessary. And saylyng first down by the river of
Guadalchiber, which runs from the said port into the sea, they came first to
a place named Giouan Dulpharaz, where are many villages of the Moors: and from
thence, arrived at a castle of the duke of Medina Sidonia, where is the port
from which they enter into the sea, and to the cape saint Vincent, The Cape of
saint Vicent.
being distant from the Equinoctial.37. degrees, and from the said port.10.
leagues, and is from thence to Siuile between 17. and 20. leagues. Here they
remained certain days, to make new provision of such things as they lacked.
Departing from hence the 20. day of September, The Islands of Canarie.
they arrived the 26. day of the same month at one of the Islands of Canarie,
called Tenerife, being 25. degrees above the Equinostial. In one of these
Islands is none other water but that is continually engendered of a cloud,
Water engendered of a clude.
which appears daily at noone tide, as though it descended from heaven, and
compasses about a certain great tree, from whose branches distylleth great
abundance of water, and falls in streams from the root of the same, into
certain trenches and cesternes, made and placed to receive it. This water
serves sufficiently all the inhabitauntes and cattayle of the Island. The Island
of S. Thomas.
The like thing is also seen in the Island of saint Thomas, lying directly
under the Equinoctial line.

The third day of October, about mydnyght, the captain commanded them to
light fire brandes, and to hoyse up their sails, directyng their course
toward the South, saylyng saylyng between Capo Verde of Affrike, and the
Islands lying about the same, Capo verde.
being from the Equinoctial fourteen degrees and a half. They sailed thus
many days in the sight of the coast of Guinea of Ethiope, Guinea in Ethiope.
where is the mountain called Serra Liona, being eight degrees above the
Equinoctial. In this coast they had no manner of contrary wind, but a great
calm, and fair weather, for the space of threescore and ten days, in the
which they came under the Equinoctial line. In this viage they saw many
strange Fyshes, Fyshes and monsters of the sea.

The fire of. S. Helene and S. Nicolas.

A tempest.


and monsters of the Sea, beside another strange thing which appeared unto
them: For there appeared in their ships certain flames of fire, burning very
clear, which they call saint Helen, and saint Nicholas: these appeared as
though they had been upon the mast of the ships, in such clearenesse, that
they took away their sight for the space of a quarter of an hour, by reason
whereof they so wandered out of their course, and were dispearsed in sunder, that
they in manner dispayred to meet again: but (as God would) the sea and tempest
being quieted, they came safely to their determined course. And before I speak
any further of the viage, The natural cause of such fyres as fall in the
ships.
I have here thought good to say somewhat of these strange fyers, which some
ignorant folk think to be spirits, or such other fantasies, whereas they
are but natural things, proceedyng of natural causes, and engendered of
certain exhalations. Of these therefore, the great Philosopher of our time
Hieronimus Cardanus, in his second book De Subtilitate, writes in this manner.
Cardanus.
There are two manner of fyers engendered of exhalations, whereof the one is
hurtful, the other without hurt. That which is hurtful, is fire in deed,
engendered of malicious and venomous vapors, which in success of time take
fire, as apt matters to be kyndled. The other kind is no true fire, but like
the matter that is in such old putrified wood, Two kinds of fires engendered
of exhalations.
as gives the shynyng of fire, without the substance or quality thereof. Of
the kind of true fire, is the Fyreball or Star, commonly called saint Helen,
which is sometime seen about the mastes of ships, True fire and false fire.
being of such fyerie nature, that it sometime melts brazen vessels, and is a
token of drownyng, forasmuch as this chances only in great tempests: for the
vapor or exhalation whereof this fire is engendered, can not be driven together
or compact in form of fire, but of a gross vapor, and by a great power of
wind, and is therefore a token of imminent peril: As on the contrary part,
the like fyres called in old time Castor and Pollux, Castor and Pollux.

The lights of Saint Peter and Saint Nicolas.


and now named the two lights of Saint Peter and Saint Nicolas, which for
the most part fall on the cables of the ships, leapyng from one to an other,
with a certain flutteryng noise like birds, are a token of security, and of
the tempest ouerpassed: For they are but vapors cleauyng to the cables, which
in success of time, the fire passing from one to an other, appear in the
similitude of a light candel. They are a token of security, because they are
little, not slow or gross, whereby they might have joined altogether in one,
and been thereby more malicious, and lasted longer, whereas being many and but
little, they are the sooner consumed. Hitherto Cardanus. But let us now
return to the vyage.

When they had sailed paste the Equinoctial line, They lost the sight of the
North star. The Island of Brasile.

The South pole.


they lost the sight of the North star, and sailed by the southwest, until
they came to a land named the land of Bressil, which some call Brasilia,
being.xxii. degrees and a half toward the south pole or pole Antartike. This
land is continuate and one firm land with the cape of saint Augustine,
which is.viii. degrees from the Equinoctial. In this land they were
refreshed with many good fruits of innumerable kinds, and found here also
very good sugar canes, and diverse kinds of beasts and other things, Sugar.
which I omit for brevity. They entered into this haven on saint Lucies day:
where the Sun being their Zenith (that is, the point of heaven directly over
their heads) they felt greater heat that day, then when they were under the
Equinoctial line. This land of Brasile is very large and great, The greatness
of the land of Brasile.
and bygger then all Spain, Portugale, France, and Italy, and is most
abundaunt in all things. The people of this country pray to no manner of
thing: but live by the instincte of nature, and to the age of C.xx. and.C.xl.
years. Both the men and women go naked, and dwell in certain long houses.
They are very docible, and soon allured to the Christian faith.

Thirtiene days after that they arrived at the said port, they departed from
this land, and sailed to the xxxiiii. degree and a half toward the pole
Antartike, where they found a great river of fresh water, and certain
Caniballes. Caniballes.
Of these they saw one out of their ships, Giantes.
of stature as byg as a Giant, having a voice like a Bull. Our men pursued
them, but they were so swyfte of foot that they could not overtake them.
About the mouth of this river, Insulae gemmarum. Cap. S. Marie.
are seven Islands, in the byggest whereof they found certain precious
stones, and called it the cape of saint Marie. The Spanyardes thought that by
this river they might have passed into the South sea, but they were deceived in
their opinion: For there was none other passage then by the river, which
is.xvii. leagues large in the mouth. Thus following this coaste by the tracte of
the land toward the pole Antartike, The pole Antartike. Geese.

Sea woolues.


they came to a place where were two Islands replenished with Geese and Wolves
of the sea, which some think to be those fyshes that we call Pikes. These were
in such number, that in an hour all the five ships might have been laden with
Geese, being all of black color, and such as can not flee. They live of fish,
and are so fat, that they could scarsely flay them. They have no feathers,
but a certain down, and their bylles like Ravens bylles. These Woolues of the
sea are of diverse colors, and of the bygnesse of Calves, with their heads of
golden color. Here were they in great danger by tempest: But as soon as the
three fyres, called saint Helen, saint Nycolas, and saint Clare, appeared
upon the cables of the ships, sodaynely the tempeste and fury of the wyndes
ceased. Departing from hence, they sailed to the.49. degree and a half under
the pole Antartike: The.xlix. degree of the South pole.
where being wyntered, they were enforced to remain there for the space of two
months, all which time they saw no man, except that one day by chance they
espied a man of the stature of a Giant, Giantes.
who came to the haven daunsing and singyng, and shortly after seemed to cast
dust over his head. The Captain sent one of his men to the shore with the
ship Boat, who made the like sign of peace. The which thing the Giant
seeing, was out of fear, and came with the Captains servant to his presence
into a little Island. When he saw the Captain with certain of his company
about him, he was greatly amassed, and made signs, holdyng up his hand to
heaven, signifying thereby that our men came from thence. The bygnesse of the
Giantes.
This Giant was so byg, that the head of one of our men of a mean stature,
came but to his waste. He was of good corporature, and well made in all parts
of his body, with a large visage painted with diverse colors, but for the most
part yelow Upon his cheeks were painted two Hearts, and red circles about
his eyes. The hear of his head was colored white, and his apparel was the
skin of a beast sowde together. This beast as (seemed unto us) had a large
head, and great ears like unto a Mule, with the body of a Camel, and tail of
a horse. The feet of the Giant were foulded in the said skin, after the
manner of shoes. He had in his hand a bygge and short bow, the stryng
whereof was made of a sinewe of that beast. He had also a bundell of long
arrows made of Reeds, feathered after the manner of ours, typte with sharp
stones in the stead of Iron heads. The Captain caused him to eat and
drink, and gave him many things, and among other a great lookyng glass: In
the which as soon as he saw his own likeness, was suddenly afraid, and
started back with such violence, that he ouerthrewe two that stood nearest
about him. When the Captain had thus given him certain Hawks belles, and
other great belles, with also a lookyng glass, a comb, and a pair of beads
of glass, he sent him to land with four of his own men well armed. Shortly
after, they saw an other Giant of somewhat greater stature, An other Giant.
with his bow and arrows in his hand. As he drew near unto our men, he
laid his hand on his head, and poynted up toward heaven, and our men did the
like. The Captain sent his ship Boat to bring him to a little Island being
in the Haven. This Giant was very tractable and pleasant. He soong and
daunsed, and in his daunsing left the print of his feet on the ground. He
remained long with our men, who named him Johan. He could well speak and
plainly pronounce these words, Jesus, Aue Maria, Johannes, even as we do,
but with a bygger voice. The Captain gave him a shert of linen cloth, and a
coat of white woollen cloth: also a cappe, a comb, a looking glass, with
diverse such other things, and so sent him to his company. The day following, he
resorted again to the ships, and brought with him one of those great
beasts, which he gave the Captain. But after that day, they never saw him
more, supposing him to be slain of his own company, for the conversation he
had with our men.

After other.xv. days were past, there came four other Giantes without any
weapons, Four other Giantes.
but had hyd their bows and arrows in certain bushes. The Captain retained
two of these, which were youngest and best made. He took them by a deceit,
in this manner, Two Giantes are taken by a policy.
that giving them knyues, sheares, looking glasses, belles, beads of Crystal,
and such other trifles, he so filled their hands that they could hold no
more: then caused two pair of shackels of Iron to be put on their legs,
making signs that he would also give them those chains: which they lyked very
well, because they were made of bright and shining metal And whereas they could
not carry them because their hands were full, the other Giantes would have
carried them: but the captain would not suffer them. When they felt the
shackels fast about their legs, they began to doubt: but the Captain did
put them in comfort, and bad them stand still. In fine, when they saw how
they were deceived, they roared like bulls, and cried upon their great devil
Setebos, The devil Setebos.
to help them. Being thus taken, they were immediately separate and put in
sundry ships. They could never bind the hands of the other two, yet was one
of them with much difficulty overthrown by.ix. of our men, and his hands
bound: but he sodeinly loosed him self and fled, as did also the other that
came with them. In their fleeing, they shot of their arrows and slew one of
our men. They say that when any of them dye, there appear x. or.xii devils,
Deuyls appear to the Giantes when they dye.
leaping and daunsing about the body of the dead, and seem to have their
bodies painted with diverse colors, and that among other, there is one seen
bigger then the residue, who makes great mirth and rejoicing. This great
devil they call Setebos, and call the less Cheleule. One of these Giantes
which they took, declared by signs that he had seen deuylles with two horns
above their heads, with long hear down to their feet: and that they cast
forth fire at their throats both before and behind. The Captain named these
people Patagoni. Patagoni.
The most part of them wear the skynnes of such beasts whereof I have spoken
before: and have no houses of continuance, but make certain cotages, which
they cover with the said skynnes, and carry them from place to place. They live
of raw flesh, and a certain sweet root, which they call Capar. One of these
which they had in their ships, did eat at one meal a baskette of Bysket,
The Giantes feeding.
and droonke a bowl of water at a draught.

They remained five months in this port of Saint Julian, They conspire
against their Captain.
where certain of the under captains conspiryng the death of their General,
were hanged and quartered: among whom the Treasurer Luigo of Mendozza was one.
Certain of the other conspiratours, he left in the said land of Patogoni.

Departing from hence, to the.52. degree toward the pole Antartike, lackyng a
third part, they found a river of fresh water and good fyshe. Their ships
were here in great danger. They remained two months in this port, where
they made new provision of fresh water, fuel, and fyshe. Here the Captain
caused all his men to be confessed. Confession.
Approaching to the.52. degrees, they found the straight now called the straight
of Magellanus, The straight of Magellanus.
being in some place a hundred and ten leagues in length, and in breadth
somewhere very large, and in other places little more then half a league in
breadth. On both the sides of this straight, are great and high mountains
covered with snow, beyond the which, is the enteraunce into the sea of Sur.
The South sea.
This enteraunce the Captain named Mare Pacificum. Here one of the ships
stole away privily, and returned into Spain: Mare pacificum.
In this was one of the Giantes, who dyed as soon as he felt the heat that is
about the Equinoctial line. The Giants died for heat.
When the Captain Magalianes was paste the straight, and saw the way open to
the other main sea, he was so glad thereof, that for joy the tears fell from
his eyes, and named the point of the land from whence he first saw that sea,
Capo Desiderato. Supposing that the ship which stole away had been lost, Capo
Desiderato.
they erected a cross upon the top of a high hill, to direct their course in
the straight, if it were their chance to come that way. They found that in
this straight in the month of October, Short nights in the month of October.
the night was not past four hours long. They found in this straight at
every three miles, a safe haven, and excellent water to drink: wood also, and
fyshe, and great plenty of good herbs. They think that there is not a
fayrer straight in the world. Here also they saw certain fleeing fyshes.
Fleeing fyshes. The Giantes language.
The other Giant which remained with them in the ship, named bread Capar:
water, Oli, read cloth, Cherecai, red color, Cheiche, black color, Amel:
And spoke all his words in the throat. On a time, as one made a cross before
him, and kyssed it, showing it unto him, he sodaynely cried Setebos, and
declared by signs, that if they made any more crosses, Setebos would enter
into his body, and make him brust. But when in fine he saw no hurt come
thereof, he took the cross, and imbrased and kyssed it oftentimes, desiryng
that he might be a Christian before his death: The Giant is baptized.
He was therefore baptized, and named Paul. Departing out of this straight
into the sea called Mare Pac ficum, the.xxviii. day of November, in the
year.1520. they sailed three months and twenty days before they saw any
land, Three months saylyng without the sight of land.

Extreme famyne.


and having in this time consumed all their Bysket and other victualles, they
fell into such necessity, that they were enforced to eat the powder that
remained thereof, being now full of woormes, and stynkyng like pysse by reason
of the salt water. Their fresh water was also putrified and become yelowe.
They did eat skynnes and pieces of leather, which were foulded about certain
great ropes of the ships: but these skynnes being made very hard by reason
of the Sun, rain, and wind, they hung them by a cord in the sea, for the
space of four or five days, to mollify them, and sodde them, and ate them.
By reason of this famyne and unclean feedyng, Diseases of famyne.
some of their gummes grew so over their teethe, that they dyed miserably for
hunger. And by this occasion dyed menetiene men, and also the Giaunt, with an
Indian of the land of Brasile, otherwise called Terra de papagalli, that is,
the land of Popingayes. Beside these that dyed.xxv or.xxx. were so sick, that
they were not able to do any service with their hands or arms for
feebleness: So that there was in manner none without some disease. In these
three months and xx. days, they sailed four thousand leagues in one gulf,
by the said sea called Pacificum, (that is) peaceable, which may well be so
called, forasmuch as in all this time, having no sight of any land, they had
no misfortune of wind or any other tempest. During this time also, they
discovered only two little Islands uninhabited, where they saw nothing but
birds and trees, and therefore named them unfortunate Islands, Unfortunate
Islands.
being one from the other about two hundred leagues distant. The first of these
Islands is from the Equinoctial toward the pole Antartike xv. degrees, and
the other five. Their sailing was in such sort, that they sailed daily
between l.lx. to.lxx. leagues. So that in fine, What they sailed daily.
if God of his mercy had not given them good weather, it was necessary that in
this so great a sea, they should all have dyed for hunger. Which nevertheless
they escaped so hardly, that it may be doubted whether ever the like viage may
be attempted with so good success. They considered in this Navigations that the
pole Antartike, has no notable star, after the sort of the pole Artike. But
they saw many stars geathered together, The stars about the South pole.
which are like two clouds, one separate a little from an other, and somewhat
dark in the myddest. Between these, are two stars, not very byg, nor much
shynyng, which move a little: and these two are the pole Antartike. The needle
of the compase.
The needell of their compass varied somewhat, and turned ever toward the pole
Artike, nevertheless, had no such force, as when it is in these parts of the
pole Artike: Insomuch that it was necessary to help the needle with the lode
stone (commonly called the Adamant) before they could sail therewith, because
it moved not, The lode stone.
as it does when it is in these our parts. When they were in the myddest of
the gulf, they saw a cross of five clear stars, directly toward the
Weste, and of equal distance the one from the other.

The order of the stars about the pole Antartike, some have figured in this
manner.
A. The pole Antartike. B. The Cross.


In these days they sailed between the West and South, so far that they
approached to the Equinoctial line, The Equinoctial line.
and were in longitude from the place from whence they first departed, a
hundred and twenty degrees. In this course they sailed by two Islands of
exceedyng heyght, whereof the one named Cipanghu, is twenty degrees from the
pole Antartike: The Islands of Cipanghu and Sumbdit.
and the other named Sumbdit, fyftiene degrees. When they were paste the
Equinoctial line, they sailed between the West and Southwest, at the quarter
of the West, toward the Southwest more then a C. leagues, changing their
sails to the quarter of the southwest, until they came to the thirtiene
degrees above the Equinoctial toward the pole Artyke, intending as much as
were possible, to approach to the Cape called of the old writers Cattigara: the
which is not found as the old Cosmographers have discribed it, but is
toward the north about.xii. degrees, as they afterward understood.

When they had thus sailed.lxx. leagues of this voyage in the xii. degree above
the Equinoctial, and.C.xlvi. degrees of longitude (as I have said) the syxt
day of March they discovered a little Island toward the northwest, and two
other toward the southwest: but the one was higher and bygger then the other.
In the byggest of these, the general captain would have rested him self a
while, but he could not, by reason the people of these Islands resorted
continually to the ships with their Canoas, and stole now one thing and now
an other, in such sort that our men could take no rest: and therefore
demanded of the captain that they might stryke their sails to bring the
ships to land. But the captain being provoked to anger, went aland with
forty armed men, and burnt about fyftie of their houses, with many of their
Canoas, and slew also about seven men, and recovered a ship boat which the
Barbarians had stolen, and so departed, following his voyage. The Captain named
these Islands Insulae Latronum, that is, the Islands of thieves. Insulae
Latronum.
When our men had so wounded some of them with arrows, that they were stryken
through both sides, they pulled forth the arrows, not ceassyng to maruayle at
them, till they fell down dead: And yet could not the other so depart, but
still followed ye ships with more then two hundred of their boats, approaching
as nere to the ships as they could, and proferryng our men certain fishes.
As the shyps passed with full sail in the midst of their boats, they saw in
some of them certain women, lamentyng and tearyng their hear, which our men
thought they did for the death of their husbands. As far as they could
perceive, these people live at their own liberty, without any ruler or
governor. They go naked, People with long hear.
and have black beards and black hear on their heads, which they wear
long down to their wastes. They are of the same stature that we are, and well
made, of color like unto an Olive. Their women are well favored, with black
and thycke hear on their heads, reachyng to the ground. The men color their
teeth read and black, which they esteem a comely thing. They annoint their
bodies and hear with they oil of Cocus. Their boats are some all black,
some white, and some read, and have sails made of the broad leaves of Date
trees, sowed together. In the stead of a rudder, they use a certain broad
boorde, with a staff in the top, and may when they will, make the stern the
fore castle, or the forecastell the stern. They sail so swyftely, that they
seem a far of, like Delphyns, swimming above the water.

The tenth day of March, in the year.1521. they went alande upon a little
Island named Zamal.xxx. leagues dystant from the Island of thieves. The Island
of zamall.
Because this Island was not inhabited, they rested here a while, where the
captain caused a pauilion to be pitched for the sick and crased men, and a
hog to be killed.

The.xviii. day of March, they saw a boat with nine men coming toward
them, showing them selves joyful and reioysyng of their coming. They brought
many presents with them, and seemed to be people of much humanity. They gave
the Captain a great fyshe, and a great vessel of the wine of those Date trees
which bear the fruit Cocus. Wine of Date trees.
They made also signs, that within the space of four days, they would bring
Rise, and diverse fowls and beasts, as they did in deed. This Cocus is a
fruit of certain Date trees, The maruilous fruit Cocus.
whereof they make bread, wine, oil, and vinegar. They make wine in this
manner. They cut a bygge branche of the tree, and hang thereat a reed as
bygge as a man's leg, into the which droppeth a sweet licoure from the tree,
like unto white wine, somewhat tart, and let the reed continue there from
morning till euenyng, and from euenyng to morning. The fruit of this tree
called Cocus, is as bygge as the head of a man, or more. The first rynde of
this, is green, and of the thyckenesse of two fyngers, having in it certain
threedes whereof they make cords, with the which they tie their boats. Under
this rynde, there is a thycke shell, which they burn and make powder thereof,
and use it as a remedy for certain diseases. Under this shell, is a white
substance like the carnel of a Nut, being a finger in thycknesse, which they
eat with flesh and fyshe, as we do bread. It has the taste of an Almonde,
and is used in the stead of bread, when it is dried. In the myddest of this
carnell, is a clear and sweet water, being very wholesome and cordiale. This
water sometime coniealeth and lies within the shell like an egg. When they
intend to make oil hereof, the lay it to putrify in water, and boil it
until it be like oil or liquide butter. When they intend to make vinegar,
they suffer only the water to putrify, and then set it to the Sun, where it
becomes vinegar, like unto that which is made of white wine. And when they
mingle the carnell with the water which is in the myddest of the fruit, and
strain it through a cloth, they make a milk thereof, like unto Goats milk.
These Date trees are like unto them that bear Dates, but are not so full of
knottes. With the juice of two of these Date trees, a whole family of ten
persons may be mentayned with wine, vsyng one.viii. days, and the other,
other.viii. days: for they should else be dried and wythered. These trees
continue for the space of a hundred years. This Island where they found this
humane and gentle people, The Island of zuluan.
is called Zuluan, and is not very bygge. About this Island they found many
other Islands, The sea called Archipelago di san Lazaro.
and therefore named this sea Archipelago di San Lazaro, that is, the great sea
of saint Lazarus, being ten degrees above the Equinoctial toward our pole,
and C.lxi. from the place from whence they departed. The people of this Island
are Caphranita (that is Gentiles. They go naked, Gentiles.
saving that they cover their privy parts with a cloth made of the rynd of a
certain tree. The chiefest men, have about their heads a sylken cloth of
needle work. They are gross and broad set, and of the color of an Olyue.
They annoint their bodies with the oil of Cocus, to defend them against the
heat of the Sun, and dryness of the wind. The.xxv. day of March, they
departed from hence, and directed their course beteweene the West and
southwest, and sailed between four Islands, named Cenalo, Huinanghan,
Hibusson, and Abarien* etc.

The.xxviii. day of March, Four Islands.
they came to the Island of Buthuan, where they were honorably entertained of
the King and the Prince his son, The Island of Buthuan.
who gave them much gold and spices. The Captain gave the King a vesture of
red cloth, and an other of yelowe, made after the Turkyshe fasshion, and also a red cappe: and gave likewise to other that came with him certain knyues,
glasses, and beads of Crystal. After that the Captain had showed the King
the secrets of his ship, and such merchaundies as he had therein, he caused a
piece of ordinance suddenly to be shot of, whereat the king was greatly
amassed, until the Captain comforted him. Then the Captain commanded one of
his men to be armed from the head to the foot, and caused three other to
stryke him with their swoordes, whereat the king marueyled greatly, and said
to thinterpretour (who was a slave borne in Malacha) that one of those armed
men was able to encounter with a hundred of his men. But he marueyled much
more, when the Captain told him by thinterpretoure, how he found the
straight by the compass and lode stone, and how many days they were without
sight of any land. Then askyng license to depart, the Captain sent two of his
men with him, of yt which Antonie Pigafetta was one. When the king saw Antonie
Pigafetta write the names of many things, and afterward rehearsed them
again, he marueyled yet more, making signs that such men descended from
heaven. The king brought them first to his palace, where he interteyned them
honorably, and gave them many gifts, as did also the Prince in his palace,
being in an other Island named Caleghan. The Island of Caleghan.


As they syfted a certain mine of earth in the kings Island, they found
pieces of gold, some as bygge as Nuttes, and other as bygge as Eggs. All the
kings vessels were of gold, and his house well furnyshed. In all the whole
nation there was no man of comelyer personage then the king: Plenty of gold.
he had his hear long down to his shulders, and very black, with a veil of
sylke rouled about his head, The king of Buthuan.
and two great rings of gold hangyng at his ears. He had about his myddle, a
cloth wrought of cotton and sylke, impaled with gold, and reachyng down to
his knees. On his one syd, he had a long daggar with a hafte of gold, and the
sheathe of a fair kind of carved woodde. He had on every finger three rings
of gold, and had his body anointed with oil of storax and Benjamin. The
natural color of his face was like unto the color of an Olive: and all his
body beside painted with diverse colors. The kings name was Raia Colambu, and
the prince was called Raia Siagu.

The last day of March, near unto Easter, the Captain caused his priest to
say Mass, and sent to the king by the interpretour, that his coming a land at
that time was not to dyne with him, but only to hear Mass. The Captain came
aland, with fyftie of his men, in their best apparel, without weapons or
harness, and all the residue well armed. Before the boats came to land, he
caused six pieces of ordinance to be shot of, in token of peace, and so came
alande, where the two kings imbrased him, and accompanied him to the place
appointed for Mass to be said, not far from the sea side. Somewhat before
the beginning of Mass, the Captain sprynkled the kings with Damask water.
When the priest was at myd Mass, at the offertorie, the kings proffered them
selves to go to kiss the cross with the Captain, but offered nothing. At the
time of sacryng, when the priest lyfted up the body of Christ, and the
Christians kneeled down and held up their hands joined together, the kings
did the like also, with great reverence. In the mean time, while certain of
the Christians were at the Communion, a handgunne was shot of, to signify unto
them that were in the ships to discharge al their ordinance. When Mass was
finished, A combatte.
the Captain caused certain of his men to put on their harness, and to make
a cumbat with their naked swoordes, whereat the kings took great pleasure.
This done, the Captain caused a cross to be brought forth, with nails, and
a crown of thorns, geuyng commandment to all his men to give reverence
thereunto, and signifying to the kings, by the interpreter, that that banner
was given him by the Emperor his lord and master, with commandment to
leave the same in all places where he came, to the great commodity and profit
of al such as would reuerendly receive it, as an assured token of friendship,
and that he would therefore leave it there, as well to accomplish his lords
commandment, as also that if at any time any ships of Christians should
chance to come that way, might by seeing that cross, perceive that our men had
been well enterteyned there, and would therefore not only abstain from doing
them any hurt or displeasure, but also help to aid them against their
enemies: and that therefore it should be requisite to erect that cross upon
the top of the highest mountain that might be seen from the sea on every
side, also to pray unto it reverently: and that in so doing, they should not be
hurt with thunder, lyghtnyng, and tempests. When the kings heard these
words, they gave the captain great thanks, promisyng gladly to observe and
fulfill al such things as he required. Then the Captain demanded, whether
they were Moors or Gentiles: They answered, Moors and Gentiles.
that they had none other kind of religion, but that lyftyng up their hands
joined together, and their faces toward heaven, they called upon their God
Abba. Which answer lyked the Captain very well, because the Gentiles are
sooned persuaded to our faith then the Moors.

Departing from hence, they came to the Islands of Zeilon, Zubut, Mani Islands.
Messana, and Calaghan, by the conduct of certain Pilots of the said kings.
Of these, Zubut is the best, and has the trade of best trafique. The Island of
Messana.
In the Island of Messana they found Dogs, Cattes, Hogs, Hens, Goats,
Rise, Gynger, Cocus, Myll, Panicke, Barley, Fygges, Oranges, Wax, and Gold, in
great quantity. This Island is above the Equinoctial toward our pole niene
degrees, and two third parts, and 162. degrees from the place from whence
they departed. They remained in this Island for the space of eight days, and
then directed their viage toward the Northwest, and passed between these five
Islands, Zeilon, Bohol, Canghu, Barbai, and Catighan. In this Island of Catighan
are certain great Battes, as bygge as Eagles, Battes as byg as Eagles.
of the which they took one: they are good to be eaten, and of taste much
like a Hen. There are also Stock Doves, Turtle Doves, Popingays, and
certain fowls as big as Hens: Fowls with horns.
these fowls have little horns, and lay great eggs, which they cover a cubit
deapth in the sand, by the heat whereof, and virtue of the Son, they are
hatched, and the young birds crepe out of the sand by themselves. Eggs
hatched in sand.
From the Island of Messana to Catinghan, are 20. leagues saylyng toward the
West. And because the king of Messana could not follow the ships, they
tarried for him about the Islands of Polo, Ticobon, and Fozon, where the
Captain took him into his ship, with certain of his principal men, The
Island of zubut.
and so followed their viage toward the Island of Zubut, which is about fyftie
leagues distant from Catighan.

The seventh day of Apryll, about noone, they entered into the port of Zubut:
And passing by many villages and habitations in trees, they came to the city,
where the Captain gave commandment to the maryners to stryke their sails,
and to set them selves in order in manner of battle raye, causyng all the
ordinance to be shot of, wherewith all the people were put in great fear.
After this, the Captain sent an ambassador with thinterpretoure to the king
of Zubut.

When they approached near to the city, they found the king with a great
company of men sore astonyed at the noise of the gunnes. But thinterpretour
advertised them, that it was the custom of our men, in all such places where
they come, to discharge their ordinance in token of frendshyppe, and to honor
the lord of the city. With which words the king and his company were well
quieted. After this, the interpretour declared that his master was the Captain
of the ships of the greatest Prince in the world, and that they went to
discover the Islands of Molucca: And further, that hearing of his good name and
fame by the report of the king of Messana, they determined to visit him, and
to have vittailes for exchange of their merchaundies. The king answered, that
he was well content therewith, and that they were hartyly welcome:
Nevertheless, that it was a custom in that place, that al such shyps as
entered into that haven, should pay tribute: And that there were not many days
past, sense a ship laden with gold and slaves did so pay. In token whereof,
he caused to come before him certain merchauntes of that company which yet
remained with him. A ship laden with gold and slaves.
To this thinterpretour answered, that forasmuch as his lord was the
Captain of so myghtie a Prince, he never paid tribute to any king in the
world, and would not now begin: Wyllyng him to take this for a resolute
answer, that if he would accept the peace that was proffered him, he should
enjoy it, and if he rather desired war, he should have his hands full. When
thinterpretour had said these words, one of the said merchauntes (who was a
Moore) spoke to the king in this manner Catacaia Chitae: that is, Take heed
sir: Calecut. Malacha.
For these men are they that have conquered Calecut, Malacha, and all the
greater India, and are of such power, that if you entreat them otherwise then
well, you may to late know what they are able to do, more then they have done
at Calecut and Malaca. When thinterpretoure heard these words, he said,
that the king his Lord was of much greater puissaunce and more dominions, and
lord of more ships then was the king of Portugale: declaryng further that he
was king of Spain, and Emperor of all Christendom. Addyng hereunto, that if
he would not be his friend, he would hereafter send thither such a power of
armed men as should destroy his country. The Moore conferred al these words
with the king, who said that he would further deliberate with his counsel,
and give them a full aunsweare the day following. In the mean time he sent
them certain vyttayles and wine. When all these things were declared to the
king of Messana, who was the chiefest thereabout next unto him, and lord of
many Islands, he went a land and repaired to the king of Zubut, and declared
unto him the great humanity and courtesy of the general Captain. Shortly
after, the Captain sent certain of his men with thinterpretour to the king
of Zubut, to know his pleasure, and what aunsweare he would make them. As
they went toward the court, they met the king coming in the streate,
accompanied with many of his chief men. He caused our men to sit down by him,
and demanded of them if there were any more then one Captain in their
company: and whether it were their request that he should pay tribute to
The Emperor. They aunsweared, that they desired none other thing, but that they
might exercise merchaundies with them, and to barter ware for ware. The king
made aunsweare, that he was well content therewith: Sheaddyng of blood is a
token of frendshyp.
wyllyng the Captain, in token of frendshyp, to send him a little blood of his
right arm, affyrmyng that he would do the like etc.

After this, the king of Messana, with the king of Zubut his neuie (who was the
prince) and certain other of his gentelmen, The king of zubut is baptized.
came to the ships, and brought the Captain many goodly presents. They
entered into great amity, and had large communication of many things. The
Captain persuaded them to the Christian faith: which they gladly embrased,
and took such pleasure in hearing the articles of our belief, that the tears
fell from their eyes for joy. They were baptized, and shortly after all the
people of the Island. They esteem nothing more precious then drynkyng glasses
of Uenice work. When they came to the city, they found the king in his
Palace sitting upon a floor or story made of the leaves of Date trees,
wrought after a curious devise, like a certain kind of mattes. He had upon
his body none other apparel but only a cloth of Bombasine cotton, hangyng
before his privy parts. The king of Zabut his apparel.
On his head, he had a veil of needle work, and about his neck a chain of
great price. At his ears, hung two Rings of gold, wherein were enclosed many
precious stones. He was but of small stature, but somewhat gross, and had the
residue of his body painted with diverse colors, whereof some were like unto
flaming fire. Before him, he had two vessels made of the fine earth called
Porcellana, with sodden eggs. Also four vessels of Porcellana full of wine
made of Date trees, and covered with many odoriferous herbs. The Prince
brought them to his house, where he had four daughters, Well favored women.
very well favored and white, like ours. He caused them to dance all naked,
and therewith to sing, and play on certain Tymbrelles made of metal. At this
time it so chanced, that one of the Spanyardes dyed in one of the ships, and
when certain of their company desired the king to give them leave to bury him
on the land: he answered, that forasmuch as he and all his, were at the
commandment of their king and master, how much more ought the ground so
to be? They greatly marueyled at the ceremonies parteynyng to the manner of our
funeralles, and honored the crosses which were set at both the ends the
grave. They live with justice, and use weightes and measures. Their houses are
made of Timber and sawne boordes, and are so builded above the ground upon
proppes and pyles, that they ascend to the same by certain stayers. Under
their houses, they keep their Hogs and Hens.

When they came to barteryng, they gave gold, Rise, Barteryng.
Hogs, Hens, and diverse other things for some of our tryfles of small
value. They gave ten Pesos of gold for sixtiene pounds weight of Iron. One
Pesus is in value a ducate and a half. The Sunday following, Pesus what it is.
the king was baptized with great solemnity: at which time, the Captain
admonyshed him before, not to be afraid at the shootyng of of the ordinance,
because it was their custom so to do at such solemn feasts. After this,
They break their Idolles and erecte the Cross.
the Captain caused them to break all their Idols, and to set up the cross
in diverse places, praying to the same both morning and euenyng kneelyng on
their knees, and holdyng up their hands joined together. The king in his
baptism was named Charles, after the Emperors name, and the Prince,
Ferdinando, after the name of his majesty's brother. The king of Messana was
named John, and the Moore Christopher. To all other they gave such names as
are commonly used in Christendom. Five hundred men baptized.
And thus before mass was begun, were five hundred men baptized. When mass
was finyshed, the Captain invited the King to dyne with him in his ship, and
at his coming, caused the ordinance to be discharged. The Queen was also
baptized, The Queen of Zabut.
with forty of her gentlewomen, and her daughter the princes wife. The Queen
was very young and fair, having her body covered with a white cloth. Her
lyppes were read, and she had on her head a Hatte, on the top whereof was a
triple crown, much like the Popes: this crown and the Hat, were made of the
leaves of Date trees. Within the space of eight days, the inhabitants of the
Island were baptized, except one village of Idolatours, who would not herein
obey the kings commandment. Whereupon the Captain sent certain of his men
thither, who burnt the town, and erected a cross in that place, because the
people of the vyllage were Gentyles (that is) Idolaters. But if they had been
Moors (that is, Machumetistes) they would have erected a pyller of stone,
because the Moors are more stubberne and harder to be converted then are the
gentiles. When the Queen came to the place where she should hear mass, she
came forth with great pomp and solemnity, The Queens apparel.
having going before her three young damsels, and three men with their Cappes
in their hands, whom she followed apparelled in white and black, with a great
veil of silk upon her head, fringed about with gold, which covered her
hatte, and hung down to her shoulders: She had also a great train of women
following her, being all barefooted and naked, except that upon their heads
and privy parts they wore certain vayles of silk, and had their hear
spredde.

Before the king of Zubut was baptized, he was named Raia Humabuon. When the
Captain demanded of him why all the Idolles in the Island were not burnt
according to his promise, he answered, that they esteemed them no more as
gods, but only made sacrifice to them for the Princes brother, who was very
sick, and as noble and witty a man as was in the Island. The Captain
answered, that if he would burn all his Idols, and believe faithfully in
Christ, and be baptized, he should be immediately restored to health, and that
he would else give them leave to stryke of his head. By these words and
persuasions of the Captain, he conceived such hope of health, that after he
was baptized he felt no mare grief of his disease. And this was a manifest
miracle wrought in our time, A miracle.
whereby diverse Infidelles were converted to our faith, and their Idolles
destroyed, and also their Altars overthrown on the which they were accustomed
to eat the sacrificed flesh. The people of the Island pay the king a portion
of victualles for their tribute by all their cities and vyllages.

Not far from this Island of Zubut, is the Island of Mathan, The Island of
Mathan.
whose inhabitants use marvelous ceremonies in their sacrifices to the son,
and burying the dead. They wear ringes of gold about their privy members.
The Island is governed by two Princes, whereof the one is named Zula, and the
other Cilapulapu. And whereas this Cilapulapu refused to pay tribute to the
king of Spain, the Captain went against him in his own person with.60. of
his men, armed with coats of mayle and Helmets. Cilapulapu divided his army
into three battayles, having in every battle two thousand and fyftie men,
with armed bows, arrows, darts, and Iauelins hardened at the points with
fire. This continued long and sharp. But the Captain being a valiant man,
The Captain Magellanus is slain.
and preasing him self in the brunte of the battle, was sore wounded and
slain, forasmuch as the most of the Barbarians directed all their force
against him. Beside the Captain, were slain of our men about.viii. or.ix. Of
the Barbarians, were.xv. slain, and many sore wounded. After the death of the
Captain, they chose two other in his place, of the which one was Odoardo
Barbessa a Portugale, and the other John Serrano* who was shortly after
betrayde by the interpretour, and taken prisoner with diverse other.

Certain days before the captains death, they had knowledge of the Islands
of Molucca, which they chiefly sought. Departing therefore from the Island of
Mathan, they sailed far, and came to the Cape of an other Island named Bohol.
The Island of Bohol.

They burnt one of their ships.


In the myddest of this main sea (which they named Archipelagus) they
consulted to burn the ship named Conception, because they were now few in
number, and to furnyshe the other two ships with the artillery thereof. Thus
directyng their course toward Southwest, they came to an other Island named
Pauiloghon, Black men.
where they found black men, like unto the Sarasins. Shortly after, they
arrived at an other great Island, whose king, named Raia Calauar, entreated
them very friendly in all things, as did the king of Massana. This Island is
rich in gold, The Island of Chippit.
and has plenty of Rysse, Gynger, Hogs, Goats, Hens, and diverse other
things: It is named Chippit, and is viii. degrees above the Equinoctial line
toward our pole, and in longitude from the place from whence they first
departed.170. degrees, and about.50. leagues from Zubut.

The Island of Caghaian.
Departing from hence, they came to an other Island, named Caghaian, being.40.
leagues from Chippit, as they sailed between the Weste and Southwest. This
Island is very great, and in manner uninhabited. The people are Moors, and were
banished out of the Island of Burnei, which some call Porne.

From this Island about.xxv. leagues between the Weste and Northweste, they
found a marvelous fruitful Island named Pulaoan, The Island of Pulaoan.
being toward our pole above the Equinoctial niene degrees and a third
part, and.C.lxxix. degrees and a third part in longitude from the place of
their departing.

From this Island.x. leagues toward the Southwest, they saw an other Island,
The Island of Burnei or Porne.
which seemed to them sometimes to mount as they sailed by the coasts
thereof. As they were entering into the port, there arose a boystuous and dark
tempest, which ceased as soon as the fyres of the three saints (whereof we
have spoken before) appeared upon the cables. From the beginning of this Island
to the port, are five leagues. This Island is great and rich, A great city.
and the chief city thereof conteyneth.xxv. thousand houses. The King
enterteyned our men very friendly, and sent them, beside many other presents,
two Elephantes, trapped with silk, Elephantes.
to bring them to his Palace that brought the presents which the Captains
sent him. He has a magnificall Court, and a great guard, also a multitude of
concubynes. He is a Moore, and is named Raia Siripada. He is a king of great
power, and has under him many other kings, Islands, and cities. This Island of
Burnei, is above the Equinoctial toward our pole, five degrees and a quarter,
and in longitude from the place of their departing.C.lxxvi. degrees, and two
third parts.

Departing from Burnei, they came to an Island called Cimbulon, being.viii.
degrees above the Equinoctial line. The Island of Cimbulon.
Here they remained.xl. days, to calke their ships, and furnysh them with
fresh water and fuel, which was to them great pain and travail, because
they were in manner all bare footed, their shoes (and in manner their other
apparel) being worn, by reason of the long vyage. In the woods of this Island,
they found a tree, Leaves of trees which seem to live.
whose leaves as soon as they fall on the ground, do stir and remove from
place to place, as though they were alive: they are much like the leaves of a
Mulbery tree, and have on every side as it were two short and blunt feet. When
they are cut or broken, there is no blood seen come forth of them: Yet when
any of them are touched, they suddenly move and starte away. Antoni Pigafetta
kept one of them in a platter for the space of.viii. days, and ever when he
touched it, it ran round about the platter. He supposes that they live only
by air.

Departing from hence, they directed their course by the West quarter toward
the Southeast, to find the Islands of Molucca, and sailed not far from
certain mountains, where they found the sea full of great weeds and
herbs. A sea full of weeds.


From hence, they came to the Islands of Zolo and Taghima, in the which are
found pearls of exceedyng bygnesse. Pearls.


Following their course toward the Northeast, they came to a great city named
Mangdando, lying above the Islands of Butbuan and Calaghan, where they took a
Canoa of certain of the inhabitants: by whom being infourmed of the Islands
of Molucca, they left their course toward the Northeast, and followed the
Southeast, near unto a Cape of the Island of Buthuan: they were advertised for
certentie, that on the banks of a certain river, there dwelt men ouergrowen
with hear, Men ouergrowen with hear.
and of high stature.

Following still their course by the Southeast, and passing by many small
Islands, The Islands of Molucca.
they came to the Islands of Molucca, the sixte day of November, and the.xxvii.
month after their departure out of Spain. Being therefore joyful, and gyuyng
thanks unto God, they discharged all their ordinance. In the coaste of all
these Islands, even unto the Islands of Molucca, soundyng with their plummet,
they found the deapth of the sea to be no less then a hundred and two yardes,
which is contrary to the saying of the Portugales, The Portugales are reproved.
who affirm that no ship can pass that way without great danger, by reason
of the shalownesse and rocks or shelues, and for the darkness which the
clouds cause in the heaven. All which things they feigned, to the intent that
none other should have knowledge of their viages.

The eight day of November, in the year 1521. before the rising of the Sun,
they entered into the port of the Island of Tidore, Tidore one of the Islands
of Molucca.
being one of the chief Islands of Molucca, where they were honorably
interteyned of the king, who declared that he had long before seen a sign in
heaven, that certain ships should come from a far country to the Islands
of Molucca: And that whereas for the better certificate thereof, A vision in
the Planettes.
he considered the stations of the Moon, he saw therein the coming of our
ships, and that we were the men whom he seemed to see in the same. Whereupon
he proffered him self to enter into league of friendshyp with the king of
Spain, and to accept our men as his brethren and children, wyllyng them to
come alande as into their own houses: Also, that for their coming, that
Island should no more be called Tidore, but Castile, for the great love
which he bore to their King, whom he reputed as his Lord and master. This
King is a Moore, and is named Raia Sultan, Mauzor.

The Islands of Molucca, are five in number, and are thus named, The five
Islands of Molucca.
Tarenate, Tidore, Mutir, Macchian, and Bacchian. Of these, Tarenate is the
cheifest.

Tarenate.
Directly against the Island of Tidore, there is an other great Island, The
Island of Gilolo.
named Gilolo, inhabited of Moors and Gentiles. The Moors have two Kings,
Moors and Gentyles.
of the which one has six hundred children, and the other six hundred and
fyftie. The Gentyles keep not so many women as do the Moors, nor yet live in
such superstitions. They pray to the first thing that they meet in the
morning when they go forth of their houses, and honor that as their God for
that day. The King of the Gentyles is very rich in gold. In the said Island
of Gilolo, Gold. Water in Reeds.
are Reeds as byg as a man's leg, and full of clear water wholesome to be
drunk.

The.xii. day of November, the king of Tidore appointed our men a warehouse in
the city, where they might sell their merchaundies. Their manner of exchange
was in this sort. Their manner of barteryng.
For ten yardes of good read cloth, they had one Babar of Cloves, which
amounts to four Cantari and six pound weight: And one Cantar is a hundred
pound weight. For.xv. yardes of cloth somewhat worse then the other, they
received in Cambie, one Bahar. For.xxxv. drynkyng cups of glass, they had
one Bahar. For.xvii. Cathyls of quick silver, one Bahar. They came daily to
the ships with many of their Barks full of Goats, Hens, fygges of a
spanne long, also the fruit called Cocus, with diverse other kinds of
victualles, in such quantity that it was a marvelous thing to behold. Water
of a strange quality.
They furnyshed also their ships with fresh water, which is hot as it
issues out of the spryng, but is very cold when it has stood a while in an
other place. It spryngeth from the mountains on the which the cloue trees
grow. They saw a cloud rise in manner daily, which compasses about the
said mountains.

The king of the Island of Bacchian, Birds of a strange form.
sent the king of Spain two dead birds of strange form. They were of the
bygnesse of Turtle Dooues, with little heads and long bylles: also long and
small legs, and no wings, but in the steed thereof certain long feathers
of diverse colors, and tails like Turtle Dooues: all the other feathers are of
one color, much like unto tawny, except those of the wings: they flee not
but when the wind blows. These Moors are of opinion that these birds come
from the heavenly Paradyse, and therefore call them Manuccodiata, that is, the
birds of God.

When they were determined to depart from the Islands of Molucca, certain
kings of the Islands accompanied them with their Canoas, and conducted them to
an Island called Mare, where they refreshed their ships with fresh water and
fuel. The kings sent the Emperors majesty many presents: and embrasing our
men, departed with the tears in their eyes, and our men for their last
farewell, shot of all their ordinance. When in the Island of Mare, they
perceived that one of their ships leaked and took water very sore, They
leave one of their ships behind them.
whereby they were enforced to tarry there three days: But seeing that they
could find no remedy for the same, but in long time, they determined to
leave it, gyuyng order that if afterward it could be repaired, they should
return into Spain as well as they could.

The Islands of Molucca.
In all the Islands of Molucca is found Cloves, Ginger, bread of the root of
Sagu, Rise, Goats, sheep, Hens, Figs, Almondes, sweet Pomegranates and
sour, Oranges, Lemondes, Honey of flies.
and honey, which is made of certain flies less then Antes: Also canes of
sugar, oil of Cocus, Mellons, Gourdes, and a marvelous cold fruit which
they name Camulicai, and diverse other fruits. Popingayes.
Furthermore, white and red Popingayes, and other of variable colors. It is
not paste fifty years since the Moors first inhabited any of these Islands,
which were before inhabited only with Gentiles.

The Island of Tidore.
The Island of Tidore, is above the Equinoctial line toward our pole about.27.
minutes, and in longitude from the place from whence they departed.171.
degrees, and from the Archipelagus, in the which is the Island of Zamal, which
our men named the Island of thieves.ix. degrees and a half, and runs to the
quarter of South Southwest, and North Northeast. Terenate, Terenate.
is under the Equinoctial line four minutes, under the pole Antartike. Mutir.
Mutir, is directly under the Equinoctial line. Macchian is.xv. minutes
toward the pole Antartike, and Bacchian one degree. Macchian.
These Islands are like iiii. sharp mountains, except Macchian, Bacchian.
which is not sharp. The biggest of all these, is Bacchian. Departing from the
Island of Mare, and directyng their course toward the Southwest, with
only.xlvi. men in their ship, and.xiii. Indians, they passed by the Islands
of Chacouan, Many Islands
Lagoma, Sico, Gioghi, Caphi, Sulacho, Lumatola, Ten^tum, Bu^u, Ambon, Budia,
Celaruri, Benaia, Ambalao, Bandon, Zorobua, Zolot, Noceuamor, Galian, and
Mallua, with diverse other Islands both great and small, of Moors, Gentiles, and
Canibales. The Island of Mallua.
Our men remained.xv. days in the Island of Mallua, to repair their ship in
certain places where it took water. All the feeldes of this Island is full of
long and round Pepper, and is situate toward the pole Antartike under the
Equinoctial line.viii. degrees and a half, Pepper.
and is in the longitude of.169. degrees and.40. minutes.

The Pilot, which our men brought out of the Islands of Molucca, Little men
with long ears.
told them that not far from thence was an Island named Arucetto, in the
which are men and women not past a cubite in heyght, having ears of such
byggenesse, that they lie upon one, and cover them with the other. But our men
would not sail thither, both because the wind and course of the sea was
against them, and also for that they gave no credit to his report. The.xxv.
day of January in the year.1522. they departed from Mallua, and the day
following, The Island of Timor.
arrived at a great Island named Timor, being five leagues distant from Mallua
between the south and southwest. In this Island is found the wood of white
Saunders and Gynger, White Saunders and Gynger.
and diverse kinds of fruits. Also sundry kinds of beasts, and plenty of
vittaile and gold. They of the Islands of Giaua, Molucca, and Lozon, resort
to this Island for Saunders. The inhabitants are gentyles. The dyuell appears.
They say that when they go to cut the wood of Saunders, the devil appears
to them in diverse fourmes, and asks them what they have need of: And that
after this vision, many of them are long sick. In all ye Islands of this
Archipelagus, Saint Job his disease.
rayneth the disease of saint Job (which we call the french pox) more then
in any other place in the world.

Far from this Island between the west and northwest, they came to an Island
named Eude, in the which grows great plenty of Sinamome. Cinamome, The
Islands of Giana.
In this tracte are found many Islands, lying in order as it were one directly
behind an other even unto the Island of the greater Giaua, named Giaua mayor,
Malaccha.
and unto the cape of Malacha, being in East India. Giaua the less, is as
bygge as the Island of Madera, and is but half a league distant from Giaua
mayor. Here they were informed that above Giaua mayor toward the north, is a
great gulf called the gulf of China, in the which are trees of exceedyng
byggnesse, inhabited with fowls of such greatness, The great gulf of China.
that they carry great beasts in the air. The fruits of these trees are as
byg as Cucummers. The cape of Malacha, is one degree and a half above the
Equinoctial line toward the pole Artike. The cape of Malacha.
On the east side of this cape, runs a very long coast, in the which are
many regions and cities, whereof some are called by these names, Cingaporla,
which is the cape. The names of many regions.
Also Pahan, Calantan, Patani, Braalin, Benu, Longon, and Odia, wherein is the
city in the which dwells the king of Sian named Zacabedera. Their cities
are builded as ours are, and subject to the king of Sian. After the realm of
Sian, are the regions of Iamgoma, Rubarbe.
and Campaa, where Reubarbe grows, of the which are diverse opinions, some
supposyng it to be a root, and other a putrified tree, affyrming that if it
were not putrified, it should not have so great a savor. They call it Calama.
Next unto this, is found the great China, whose king is thought to be the
greatest prince in the world, The great king of China.
and is named Santoa Raia. Furthermore, all that is written hereafter of this
king and these regions, they learned by thinformation of a Moore that was in
the Island of Timor. He affirmed that the said king has threescore and ten
crowned kings under his empire, and has a port in the sea named Canthan, and
two principal cities named Nauchin and Connulaha, where he remains him
self, and has ever four of his chief princes lying about his palace on
every side, toward the east, west, north, and south, geuyng dilygent
attendaunce what is done in every of their quarters. The greater India.
All the princes of the greater India (called India Mayor) and of that whereof
I have spoken before, are obedient to this king. And in token that they are
true subjects, they keep in their palaces, which are in the myddest of their
cities, The beast called Linx.
the beast called Linx, being fayrer then a Lion, and is the great kings
signet, which all such as intend to go to China, bear with them sealed in
wax, or on a piece of Iuerye, for their safe conducte, without the which they
may not enter into the haven.

When any of his kings rebel or are disobedient, he causes them to be
flayen, and salted, and dried at the Sun, then to be stuffed with chafe, The
punishment of rebels.
and set up on some high thing in the myddest of the chief streate of the
city, where all the people may see it. He never suffers his own person to be
openly seen to any man: But when his noble men of the court are desirous to
see him, The king is not seen but at a glass.
he comes down from his palace into a rich pauilion, accompanied with six
of his principal concubines, apparelled with like vestures as he him self is.
All this way he is not seen, by reason of the pauilion. When he has passed
through the pauylyon, he enters into a Serpent, named Nagha, being the most
marvelous and rich work of the world, A thing of strange workemanshyp.
and placed in the greatest court of the palace. When the king enters into
this with the women, to the intent that he may not be known among them, he
causes the said noble men only to look in at a glass which is in the
breast of the Serpent, where they see the king among the women, but can not
discern which is he. He joins in marriage with his sister, that the blood
royal be not myxte with any other. The king marieth his sister. His palace.
His palace is environed with seven large walls, the one being far distant
from the other, and has in every such circuit ten thousand men for the
garryson of his palace, A marvelous guard.
who have their waytyng days appointed them course by eourse, with fresshe men
in their places, and thus keep their watch continually both day and night. In
this palace are.lxxix. haules, in the which is an infinite number of women
that serve the king, Women serve the king.
having ever light torches in their hands for the greater magnificence. He
that would see all the palace, should spend a whole day therein. Among
other, there are four principal haules, Four marvelous haulles.
where sometimes the king gives audience to his noble men. Of these, one is
covered both above and beneath with metal, an other all over with silver, the
third with gold, and the fourth with pearls and precious stones. These
people of China, are white men, appareled as we are, and eat their meat on
tables as we do. They have the cross in some estimation, The people of China.
but know not the cause why. Beyond the coaste of China, are diverse other
nations and people, as Cheneby, where Pearls and Sinamonie are found: also
the people named Lickij, where reigns the great king of Mien, having under
him.xxii. kings, and is subject to the king of China. Here is also found the
great city of Cathay* The great king of Mien. Cathay.
in the East, and diverse other nations in the said fyrme land, of the which
some are bruityshe, and beastiall, which use to kill and eat their parents
when they be old, thynkyng thereby that they shall reuyue in them: All these
people are Gentyles.

The.xi. day of February in the year.1522. they departed from the Island of
Timos, and were ingulfed by chance in the great sea called Lantchidol, The sea
of Lantchidol.
and took their course between the west and southwest, leauyng the north
coasts on their right hand, fearyng least if they should sail toward the
firm land, they might be seen of the Portugales, Malacha.
who are of great power in Malacha: The Island of Sumetra.
and therefore dyrected their course without the Island of Sumatra, called in
old time Taprobana, leauyng also on their right hand, Pegu.
Bangala. Calecut. Canonor. Coa. Cambala. Ormus. East India. Cap. de Buona
Speranza.
upon the fyrme land, the provinces and regions of Pegu, Bengala, Calecut,
Canonor, Coa, Cambaia, the gulf of the Island of Ormus, and all the coasts of
the greater India. And more safely to pass the cape of Buona Speranza, being
above Affrike, they sailed about.xlii. degrees toward the pole Antartike, and
remained seven weeks about that cape, with many fetches compassyng the wind
with their sails continually alofte, because they had a west and northwest
wind in the proos of their ship, which would not suffer them to pass. The
cape of Buona Speranza, is toward the pole Antartike, beneath the Equinoctial
line.34. degrees and a half, and.1600. leagues from the cape of Malacha, and
is the greatest and most dangerous cape that is found at this day in all the
world.

When they had by these peryls ouerpassed this cape, certain of them, as well
for lack of vyttayles, as also by reason of syckenesse, were minded to sail
to a haven of the Portugales named Monzambique, above Affryke: But the other
answered, that they would rather dye, The port of Monzambique.
then go to any other place then directly to Spain. They followed their course
therefore, saylyng toward the Southwest, two months continually without
touching at any port, in which time there dyed about.xxi. of their company,
whom they cast into the sea. And suerly if God of his infinite mercy had not
preserved the residue in time, they had all dyed of famyn.

In fine, being enforced of necessity, and half of their company dead, they
sailed to one of the Islands of Capo verde, called Insula Sansti Iacobi, that
is, saint James Island, parteynyng to the king of Portugale. Where, as soon
as they arrived, they sent certain a land in the ship boat for vittayles,
declaryng to the Portugales with all love and favor what necessity they were
driven to, and what miseries and trauayles they had sustained, infourmyng them
furthermore of their marvelous voyage, and such things as they had seen in
both the East and West India, with such other gentle words, The ingratitude
of the Portugales.
whereby they obtained certain measures of Rise. But when afterward xiii. of
them returned for more Rise, they were deteyned: Wheruppon the rest which
remained in the ship, fearyng the like chance, departed with full sails,
and the.vii. day of September with the help of God entered into the haven of
San Lucar near unto Siuile, The port of S. Lucar near unto Siuile.
where dischargyng all their ordinance for joy, they went immediately to the
great church in their shiertes, and barefooted, with a torche before them, to
give thanks to almighty God, who had brought them safe to their own country,
and restored them to their wives and children. As touching the end of this
voyage, Transiluanus writes somewhat more largely, as follows.

The other ship which they left behind them to be repared, returned
afterward by the Archipelagus before said, What became of the other ship.
Dariena.
and by the great sea to the coasts of the fyrme of the West India, and
arrived at a region of the same being against Dariena, where the South sea of
Sur is separate but by a little space of land from the west Ocean, in the which
are the Islands of Hispaniola and Cuba, and other Islands of the Spanyardes. The
other ship which returned into Spain by compassyng about the whole bowl of
the world by the coasts of East India and Affrike, departing from the Island
of Tidore, The Cape of Cattigara.
and saylyng ever on this side the Equinoctial, did not find the cape of
Cattigara, being about Asia, and (by the description of Ptolome) reachyng many
degrees beyond the Equinoctial: But having sailed many days by the main
sea, they came to the cape of Buona Speranza and from thence to the Islands of
Capo verde, where their ship, being soore broosed by reason of the long
voyage, leaked and took water, in such sort that the maryners, being now
but few in number, The voyage, hardly performed.
and those also weak and feeble by reason of long sickness and hunger, were
not able both to dry the pomp continually, and otherwise govern the ship,
and were therefore of necessity enforced to go alande at the Island of saint
James, to bye them certain slaves to help them. They bye slaves for lack of
help.
But being destitute of money, according to the custom of the maryners, they
proffered them cloves for their slaves. The which thing when it came to the
ears of the Portugale that was Captain of that Island, he cast.xiii. of them
in prison: Whereby the resydue that remained in the ship (being now
but.xviii. in number) were put in such fear, that they departed immediately
without rescuing their fellows, and sailed continually both by day and by night
by the coasts of Afrike, and came in fine to Spain yt.vi. day of September in
the year of our lord.1522. and arrived at the port nere unto Siuile the.xvi.
month after they departed from the Island of Tidore. Maryners doubtless more
worthy to be celebrate with eternal memory then they which in old time were
called Argonauti, Maryners worthy immortal fame.
that sailed with Jason to win the golden fleese in the region of Cholchis and
the river of Phasis in the great sea of Pontus. And the ship it self, more
worthy to be placed among the stars, then that old Argo, which departing
out of Grecia, sailed to the end of that great sea. For this our marvelous
ship, taking her voyage from the straightes of Gibelterra, and saylyng by the
great Ocean toward the South and pole Antartike, and turnyng from thence to
the West, followed that course so far, that passing under the great
circumference of the world, she came into the East, and from thence again into
the West, not by returnyng backewarde, but still sailing forward, so compassing
about the ball of the world under the whole circumference of heaven, until
she were myraculously restored to her native region of Spain, and house of
Siuile.

The debate and strife between the Spanyardes and Portugales, for the Division
of the Indies, and the trade of Spyces, and also for the Islands of Molucca,
which some call Malucas. Written in the Spanishe tongue by Francisco Lopes de
Gomara.
THe Emperors majesty was very glad that the Malucas and Islands of the
Spycery were discovered, and that he might pass unto them through his own
countries, without any prejudice or hurt to the Portugales: and because also
that Almanzor, Lusfu, and Corala, which were the lords of the Spycerie,
showed them selves to be his friends, John Sebastian.
and became tributaries to him. He also gave certain gifts and rewards to
John Sebastian for his great pains and good service, forasmuch as he craved a
reward for the good news that the Islands of the Malucas, and other Islands
rycher and greater then they, were found to be in his part of those countries
which parteyned unto him, according to the Popes Bull. And hereby it came to
pass, that there was great contention and strife between the Spanyardes and
the Portugales, about the Spycery, and the division of the Indies, by reason of
the return of John Sebastian, and the information which he gave thereof: who
also affirmed, that the Portugales had never any entrance before that time
into those Islands. Hereupon the counsel for the Indies advertised the
Emperor to maynteyne his fleet for those parts, and to take the trade of
Spyces into his own hand, The trade of spices parteineth to The Emperor.
forasmuch as it was his own of duty, as well for that those Islands fell on
his part, as also that he had now found passage and way through his West
Indies into those regions: and finally, to consider that he should thereby
obtain and geat to him self great revenues, beside the inrychyng of his
subjects and realms, and that with small cost and charge. The Emperor, being
thus advertised of the truth, took it for good counsel, and commanded all
things hereunto apperteynyng to be furnyshed accordyngly. In this mean time,
John king of Portugale.
when king John of Portugale had knowledge what the Emperor determined to do,
and the speedy haste his counsel made for the perfourmaunce hereof, and of
the coming home of John Sebastian of Cane, with thinformation he made, what of
stoutnes of mind, and what for grief, was puffed up with anger, as were also
the rest of the Portugales, stormyng as though they would have plucked down
the sky with their hands, not a little fearyng lest they should lose the trade
of Spices, if the Spanyardes should once put in their foot. Whereupon the king
immediately made supplication to the Emperor, not to set forward any ships,
until it were determined to whether of them those Islands should belong: and
that he would not so much endomage him, as to cause him to lose the trade of
Spyces, which was so cominodious and profitable to him: The trade of Spices.
and finally, to avoid the occasion of murder and bloodshed, which were like
to ensue thereof, if the Spanyardes and Portugales ships should meet
together. The Emperor, although he knew that all this was but to make
delays, and prolongyng of time, yet was he glad to have it tried by justice,
for the better justification of his cause and right. In fine, both parties were
agreed to appoint learned men, The controversy determined by Cosmographers and
Pilots.
Cosmographers and Pilottes, which should determine the controversy between
them: promisyng on both parties to abide and stand to the sentence and
determination made by those persons, appointed and sworn to judge
indifferently.

The Repartition and division of the Indies and new world, between the
Spaniardes and the Portugales.
THis matter concerning the trade of Spices, and the new world of the Indies,
by reason of the great riches thereof, was of great importance, and very
difficult to be limited, and drawn forth by lines. By reason whereof, it was
necessary and convenient to seek wise and worshipful men, expert in
Nauigations, The arbytrers on the Emperors side.
in Cosmographie, and the Mathematical sciences. The Emperor for his side
chose and named, for Judges of the possession, the Licentiate Acuna, one of the
kings counsel, also the Licentiate Barrientos, of the counsayl of the
orders, the licentiate Petro Manuel, Auditor of the court of the Chauncerie in
Valladolith. For Judges of the property, he chose Don Fernando Colono, the
son of Christopher Colonus: Also Doctor Sancho Salaya, Peter Ruiz of
Villegas, Friar Thomas Duran, Simon of Alcazaua, and John Sebastian of Cano.
His advocate and Attorney, he made the licentiate John Rodriguez of Pisa: and
for his fyscall Doctor Ribera, and his Secretary, Barthalome Ruiz of
Castaneda. He also appointed that Sebastian Cabote, Sebastian Cabote.
Steven Gomes, Nunnio Gracia, Diego Riuero, being all expert Pilottes, and
cunnyng in making cards for the sea, should be present, and bring forth
their Globes and Mappes, Instruments of Cosmographie.

The Islands of Maluca.


with other instruments necessary to declare the situation of the Islands of
the Malucas, about the which was all the contention and strife. But order was
taken, that they should show their minds on neither side, nor enter into the
company of the other, but when they were called. All these, and diverse other,
went together to a town called Badaioz: and as many Portugales came to Elbes,
The Arbitrers on the Portugales side.
or rather more. For they brought with them two Fiscalles and two Advocates.
The principal of them, was the licentiate Antonie de Asseuedo, Diego Lopes of
Sequeyra, the Clarke of the weyghtes and rece^ptes, who had before been
governor in India. Also Peralfonso of Melo, Clarke, Simon of Tauira, with
diverse other, whose names I know not. Before they met together, the one
part remaynyng at Badaioz, and the other in Elbes, there was much ado among
them, before they could agree upon the place where they should meet, The
place where they met.
and who should speak first: For the Portugales do greatly weygh such
circumstances. At the last, they concluded to meet together at Caya, a little
river which divides Castile from Portugale, standing in the myd way between
Badaioz and Elbes. And when they were assembled together one day at Badaioz,
and an other day at Elbes, and saluted the one the other, both parties were
sworn that they should proceed and speak according to truth, The order of
their process.
justice, and equity. The Portugales refused Simon de Alcazaua, because he was
a Portugale, and Friar Thomas Duran, because he had sometime ben Preacher to
their King: So that Simon was by consent put out of the company, in whose room
was placed master Antonie of Alcaraz. Yet fell they not to reasonyng the
matter, until the Friar was put out. They were many days in beholding Globes,
Mappes, and Cards of the sea, and hearing what might be said, both sides
alleagyng for the right which they pretended. The Portugales.
But the Portugales standing in vain contention, said very angerly, The
Islands of Maluca, whereupon their meetyng and reasonyng was at that present,
fell on their part, and was of their conquest: and that they both had been
there, and had them in their possession before John Sebastian had ever seen
them: Contention for drawyng the line of the division.
Likewise that the line should be drawn from the Island of Bonauista, or the
Island called de la Sal, which are the most Easterly Islands from Cabouerde,
and not from the Island of Santanton, or saint Antonie, which lies toward
the Weste, and are.lxxxx. leagues the one from the other. All this was no more
but to contend, and the other of the Malucas, is untrue: But they that have a
naughty matter, must set it forth with words and brabbelyng. Here they
found how greatly they were deceived, How the Portugales were deceived.
in that they demanded that the line should be drawn three hundred threescore
and ten leagues more to the West, from the Islands of Cabouerde (as appears
hereafter) and not one hundred, according to the assignement of the Popes Bull.
The Spanyardes allegations.
The Spanyardes on the contrary part affyrmed, and made demonstration, that
not only the Islands of Lurney, Gilolo, Zubut, and Tidore, with the other
Islands of the Malucas: but as well Samatra, Malacha, and a great part of
China, Samatra. Malacha. China. Magallanes.
should belong to the Castilians, and that those countries fell on their side,
and on the part of their conquest: Also, that Magallanes and John Sebastian
were the first Christian men that found them, and obtained them for the
Emperor, as the letters and presents of Almanzor do testify. And although
the Portugales had been there first, yet went they thither after the donation
of the Pope: neither got they any right or just title thereby. For although
they should draw the line by Buena Vista, Buena Vista.
what inconvenience should follow thereof, since as well by the one way as the
other, the Islands of the Malucas must parteyne to the Castilians? yea and
moreover, the Islands of Cabouerde should also parteyne to the Castilians, The
Islands of Cabo Verde.
forsomuche as drawyng the line by Buena Vista, the Islands of the Malucas do
remain within the line on the Emperors side. They continued in these
controversies for the space of two months, without any resolution or end
made. For the Portugales prolonged and put of the matter, The Portugales
cauillations.
fleeyng from the sentence with cauillations and cold reasons, to the end
that they might dissolve that assembly without any conclusion or determination:
for so it stood them upon The Castilians which were the Judges of the
property, The line of division.
drue a line in the great globe three hundred and.70. leagues from saint
Antonies Island, lying by Weste Cabo Verde, according to the entreaty and
determination which was agreed upon, between the Catholyke Princes and the
king of Portugale. These Judges gave sentence upon this matter, The sentence.
calling the contrary part before them upon the bridge of Caya, in the
year.1524. The Portugales could neither disturb or defer the sentence, nor
yet would they allow it to be just, and according to right: Saying that there
was not sufficient process made, that they should pass to the giuyng of
sentence: and so departed, threatenyng to sleye the Castilians, The Portugales
threaten death to the Castilians.
as many as they should find in the Islands of the Malucas: For they knew
right well that their countrymen the Portugales, had already taken the ship
called the Trinity, and had also taken the Castilians in Tidore. Then also
departed our men, taking their journey to the Court, gyuyng up to the Emperor
all their writings and declaration what they had done. And according to this
declaration must be signed and marked all Globes and Mappes which good
Cosmographers and masters do make. The line also of the repartition and last
division of the new world of the Indies, The line of the last division.
ought to pass (little more or less) by the points of Humos and Buen Abrigo,
as I have said in an other place. And thus shall it appear evidently, that
the Islands of spices, and also the great Island of Samotra, do parteyne to
Castile. The great Island of Samotra.

The land of Brasile, parteyneth to the Portugales.


But the land of Brasile parteyneth to the king of Portugale, where the Cape
of saint Augustine is, being.viii. degrees beneath the Equinoctial. This
land reaches from the point of Humos to the point of Buen Abrigo, and is in
length North and South.viii. hundred leagues: being also some way two hundred
leagues East and West.

And here after these serious matters, A merry tale.
we will rehearse one merry thing, which was this. It so chanced that as
Frances de Melo, Diego Lopes of Sequeyra, and other of those Portugales of this
assembly, walked by the ryuers side of Guadiana, a little boy, who stood
keepyng his mothers clothes which she had washed, demanded of them whether
they were those men that parted the world with the Emperor. And as they
answered, yea: he took up his sherte and showed them his bare arse, saying,
Come and draw your line here through the myddest. Which saying was afterward
in every man's mouth, and laughed at in the town of Badaios: yea even among the
Commissioners them selves, of whom some were angry, and some marueyled at the
saying of the child.

The cause and authority whereby they divided the Indies.
THe Castilians and Portugales had long debated and reasoned about the gold
mine of Guinea, The gold mine of Guinea.
which was found in the year of our Lord.1471. in the time of the reign of
Don Alonso king of Portugale, Alonso king of Portugale. Gold for things of
small value.
ye first of that name. This was a matter of great importance: For the Negros
or black Moors, for things of no value, gave gold by whole handfulles,
which was at that time when the said king of Portugale pretended title and
claim to the kingdom of Castile, Contention for the kingdom of Castile.
in the right of his wife Queen Ioane (called the excellent) against the
Catholyke Princes Isabel, and Don Fernando, whose it was in deed. But that
strife was ended as soon as Don Fernando had vanquished Don Alonso, War
against the Moors of Granada.

The conquests of the Portugales in Affrike


at a place called Temulos, nor far from Toro, which place Don Fernando
chose rather to make war against the Moors of Granada, then to buy and sell
with the black Moors of Guinea. And thus the Portugales remained with the
conqueste of Affryke, from the streightes forward: which began where the
infant of Portugale Don Henrique (son to King John the bastard, and master
of Auis) did begin to enlarge it. Pope Alexander.
When Pope Alexander the.vi. (being a Ualentinian borne) had knowledge hereof,
he minded to give the Indies to the kings of Castile, without any prejudice
to the Portugales, who had conquered the sea coasts of Affryke. These Indies,
the Pope gave of his own mind without the motion of any other, with this
burden and charge, that they should convert the Idolatours to the faith of
Christ: The Pope ma^keth the division.
and commanded a line or meridian to be drawn North and South, from one
hundred leagues Westward, beyond one of the Islands of Capo Verde toward the
Weste, because the Spanyardes should not meddle in Affrike, The king of
Portugale refuses to stand to the Popes Bull.
parteynyng to the conquest of the Portugales, to the auoydyng of all strife
between them. King John of Portugale, the second of that name, was greatly
offended when he red the Bull and donation of the pope, although his own
Ambassadors had made the self same request unto his holiness: He also found
him self agreeued with the Catholyke princes Isabel and Fernando, that they
had shortened the course of the lands he had discovered, depriuyng him of the
richesse which belonged to him, and therefore refused to stand to the Popes
Bull in this case: desiryng the Catholyke princes Isabel and Fernando, to
grant him three hundred leagues more to the West, beside the one hundred which
they had granted before: and th^rewith sent his ships to keep the coasts
of Affryke. The princes Catholyke were content to satisfy his mind, and to
please him according to their gentle nature, and for the aliance that was
between them: And in fine, with the consent and agreement of the Pope, The
agreement of the last division.
granted two hundred and sixty leagues more then the Bull made mention of, at
Tordesillas the seventh day of June, in the year of our Lord.1494. And whereas
our kings thought that they should have lost ground in granting so many
leagues that way, they won by that means the Islands of the Malucas, with
many other rich Islands. The king of Portugale also herein deceived him self,
or was deceived of his, whom he put in trust, Wherein the Portugales were
deceived.
having no certain knowledge of the situation of the Islands of the rich
Spicery, in demaundyng that which the king did demand: For it had been better
for him to have requested the three hundred and sixty leagues, rather
Eastwarde from the Islands of Capo Verde, then toward the Weste. And yet for
all that, I doubt whether the Malucas should have fallen within his conquest,
according to the ordinary accoumpte and dimension which the Pylottes and
Cosmographers do make. And after this manner they divided the Indies between
them by authority of the Pope, for the auoydyng of further strife and
contention.

How and by what occasion the Emperor laid the Islands of Maluccas to pledge
to the king of Portugale.
WHen the King of Portugale Don Iuan the third of that name, had knowledge that
the Cosmographers and pylottes of Castile, had drawn the line from the place
before named, and that he could not deny the truth, fearyng also thereby to
leese the trade of spices, made suite and request to the Emperor, that he
should not send forth Louisa, Sebastian Cabote.
nor Sebastian Cabote to the Malucas, and that the Castilians should not
attempt the trade of spices, nor see such euylles and miseries as his
Captains had showed in those Islands to them that adventured that viage with
Magallanes: which thing he greatly covered, although he paid all the charges
of those two fleetes, and made other great bargaynes. In the mean time, the
Emperor married the Lady Isabel, The Emperor and the king of Portugale joined
in aliance by marriage.
sister to king John, and king John married the Lady Catharine, sister to the
Emperor: whereby this matter waxed cold, although the king ceased not to
speak hereof, ever mouyng the partition. The Emperor by the means of a
certain Biscaine that was with Magallanes in the governors ship, had
knowledge what the Portugales had done to the Castilians in the Island of
Tidore, The Portugales rob the Castilians.
whereof he took great displeasure, and brought the said maryner face to face
before the Ambassadors of Portugale, who denied all that he said, one of them
being the chief Captain and governor of India, when the Portugales took the
Castilians in Tidore, and robbed them of their Cloves and Cinamome, and such
other things as they had in the ship named the Trinity. But as the king of
Portugales trade was great, and our necessity greater, The coronation of the
Emperor.
in the mean time The Emperor (who was now going into Italy to be crowned in
the year.1529.) gaged the Malucas and the spicerie to the king of Portugale,
The gagyng of ^he Islands of Malucas.
for three hundred and fyftie thousand Ducates, without any time determined,
Zamatra and Malaca.
otherwise then the controversy defined upon the bridge of the river of Caya:
for the which thing, king John punyshed the licentiate Azeuedo, because he
paid the money without declaration of the time. The covenant of the pledge
was blyndly made, and greatly against the minds of the Castilians, as men that
well understood the profit, commodity, and riches of that trade: Affyrmyng
that the trade of spices might have been rented, for one year or for two, for
six times as much as the king gave for it. Peter Ruiz of Villegas, who was
twice called to the bargayne, as once at Granada, and an other time at Madrid,
said that it had been much better to have pledged Estremadura or Serena, or
other great lands and cities, rather then the Malucas, Zamatra, or Malaca, or
other rich lands and ryuers in the East, not yet well known: forasmuch as it
may so chance, that either by continuance of time, or aliance, the pledge
might be forgot^en, as though it parteyned to the right of Portugale. In fine,
the Emperor considered not the Jewel that he pledged, nor the king what he
received. The Emperor was oftentimes counsayled to release the pledge of those
Islands, in consideration of all the advantage he might have thereby in few
years. Furthermore, in the year.1548. the procuratours of Cortes being in
Valladol^d, made petition to the Emperor, to surrender the spicerie to the
kingdom of Cast^le for vi. years, and that they would repaye to the king of
Portugale his.350. thousand crowns, and after those years, restore the trade
to the crown, that his majesty might inioye the same, as was agreed at the
beginning But the Emperor, being then in Flaunders, sent word to the
counsel, that they should not assent to Cortes his request, nor speak any
more hereof. Whereat, some marueyled, other were sorry, and all held their
peace.

Exemplar Bullae Seu Donationis, Autoritate cuius, Episcopus Romanus Alexander
eius nominis sextus, concessit et donauit Castellae regibus and suis
successoribus, regiones and Insulas noui orbis in Oceanooccidentali Hispanorum
nauigationibus repertas.
ALexander Episcopus, seruus seruoru^ Dei, Charissimo in Christo filio
Ferdinando Regi, et Charissimae in Christo filiae Elizabeth Reginae Castellae,
Legionis, Aragonum, Siciliae, et Granatae, illustribus, salutem et Apostolicam
benedictionem.

Inter caetera Diuinae maiestati beneplacita opera et cordis nostri
desiderabilia, illu^ profecto potissimum existit vt fides catholica and
Christiana religio nostris praesertim temporibus exaltetur ac vbilibet
amplietur ac dilatetur, animarumque salus procuretur, ac barbarae nationes
deprimantur et ad fidem ipsam reducantur. Vnde cum ad hanc sacram Petri sedem
Diuina fauente clementia (meritis licet imparibus) euocati fueremus,
cognoscentes vos tanquam veros catholicos reges et principes: quales semper
fuisse nouimus, and a vobis praeclare gesta, toti pens orbinotissima
demonstra^t, nedum id exoptare, sed omni conatu, studio, et diligentia, nullis
laboribus, nullis impensis, nullisque parcendo periculis, etiam proprium
sanguinem effundendo efficere, ac omnem animum vestrum, omnesque conatus ad hoc
iam dudum dedicasse, quemadmodum recuperato regni Granatae a tyrannis de
Sarracenorum hodiernis temporibus per vos, cum tanta Diuini nominis gloria
facta, testatur. Digne ducimur non immerito, et debemus illa vobis etiam
sponte, ac fauorabiliter concedere per quae huiusmodi sa^ctu^ ac laudabile ab
immortali deo acceptu^ propositum, indies feruentiori animo ad ipsius dei
honorem et ^mperij Christiani propagationem, prosequi valeatis. Sane accepimus
que vos qui dudum animum proposu^ratis aliquas insulas et terras firma^ remotas
et incognitas, ac per alios hactenus non repertas, quaerere et inuenire, vt
illarum incolas et habitatores ad colendum redemptorem nostrum et fidem
catholicam profitendum reduceretis, hactenus in expugnatione et recuperatione
ipsius regni Granatae plurimum occupati, ^uiusmodi sanctum et laudabile
propositum vestrum ad optatum finem perducere nequiuistis: Sed tamem sicut
Domino placuit, regno predicto recuperato, volentes desiderium vestrum
adimp^ere, dilectum filium Christophorum Colonum, virum vtique dignum, et
plurimum commendatum, ac tanto negotio aptum, cum nauigijs et hominibus ad
similia instructis, non sine maximis laboribus, ac periculis, et expensis
destinastis vt terras firmas et insulas remotas et incognitas, huiusmodi per
mare vbi hactenus nauigatum non fuerat, diligenter inquireret. Qui tandem
(Diuino auxilio fasta extrema diligentia in mari Oceano nauigantes) certas
insulas remotissimas, et etiam terras firmas, quae per alios hastenus reperte
non fuerant, inuenerunt. In quibus plurimae gentes pacifice viuentes, et (vt
assiritur) nudi incedentes, nec carnibus vescentes, inhabitant: Et vt praefati
nuncij vestri possunt opinari, gentes ipsae in Insulis, et terris praedistis
habitantes, credunt vnum deum creatorem in Coelis esse, ac ad fidem catholicam
amplexandum et bonis moribus imbuendum, satis apti videntur: Spesque habetur,
quod si erudire^tur, nomen saluatoris Domini nostri Jesus Christi in terris et
insulis praedictis facile induceretur. Ac prefatus Christophorus in vna ex
principalibus Insulis praedictis, iam vnam turrim satis munitam, in qua certos
Christianos qui secum inerant in custodiam, et vt alias insulas ac terras
firmas remotas et incognitas inquirerent posuit, construi et aedificari fecit.
In quibus quidem Insulis et terris iam repertis, aurum, aromata, et aliae quam
plurimae res praeciosae diuersi generis et diuersae qualitatis reperiuntur.
Vnde omnibus diligenter, et praesertim fidei catholicae exaltatione et
dilatione (prout decet Catholicos Reges et Principes) consideratis, more
progenitorum vestrorum clarae memoriae Regum, terras firmas et insulas
predictas, illarumque incolas et habitatores, vobis diuina fauente clementia
subijcere, et ad fidem Catholicam reducere proposuistis. Nos itaque huiusmodi
vestrum sanctum et laudabile propositum plurimum in domino commendantes, ac
cupientes vt illud ad debitum finem perducatur, et ipsum nomen saluatoris
nostri in partibus illis inducatur, hortamus vos quamplurimum in domino, et per
sacri lauacri susceptionem, qua mandatis Apostolicis obligati estis, et per
viscera misericordiae Domini nostri Jesus Christi attente requiribus, vt cum
expeditionem ^uiusmodi omnino prosequi et assumere prona mente orthodoxae fidei
zelo intendatis, populos in ^uiusmodi Insulis et terris degentes, ad
Christianam religionem suscipiendum inducere velitis et debeatis, nec pericula
nec labores vllo vnquam tempore vos deterreant, firma spe fiduciaque conceptis,
quod Deus omnipotens conatus vestros foeliciter prosequetur. Et vt tanti
nego^ij prou^ntiam Apostolicae gratiae largitate donati, liberius et audacius
assumatis, motu proprio non ad vestram vel alterius, pro vobis super hoc nobis
oblatae petitionis instantiam, sed de nostra mera liberalitate, et ex certa
scientia, ac de Apostolicae potestatis plenitudine, omnes Insu^as et terras
firmas inuentas et inueniendas, detestas et detege^das versus Occidentem et
Meridiem, fabricando et construendo vnam lineam a polo Arctico, scilicet
Septentrione, ad polum Antarcticum, scilicet Meridiem, sieve terrae firmae et
insulae inuentae, et iueniendae sint, versus India^, aut versus aliam
quamcumque partem, quae linea distet a qualibet insularum, quae vulgariter
nuncupantur de los Azores, et Cabo verde centum leucis, versus Occidentem et
Meridiem. Itaque omnes insulae et terrae firmae repertae et reperie^dae,
detectae et detegendae a praefata linea versus Occidemtem et Meridiem, quae per
alium Regem aut Principem Christianum non fuerint actualiter possess vsque ad
diem natiuitatis Domini Nostri Jesus Christi proxime praeteritum, a quo incipit
annus praesens Millessimus Quadringentessimus Nonogessimus tertius, quando
fuerunt per nuncios et capitaneos vestros inuentae aliquae praedictarum
insularum, Autoritate omnipotentis Dei nobis in beato Petro concessa, ac
viccariatus Jesus Christi, qua fungimur in terris, cum omnibus illarum dominijs,
ciuitatibus, castris, locis, et villis, iuribusque et iurisdictionibus ac
pertinentijs vniuersis vobis, heredibusque, et successoribus vestris (Castellae
et Legionis regibus) in perpetuum tenore praesentium donamus, concedimus, et
assignamus: Vosque, et haeredes, ac successores prefatos illarum Dominos, cum
plena, libera, et omnimoda potestate, autoritate, et jurisdiction, facimus,
constituimus, et deputamus. Decernentes nihilo minus, per huiusmodi donatione^,
concessione^ et assignatione^ nostra^, nullo Christiano Principi, qui
actualiter prefatas insulas et terras firmas possederit vsque ad predictum diem
natiuitatis Domini nostri Jesus Christiius quaesitum, sublatum intelligi posse,
aut auferri debere.

Et insuper mandamus vobis in vertute sanctae obedientiae (vt sicut pollicemini
et non dubit^mus pro vestra maxima deuotione et regia magnanimitate vos esse
facturos) ad terras firmas et insulas predictas, viros probos et Deum timentes,
doctos, peritos, et expertos ad instr^endu^ incolas et habtaitores prefatos in
fide chatholica, et bonis moribus inbuendum, destinare debeatis, omne^ debitam
diligentiam in praemissis adhibentes. A quibuscumque personis, cuiuscunque
dignitatis, etia^ imperialis et regalis status, gradus, ordinis vel
conditionis, sub excommunicationis latae sente^tiae poena qua^ eo ipso, si
contra fecerint incurrant, districtius inhibemus ne ad insulas et terras firmas
inuentas et inueniendas, detectas et detegendas versus Occidentem et Meridiem,
fabricando et construendo lineam a polo Arctico ad polum Antarcticum, siuae
terrae firmae et Isulae inuentae et inueniendae sint versus Indiam aut versus
aliam quamcumque partem, quae linea distet a qualibet insularum, que vulgariter
nuncupantur de los Azores, et Cabo verde centum lucis versus Occidentem et
Meridem vt praefertur, pro mercibus habendis, vell quauis alia causa accedere
praesumat, absque vestra ac haeredum et successorum vestrorum praedictorum
licentia speciali: Non obstantibus constitutionibus et ordinationibus
Apostolicis, caeterisque quibuscumque, in illo in quo imperia et dominationes
et bona cuncta procedunt: Confidentes quod dirigente Domino actus vestros, si
huiusmodi sanctum ac laudabile propositum prosequamini, breui tempore cum
foelicitate et gloria totius populi Christiani, vestri labores et conatus
exitum felicissimum consequentur. Verum quia difficile foret praesentes literas
ad singula quaeque loca in quibus expediens fuerit deferri, volumus ac motu et
scientia similibus decernimus, quod illarum transsumptis manu publici notarij
inderogati subscriptis, et sigillo alicuius personae in ecclesiastica dignitate
constitutae, seu curiae ecclesiastice munitis, ea prorsus fides in iudicio et
extra ac alias vbilibet adhibeatur, quae praesentibus adhiberetur si essent
adhibitae vel ostensae.

Nulli ergo omnino hominum liceat banc paginam nostrae commendationis,
hortationis, requisitionis, donationis, concessonis, assignationis,
constitutionis, deputationis, decreti, mandati, inhibitionis, et voluntatis,
infringere, vel ei ausu temerario contraire. Si quis autem hoc attentare
praesumpserit, indignationem omnipotentis Dei, ac beatorum Petri et Pauli
Apostolorum eius, se nouerit incursurum.

Datum Romae apud sanctum Petrum, Anno incarnationis Dominicae 1593 quarto
nonas Maij, Pontificatus nostri, anno primo.
The copy of the Bull or donation, by thauthoritie whereof, Pope Alexander the
syxt of that name, gave and granted to the kings of Castile and their
successors, the Regions and Islands found in the west Ocean sea, by the
nauigations of the Spanyardes.
ALexander Bishop, the servant of the servants of God, to our most dear
beloved son in Christ king Ferdinando, and to our dear beloved daughter in
Christ Elizabeth Queen of Castyle, Legion, Aragon, Sicilie, and Granata, most
noble princes, gretyng, and Apostolical benediction. Among other works
acceptable to the divine majesty, and according to our hearts desire, this
certaynely is the chief, that the Catholyke faith and Christian religion,
specially in this our time, may in all places be exalted, amplified, and
enlarged, whereby the health of souls may be procured, and the Barbarous
nations subdued and brought to the faith. And therefore whereas by the favor
of Gods clemency (although not without equal deserts) we are called to this
holy seat of Peter, and understanding you to be true Catholyke princes, as we
have ever known you, and as your noble and worthy factes have declared in
manner to the whole world, in that with all your study, diligence, and
industry, you have spared no trauayles, charges, or peryls, aduenturyng even
the shedyng of your own blood, with applying your whole minds and endeavors
hereunto, as your noble expeditions achyued in recovering the kingdom of
Granata from the tyrrany of the Sarracens in these our days, do plainly
declare your factes, with so great glory of the divine name. For the which, as
we thynk you worthy, so ought we of our own free will favorably to grant you
al things, whereby you may daily with more fervent minds, to the honor of
God, and enlargyng the Christian Empire, prosecute your devout and laudable
purpose, most acceptable to the immortal God. We are credibly infourmed, that
whereas of late you were determined to seek and find certain Islands and
fyrme lands, far remote and unknown (and not heretofore found by any
other) to the intent to bring the inhabitants of the same to honor our
redeemer, and to profess the catholic faith, you have hitherto been much
occupied in the expugnation and recovery of the kingdom of Granata, by reason
whereof you could not bring your said laudable purpose to the end desired.
Nevertheless, as it has pleased almyghtie God, the foresaid kingdom being
recovered, wyllyng to accomplish your said desire, you have, not without
great labor, peryls, and charges, appointed our well-beloved son Christopher
Colonus (a man certesse well commended, as most worthy and apt for so great a
matter) well furnyshed with men and ships, and other necessaries, to seek
(by the sea, where hitherto no man has sailed) such firm lands and Islands
far remote, and hitherto unknown, who (by Gods help) making diligent
search in the Ocean sea, have found certain remote Islands and firm lands,
which were not heretofore found by any other: in the which (as is said) many
nations inhabit, living peaceably, and going naked, not accustomed to eat
flesh: and as far as your messengers can conjecture, the nations inhabytyng
the foresaid lands and Islands, believe that there is one God, creator in
heaven, and seem apt to be brought to the imbrasyng of the catholyke faith,
and to be imbued with good manners: by reason whereof, we may hope that if they
be well instructed, they may easyly be induced to receive the name of our
savior Jesus Christ. We are further advertised, that the forenamed
Christopher has now builded and erected a fortress, with good munition, in
one of the foresaid principal Islands, in the which he has placed a
garryson of certain of the Christian men that went thither with him, as well to
the intent to defend the same, as also to search other Islands and firm lands
far remote, and yet unknown. We also understand, that in these lands and
Islands lately found, is great plenty of Gold and Spyces, with diverse and
many other precious things, of sundry kinds and qualities. Therefore all
things diligently considered (especially the amplyfying and enlargyng of the
catholic faith, as i^ behooves catholic princes, following the examples of
your noble progenitors of famous memory) whereas you are determined, by the
favor of almyghtie God, to subdue and bring to the catholyke faith
thinhabitantes of the aforesaid lands and Islands.

We greatly commendyng this your godly and laudable purpose in our Lord, and
desirous to have the same brought to a due end, and the name of our savior to
be known in those parts, do exhort you in our Lord, and by the receiuyng of
your holy baptysme, whereby you are bound to Apostolical obedience, and
earnestly require you by the bowels of mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ, that
when you intend for the zeal of the Catholyke faith to prosecute the said
expedition, to reduce the people of the forsayde lands and Islands to the
Christian relgion, you shall spare no labors at any time, or be deterred with
any peryls, conceiuyng fyrme hope and confidence, that the omnipotent God will
give good success to your godly attemptes. And that being auctorysed by the
privilege of the Apostolycall grace, you may the more freely and boldly take
upon you thenterpryse of so great a matter, we of our own motion, and not
either at your request, or at the instant petition of any other person, but of
our own mere liberality and certain science, and by the fullness of
Apostolycall power, do give, grant, and assign to you, your heirs and
successors, all the fyrme lands and Islands found, or to be found,
discovered, or to be discovered, toward ye west and south, drawing a line from
the pole Artik to ye pole Antartike (that is) from the North to the South:
Contaynyng in this donation, whatsoever fyrme lands or Islands are found, or
to be found toward India, or toward any other part what so ever it be, being
distant from, or without the foresaid line, drawn a hundred leagues toward
the West and South from any of the Islands which are commonly called De los
Azores and Capo verde. All the Islands therefore, and fyrme lands, found and
to be found, discovered and to be discovered, from the said line toward the
West and South, such as have not actually ben heretofore possessed by any other
Christian king or prince, until the day of the nativity of our Lord Jesus
Christ last paste, from the which begins this present year being the
year of our Lord.M.CCCC.lxxxxiii. when so ever any such shall be found by your
messengers and captains, we by the authority of almighty GOD, granted unto
us in saint Peter, and by the office which we bear on the earth in the steed
of Jesus Christ, do for ever, by the tenor of these presents, give, grant,
assign, unto you, your heirs, and successors (the kings of Castyle and
Legion) all those lands and Islands, with their dominions, Territories,
cities, castles, towers, places, and villages, with all the right, and
jurisdictions thereunto parteynyng: constitutyng, assignyng, and deputyng, you,
your heirs, and successors, the lords thereof, with full and free power,
authority, and jurisdiction: Decreeyng nevertheless by this our donation,
grant, and assignation, that from no Christian Prince, which actually has
possessed the foresaid Islands and fyrme lands, unto the day of the
nativity of our Lord beforesayd, their right obtained, to be understood
hereby to be taken away, or that it ought to be taken away. Furthermore we
command you in the virtue of holy obedience (as you have promised, and as we
doubt not you will do upon mere devotion and princely magnanimitte) to send
to the said fyrme lands and Islands, honest, virtuous, and learned men, such
as fear GOD, and are able to instruct thinhabitantes in the Catholyke faith
and good manners, applying all their possible deligence in the premises. We
furthermore straightly inhibite all manner of persons, of what state, degree,
order, or condition soever they be, although of Imperial and regal dignity,
under the pain of the sentence of excommunication, which they shall incur if
they do to the contrary, that they in no case presume, without special license
of you, your heirs, and successors, to travail for merchaundies, or for any
other cause, to the said lands or Islands, found, or to be found,
discovered, or to be discovered, toward the West and South, drawyng a line
from the pole Artyke to the pole Antartike, whether the firm lands and
Islands, found and to be found, be situate toward India, or toward any other
part, being distant from the line drawn a hundred leagues toward the west,
from any of the Islands commonly called De los Azores and Capo Verde:
Notwithstanding constitutions, decrees, and Apostolycall ordinances whatsoever
they are to the contrary. In him from whom Empyres, dominions, and all good
things do proceed: Trustyng that almyghtie GOD, directyng your enterprices,
if you follow your Godly and laudable attemptes, your labors and trauayles
herein, shall in short time obtain a happy end, with felicity and glory of
all Christian people. But forasmuch as it should be a thing of great
difficulty these letlers to be carried to all such places as should be
expedient, we will, and of like motion and knowledge do decree, that whyther so
ever the same shall be sent, or wheresoever they shall be received, with the
subscription of a common notarie thereunto required, with the seal of any
person constitute in ecclesiastical dignity, or such as are aucthorised by
the Eclesiasticall court, the same faith and credit to be given thereunto in
judgment* or else where, as should be exhibyted to these presents.

It shall therefore be lawefull for no man to infrynge or rashly to contrary
this letter of our commendation, exhortation, request, donation, grant,
assignation, constitution, deputation, decreee, commandment, inhibition, and
determination. And if any shall presume to attempt the same, he ought to know
that he shall thereby incur the indignation of almighty God, and his holy
Apostles Peter and Paul.

Given at Rome at saint Peter's: In the year of thincarnation of our lord
M.CCCC.lxxxxiii. The fourth day of the nones of May, the first year of our
seat.
An Abridgement of. P. Martyr his.5.6.7. and.8. Decades, and particulerly of
Ferd. Cortesius conquest of Mexico, by. R. VV.
THe first four Decades of. P. Martyr, you have already seen done into
English by R. Eden, as also certain parcelles of the four last. P. Martyr
made eight decades of the west Indish news: in less labor these may be run
over, special regard being had unto that Decade wherein the more principal
matter is expressed: I mean the first, and that chiefly for the famous
conquest of the city Themistitan, in Mexico province, yea of all that great
region we do now usually call new Spain. As for the sixte Decade, it
conteyneth very little matter worth the rehearsal, except it be certain
reports of the Spaniards, how they found, where they traueyled in the West
Indies, plough stuff of gold: that the prince of Nicoragua with his family
became christian: that certain beardles Indians greatly fear such men as
have beardes: that they use to sacrifice live men unto their Idolles, either
taken in the wars, or fatted up at home bountefully for that purpose: that
Nicoragua Mere, for the greatness and unknown length thereof, for the ebbes
and fluddes and many Islands therein, might woorthely be called a fresh water
sea. This freshet has been thought to run into the Northwesterne streicte,
rather of ignorance (the course thereof being not thoroughly known) than that it
so falls out in deed, as. P. Martyr writes. Finally in the.9. and.10.
books of the sixth Decade, news is sent to Rome of the controversy betwixt
the Spaniardes and Portugales, concerning the Moluccaes, handled more
effectually and in more ample manner, by. R. Eden. Fol. 448. than. P. Martyr in
this place penned it. Wherefore it were a needless work and actum agere in
deed to trouble the reader therewith any further, especially whereas in this
volume, mention has been made thereof, even by. P. Martyr him self, as you have
already seen.

The like opinion am I also of, touching the.vii. and.viii. decades, some
parcels whereof the Aucthour does repeat out of his former writings as Dec. 7.
c. 2. the ruin of the Islands Iucaies, out of his fourth Dec. c. 3. Item out
of the second Decade. c. 10. the nature of that spring in the Island Boiuca,
otherwise called Agnaneo, the water whereof who so drinks, by report, of an
old man becomes young again, is in many words repeated by. P. Martyr, Dec.
7. c. 7. the whole sum of whose second discourse thereof is expressed in the
former place, by. R. Edens addition of this clause (Perhaps with some diet)
the which words are not in P. Martyr his text: to be short, the two kinds
of bread the Indians do make of the roots Iucca, and a kind of grain called
Maiz, suffitiently declared. Dec. 1. lib. 1. and. Dec. 3. lib. 5. lib. 9. Dec.
3. be repeated again, Dec. 8. c. 3. Other parcelles of these aforesaid
Decades, wherein the subtelties of their Magicians and Coniurers Peaces or
Pages are discribed, their Tigres cruelty, their sundry kinds of wild
beasts, foul, and Serpents, their diverse sorts of trees and fruits, partly
may you read of in the breuiarie of Gonzal. Ferd. Ouiedus history: as of the
fountain of pytch, the stone pellets naturally made for Gunnes. Fol. 224. out
of the.7. Decade. c. 7. and the Glowoormes out of the same c. 9. partly in R.
Eden his notes of new Spain, Peru, Rio de la Plata, Baccaleos, and Florida,
set down in this volume. Fol. 225. as particulerly of the Nutshelles used in
steed of money, taken out of P. Mart. Dec. 8. c. 4. Partly in Theuetus works
of the new found world, Englished long since, and finally in those books
which sundry learned Simplicistes have lately written principally to aid the
Physicians of our time.

Some other curiosities there be contained in. P. Martyr his two last Decades,
namely the Iucaien women, to be so fair, that for their love other country
Barbares seek to inhabit those Islands. Dec. 7. c. 1. The Spanyardes well
used of the Iucaiens, contrary to all courtesy, to have carried away many of
those Ilanders into slavery and misery: Again certain traueylers to have been
seen there that had tails like fyshe. Dec. 7. c. 2. Fond fantasies of men's
souls departed, Dec. 7. c. 3. wandering first North and than South about the
world, afterward to grow young again in iolitie: Again, other to imagine
that the departed souls rest in Caves, and to be that reflection of the air
the which we do call Echo. Dec. 8. c. 9. The contention betwixt Garaius and
Cortesius, for ambition, Dec. 7. c. 5. and Dec. 8. cap. 1. and.2. The great
Cormorantes that devour fish of five pound weight at one morsel. Dec. 7. c.
9. The shameless daunses of naked women at their funeralles and obsequies.
Dec. 7. c. 10. Their woorshipping of the cross in Saltier.x. Or made thus, x
upon their new borne babes to drive away deuylles, as also in the night time
if they fear any thing, imagining with that sign the place to be purified.
Dec. 8. c. 9. The Chiribikes follies in daunsing whole weeks together, their
language full of difficulties for leauyng out some sillables in speech, their
manner of marriage by clippyng the brydes hear, Dec. 8. c. 8. The dead bodies of
gentlemen to be roasted, and so hanged up to roof for buttry gods, the bones
of other that lay buried a whole year to be taken up again at the.xii.
months end, and solempnely buried. Decade 8. c. 9. To conclude, How Captain
Olitus, whom Cortesius feared not a little, and therefore sent under the
pretexte of honor as it were to discover other lands, took head him self
against Cortesius, and miserably was murdered in the end. Dec. 8. c 6 and.10.
These with some other the like things, may the curious reader find in many
words, set down in the aforesaid.7. and.8 Decades, spoken of all for the
most part before in. P. Martyr his other doings, or mentioned in Ouiedus
Summary, or by. R. Eden briefly noted, or not greatly needful to be set forth
at large in English, except they were matters of greater weight. One special
thing I observed amongst other in reading over these.6 7. and 8. Decades, to
wit, the West Indians not only to be conquered by the Spaniardes, but also to
be their slaves and bondmen: the cause why after the conquest made of them, the
Spanyardes do in continual bondage and slavery keep them under, is expressly
brought forth by. Pe. Martyr. Dec. 7. c. 4. in the spanysh tongue, as it was
read at the Indishe counsel boorde in Spain, and may thus be Englished.

These be the Indians qualities, in respect whereof they deserve no liberty.
IN the continent or fyrme land they eat man's flesh: they be more given to
Sodomye than any other nation of the world: there is no order of justice among
them, they go naked, they have neither love nor honesty, they be fools and
furious, there is no truth in them, except it be for their own profit:
inconstant, without all discretion, very unkind, and lovers of novelties: they
delyght to make them selves drunk with wynes made of diverse herbs, fruits,
and grain, as ale and sider, and to overcome their brains, as well otherwise
with herbs, as in making drink thereof, or eating them* They are very
bruitishe, and do make it a praise to wallowe in vices. No obedience, no
reverence at all shows the young man to the old, the child to his father.
Neither teaching nor chastning amendeth them: they be traitors, cruel, so full
of revenge that they never forgive any offense, great enemies unto our
religion. They be slothful, thieves, of judgment very gross and base,
without all honesty and good order. Neither do the men behave them selves
loyally with their wives, nor the wives with their husbands: they be
superstitiously given to soothsaying, as fearful as Hares, filthes, eating
lyse, spiders, and woormes, whersoeuer they find them: they have no art, nor
good condition of men. Having learned any points of Christian religion, they
are wont to say that to be good in Spain, but in India nothing worth, for
that they desire not to alter their manners. They have no beardes, for they
peele and pluck up the hear as fast as it grows. They take no piety on
sick folk, such as be very sick, they give over to some one kynsman or
neighbor of theyrs, or else carry them to the mountains to dye there, leaving
with them some small portion of bread and water, and so go their way. The
elder they wax, the worse they be: until they be.xi. or.xii. years old,
some hope there is that they would prove civil and virtuous, when they grow
elder, they become bruit beasts. In conclusion, I say that god never created so
corrupt a people for vice and beastliness, without any mixture of goodness
and civility: they are as blockishe as Asses, making no account at all to kill
them selves.

In the fyft Decade is written by. P. Martyr, or geathered rather by him out of
Ferd. Cortesius relations, the conquest of that portion of the West Indishe
continent, that lies in the hot zone, near the Tropike of Cancer, betwyxte
our Weste sea and Mar del zur, the chief province wherein is Mexico, and the
principal city Themistitan. This region, after that it was conquered by
Cortesius, began to be called Noua Hispania, new Spain, for the likeness
thereof unto the Spanysh kingdom in nature of soil, greatness, disposition
of the air, and other such like things, as Cortesius him self writes unto
Charles the fifth, humbly desiryng his majesty to allow of that name. Some
later writers have given the particular name of one shyre unto the whole,
calling it Mexico, and the general name of that whole shyre to the head city
therein, calling Themistitan likewise Mexico, howbeit in truth Themistitan is
the principal city in Mexico province, Mexico the chief province in all new
Spaigne. Of this country, the commodities it does yield, the nature of the
inhabiters, partly you have already seen in Gone. Ferd. Ouiedus history. Fol.
221. and chiefly Fol. 225. The king of this country bare name Monte Zuma, or
Muteezuma, as Cortesius that conquered him writes* in P. Martyr his Decades
printed in Spaigne. An. d. 1530. Meteezuma. in his.4* Decade, entitled de
insul. nuper inuentis to. no. orb. p. 506. Multoxumam, as also in the last
edition thereof at Cullen, jointly with the three first decades, the which our
Printer in the translation hereof, has followed in the discourse of the West
Indies Islands. Strange names are many times diversely written, though in
effect they mean all one, Henricus say we, with the Frenchmen Henry, the
Almans Henreich, the Italians Arrigo, the Portugales Henrico, as Barros
speaking of king John the first his son, whom Cadamust called in his
Navigations Huric.

This king was so welthie, so mighty, his dominions so large, that the
inhabiters knew no other prince in all the world, of him Cortesius had
intelligence by Montegius and Portucarrerius, and from him certain rich
presents for his master Charles The Emperor, as in the aforesaid discourse of
the west Indish Islands it has been said. Wherefore the.16. day of August, in
the year of our Lord.1520. Ferdinandus Cortesius, with.15. light horsemen,
and five hundred footmen well appointed, besides three noble men of the city
Cempoal, named Teuchius, Mamexus, and Tamaius, and.13 hundred men of that
country, to serve in steed of pack horses, for carriage, after the manner
there, began to set forward from his Castle Vera crux, toward Themistitan in
Mexico, distant from thence Westwarde a hundred leagues, or thereabout. Cempoal
stands from Vera Crux.4. leagues, each league in this country is.4. Italian
miles. Four days journey from Cempoal Cortesius was enterteined curtuously by
the inhabiters of a goodly shyre named Sienchimalen, as also by the citizens of
Texuacan, after that he had passed with his army an exceedyng high hill, thick
clad with yse and snow even in the month of August. The like enterteynment was
offered him and his company as he marched forward, until he came to the
Tascaltecans land, who are so great enemies unto the Mexicans, that living
amyd their dominions, they had rather want their greatest necessaries, to wit
salt, and cotton to cloth them, than become subjects in any wise to the Prince
of Mexico. With these Tascaltecans, Cortesius had three conflictes passing
through their country, and in the end valiantly gave them the overthrow.
Tascalteca is a greater city, more populous, Tascalteca.
and better served than Granata in Spain was, at what time the Moors yielded:
their bread is made of Maiz, that is, Indish corn, a very good seat for
hauking, hunting, and fresh water fishing, sea fish is scarce, for it stands
from the sea above.50. leagues: of pulse good store. This town walls, and
houses in number 20000. built of stone, high, and strong, in respect of the
enemy ever at hand: they keep markets and fayres. The people does wear hose,
and makes good account of Jewels, precious stones, of crestes, and bushes of
feathers, to set them forth in the wars, they garnishe every thing with
gold: wood is brought to be sold to the market on men's shoulders: timber,
boordes, brick, lime, and stone, are usual merchandise. Their Carpenters,
Masons, and Potters, are very skillful. There is no vessel wrought amongst us
more artificially than theyrs is Medicinable herbs are sold openly. They use
baths, the nation politic, governed in manner of a common wealth. The whole
circuit of this province is.90. leagues, full of towns, boroughes, and
villages, hills and dales most ^ruitfull, and well stored of good souldyers, in
respect of their enemies round about them. About one league of this city
encamped Cortesius, and by his spials understanding the citizens not to
mistrust or fear any invasion, took the strongest part thereof by night: in
the morning came the best citizens to offer him all obedience. Cortesius than
returning with the victory and victuals to his camp, found it in a
troublesome mutiny for the great distresses and present calamies they thought
them selves to be in, so far of from their own country, in the midst of their
enemies This mutiny appeased he with good words, and comfortable reasons,
persuading them their enemies to be weaker, the spreadyng abroad of the
gospel to be now in their hands, them selves to be Spaniardes, who esteem not
death to win glory: a most happy death that to be, where life is spent in the
conquest of infidelles and barbares, and to lie by the sea side idly, that
were to no purpose. Churultecal.
Thus appeased he the rebellious minds of his companyons, and after.20. days
abode made in this province, he led them into an other shire for pastures and
rivers the most commodious, for habitation best in all that country. The
principal city has name Churultecal, as great, as fair, as Tascalteca, and
so governed, until the king of Mexico oppressed it. Here was Cortesius received
with songs, musical instruments, and trumpets, by the priests and children
of the city after their manner, and well feasted. The end of all this mirth was
an uproar of the inhabiters against him, procured by the king of Mexico, as it
was supposed, whereof Cortesius having secret intelligence by a woman of
Cempoal that followed his Camp, summoned a parle with the best citizens of
Churultecal, at his own lodging. Those citizens first laid he fast by the
heles, and than speedely with his army, warned to be in a readiness for that
purpose, set upon the deceiptful Barbares of a soden, before that they were
thoroughly provided, and gave them the overthrow. The prince of Mexico acquitted
him self of this uproar, protesting by his Ambassadors to Cortesius, that his
disloyal subjects the Churultecals had bruted that conspiracy under his name
to do him injury, whom they would not willingly obey. He sent withal rich
presents, praying Cortesius to come to Themistitan, promising him that he
should want nothing there, notwithstanding the hard provision thereof in so
barren a place, altogether in the water. To conducte Cortesius thither, he
sent also certain Gentlemen for guydes, and other of his nobility to receive
him as he came near. To speak of every courtesy showed him in this journey,
and to write of every place he passed, and particulerly to rehearse every days
journey, every hill, town, river, house, and gardeyne, by the way, would
breed ouermuche tediousness. In few, the Lords of the country, as he went,
used him well, especially in Guazucingo province, and Chialcho shyre, the one
whereof was violently oppressed by the prince of Mexico, the other willingly
subject unto him. In the cold mountains he wanted no wood, in the towns he
was provided for, and his companions, who were of Cempoallens, Tastaltecans,
Churultecans, and G^zucinges, in number.4000. of Spaniards not above.300. In
this manner, Cortesius accompanied and followed, came at the length into a vale,
bearing name Colua* wherein be two meres, the one salt water of.60. leagues in
circuit, the other a freshet. Partly on the land, partly in the salt mere
stands Iztapalapa a fair town, from whence to Themistitan, the royal seat
of Mexico, there lies a way on a stone wall, two spears length broad, built
up in the water by hand with infinite charges, the wall serves also for a
bridge, by this bridge sides stand three fair towns, Mesicalcingo, Coluacan,
and VVichilabusco. The first is supposed to have.3000. houses, the second.6000.
the third.4000. well built, especially their Towers, and their Temples wherein
they do sacrifice. In these towns great abundance of salt is made, that
serves all such as do acknowledge the Prince of Mexico for their Lord. Other
be denied it, as of the Tascaltecans it was said. This salt mere rising
does flow into the Freshet, and as it ebbeth the Freshet falls into the
salt mere again. The fresh water may serve nevertheless for drink, the
salt water becomes not fresh therewithal. The wall has many draught
bridges for warfare, and sluses for passage, where toll is paid unto the king.
Half one league before you come to Themistitan, where the like bridge or
causey from the land joins with the aforesaid wall, stands a strong
Castle, double walled about, with two strong Towers, not possible to be
conquered. To this place came a thousand Gentlemen Courtiers forth of the
city to receive Cortesius, all apparelled a like, saluting him one by one
after their country manner, to wit, touching the ground with their finger,
and than kyssyng it, in sign of reverence. After all them came the king of
Mexico Montezuma him self in the middle of the bridge, accompanied with two
hundred of his nobles, orderly two and two, in better attire then the other
aforesaid, but all on their bare feet, though every body in this country
otherwise wears shoes. The king as he went, leaued upon the shoulders of two
noble men, the one whereof was his brother: not that he needed any such help,
but for that the kings of Mexico are wont so to be honored, as though they
were holden up by the strength of their nobility. These two noble men,
Cortesius meeting with king Meteezuma, and lyghtyng of his horse to embrace
him, did forbid him to touch their king, as an unlawful action in that
country: the rest of the kings company came orderly to salute Cortesius,
after their manner. Cortesius presented the king with a chain of Bugle, set
with some Diamondes and Rubies, of no great value, but such as pleased the
king, who rewarded him again with two other chains of gold, wrought in manner
of sea Crabbes, and Snails, and so returned into ye city with Cortesius
again, where he, lodgyng him in the royal palace, erected therein for him a
throne, and presented him the second time with other rich gifts, and
provision of all things necessary for him and his train. All the bridge
length, as he went with the king, stood on each side certain great Temples,
wherein were sacrificed slaves, and children paid for tribute by king
Meteezumaes vassalles. Near unto Cortesius throne king Meteezuma had his
clothe of estate, where unto the Spaniardes, before his nobles there assembled,
he spoke in this sort.

Noble and valiant men of arms in the feelde, and merciful Capitanes unto
such as do yield them selves, you are welcome into this country. Of ancient
time we have heard, King Metuzuma his oration to the Spaniards,
and in our old Chronicles we do read, that neither I, nor any of this land,
be ancient inhabiters hereof, but aliens and forreyners, brought hither by a
great prince, unto whom we were al subject. While this prince, leauyng us
here, went home again to see his country, our forefathers married, had issue,
builded up houses, and erected certain cities, so that at his return we
neither would go back again with him, nor acknowledge him for our prince any
more: Wherefore we have been ever of opinion, that his posterity would come to
recover this country, and make us his subjects again. Consyderyng then the
place from whence you say that you do come, and that which you give us to
understand of your great and myghtie lord and king that sent you hither, we be
thoroughly persuaded that he is our true Lord, so much the more, for that, as
you say, he has long since known that we dwelt here Assure your selves
therefore, that we will all yield unto you, and acknowledge you our lords, in
his name that sent you: in this will we not fail, we will not deceive you, all
my dominions shall you rule, for all my subjects shall obey, command all
that we have, for you be now in your own province and house. Be ye merry, and
refreshe your selves after your long travail and many labors in the wars.
I am not ignorant what has happened unto you all the way, I doubt not but
that the Campoales and Churultecanes have said evil of me unto you, but I pray
you give no credit unto any man's words concerning me, especially unto my
enemies, some whereof having ben my subjects, at your coming are gone from me,
and do report untruths of me, to purchase therewith your favor. I know that
they bear you in hand, that my seat, the furniture of my house, the very
walls thereof, are beaten gold. Furthermore, that I am a God, that I feign my
self a God, and such like toys: but you see all things here are made of
lyme, stone, and earth. Do you not see that I am made of flesh and bone,
mortal, and corpulent? you see they have not said the truth. I have in deed
certain place left me by my forefathers, A note.
what soever I have it shall be yours, dispose thereof as you think good, I
will now depart to other of my houses where I am wont to lie, I will see
that neither you, nor your train want any thing: be ye of good cheer, be
glad, for you are in your own country, you be in your own houses.

Cortesius aunsweared in few, and to the purpose, especially concerning that
point, the king of Spain to be that prince whom they looked for. After six
days spent there joyfully, noise was brought to Cortesius of certain murders
and injuries offered unto the Spanyardes in a town of Muteezumaes dominions, A
note.
and that by Muteezuma his consent. This occasion took he, thoroughly to bring
Muteezuma in subjection. And first he caused him to keep that house wherein
Cortesius lay, then to send for the malefactors, whom Cortesius openly
executed, by whose confession Muteezuma found gyltie, was for a time set by
the heels, but delivered again by and by, confessyng his fault, and
promysyng all loyalty and dewtie, chose rather to remain a true subject in
Cortesius palace, then to live abroad at liberty like a king, as in effect he
showed, both in sendyng abrod commission to discover the gold mines throughout
all his dominions at Cortesius motion, in geatheryng together great sums of
gold and treasure to be presented unto the Spanyshe king, in geuyng both
counsel, and the means how to conquer crftelie prince Cacamozin,
Muteezumaes vassal, refusyng all obedience unto the Spanyardes, finally in a
public assembly, exhortyng all his nobles to acknowledge the king of Spain
for their sovereign Lord, and to yield unto him that obedience and in his
name, to Cortesius that duty, which he him self was wont to look for at
their hands. The process was written by public notaries, confyrmed by the
nobles, and a copy thereof delivered unto Cortesius. Mexico province, Mexico.
enuyronned about with high and Alpyshe mountains, stands in a plain
country in circuit.70. leagues, about the greatest part whereof are two Meres,
the one of salt water, the other of fresh. The two lakes go one into the other
at a streict, caused by little hills that run amyd all the foresaid plain.
This streict is passed by boat out of the one lake into the other, to all the
towns standing on either side of the aforesaid lakes. Our Indyshe writers name
the boats Canoa, the Indians call them A^caler, troughes as it were, all of
one piece. I have traueyled in the like upon the river Sone, in the edge of
France, near high Burgundy. In the mydst of the salt Mere, two leagues every
way from the land, stands that rich and welthy city Temixtitan or
Themistitan, Themestitan
no less in quantity then Siuilia, or Corduba in Spain. From the land, unto
it lie four ways, or walls built up out of the water two Spears length
broad, commodiously for such as trayuayle thither by land, with sundry
draught brydges by the way, to cut of invasions if need were. Of these four
ways, one was that, where Cortesius met with king Muteezuma. In one of these
walls or bridges, fresh water is brought from the land into the city by two
gutters, no less in quantity then hoggesheades: the one thereof serves when
ye other is either stopped, or musty. The streats are straight, many in number,
built much after the manner of Uenice, both to go by land and by water. The
brydges over the water in this city be made of woodde, of such breadth that
ten may pass over them together, so many in number, that it were a thing
almost infinite to reckon them.

The number of houses therein amounts to.60. thousand. Amongst other one
streate is very large, sumptuously buylte, and famous for all sorts of
merchaundies, that province yields, wont to be sold there.60. thousand
merchauntes, as it is thought daily haunt that streat. There are sold sundry
sorts of mettales iewelles, fruits, foul, herbs, and all other necessaries
seruyng for meats, clothes, warfar, buyldings, and pleasure. For every
special kind of merchaundies, is appointed a special standing by it self.
They sell by tale and measure, the use of weyghtes as yet they have not. Their
money is a kind of Nutte shells, of the kyrnell it self is made their drink.
The tree is planted under the bows of some other for defense, until it be
grown strong, hable to abide the heat of the Sun, then is the fense tree
cut down, and that let to continue, many Lords have thereof great revenues
in that country. Steel and Iron they want, in steed whereof they use to make
their instruments of a kind of hard stone, wherewith they work gold,
silver, copper, brass, exellently well in what form or shape so ever they
list. You can not show them any kind of thing, but they will draw it, and
set it out most lively in metal, so cunnyng artificers they be. To the markets
all things are brought, either by water in Canoaes, or on slaves backs. There
stands a goodly palace in the market place for judgment. There be resydent
always.x. or.xii. grave senators, to see good order kept in that streate, to
decide controversies happenyng there, to punyshe offenders. Other see what is
to be sold in the market, and what measure is made. Many gorgeous temples be
in this city, many goodly towers buylte where noble men have been buried, with
gallant chappelles to their Idolles, many princely palaces, for that all the
nobility of that country lies some part of the year in the city, and the
best citizens great rich men. The good order and policy in so barbarous a
nation, is wonderful to behold. Concerning their abominable Idolatry,
Cortesius is worthy of great commendation, for the throwyng down the Idols
where he came, being a stranger, though the princes of that province and
Meteezuma also took it not well, principally in the palace, persuadyng them
that it was not seemly for a king to worship that which a knave or slave of
his had made. Every noble man has, besides the palaces in the city, his
castle, soldiers, receyuers, and other officers in the country: and near the
court gallant houses for recreation, with pleasant gardens, orchardes, pondes,
The Courtiers.
and other the like delights. The noble men and Gentlemen of this country,
can not be few in number, whereas daily the court is furnished with five
hundred young gentlemen, besides the multititude of seruyng men that attend on
them. And the fashion in this country is of all the nobility, to send their
sons for education sake unto the Court, although many of them dwell an hundred
and fyftie, or two hundred leagues of. So large and so myghtie is the kingdom
of Mexico, and yet so well governed, the king so duetyfully obeyed of all his
subjects, as well absent as present, each shyre yeeldyng and duly paying unto
him the commodities thereof, according to their custom, that Cortesius thinks
no prince in the world to be more feared and reverenced of his people. The king
has sundry goodly palaces, The kings houses.
and in them many rich and costly ornaments, of gold, of silver, of
feathers, so artificially wrought, that neither any sort of needle work, nor
kind of picture, may seem to make the like show. Among the rest, three
special houses of recreation the king has in his palace. In one of them are a
number of moustrous and defourmed persons, The service of the king.
though they come not always in the kings sight. These gentlemen sit down to
dynner when the king sytteth, and do fare as well as he, their folowers have
their reuersion. The buttrey, cellar, pantry, and other offices never shut,
come in who will, meat and drink he can not want. The hall wherein the king
dines, is matted under foot, his meat is brought up by.300. young men
pensioners, flesh, fyshe, fruits, salates of all sorts upon chaffyng dyshes
in the winter to keep the meats warm. These wayters never come near the
board, for the king sytteth on a leather cushyng artificially wrought, at a
table raylled about, within the precinct whereof stands his Sewer, to set
him down those meats he lyketh of best. At his right hand six old men sit
down, unto whom the king him self carueth. The king washes before meat and
after, he is served in earthen dyshes, his cups be of the same metal: he
shyfteth him self four times a day. Whatsoever he has once used, be it
apparel* napery, or any other kind of household stuff, it is never brought
him any more to use, but bestowed by him upon his servants or friends at
convenient times. For honor sake each one comes into the palace barefoote,
in most humble wise they come before the king, when they are called, bowing
down their heads, their eyes to the ground. It were great presumption to look
the king in the face when he talks with any of them. A man would think they
were all dombe in the presence of the king, such is their silence. No man dare
turn his back to the king, but departing from him each one goes backewarde.
No man dare go out of his place when the king passes by. At his going abroad
he is followed with a great troop of his nobles and gentelmen, and has three
rods borne before him, one whereof he takes in his own hand when he comes
forth out of his lytter, wherein commonly he is carried abroad. In conclusion no
heathen prince has so many ceremonies as this king of Mexico. Quietly in this
city from the.8. of September the year of our lord.1520. until May
following, remained Cortesius with all honor, enjoying his pictorye, and rulyng
so mighty a kingdom conquered by him, with all prosperity. When Velasque a
Spanyarde, then Lieuetenaunt of Cuba, that ever envied at his good hap, sent
Naruaez a lusty young captain with eyghtene sail well appointed to command
Cortesius out of Mexico, and to give over the rule of that country, which he
him self had paynefully conquered unto their pleasure, by forged patents from
the Spanyshe king. Much amazed at the first was Cortesius with this tydinges,
considering that if he went against Naruaez, the Mexicanes not yet thoroughly
brought in subjection might in the mean time reuolte: again if he stayed,
Naruaez might put his conquest in ioperdy, violently forcing ye country
euerywhere as he came. The matter was thoroughly known to the barbares of
Themistitan. The king himself had brought him by his vassalles, painted in a
table, the ships, their number, artillarye, horsemen and footmen landed. In
the end Cortesius resolved him self to go against Naruaez. Wherefore leauyng
at Themistitan a Garryson of Spaniardes, the which he hyghly commended unto
Muteezuma, marched forward with.170 footmen, sendyng other.80. that way before
him. Naruaez likewise came on against Cortesius, and had now taken Cempoal,
and styrred up against him those citizens. Cortesius having intelligence of
Naruaez certain being there in an high tower guarded with.800. soldiers,
and.19. Canons set at the steyre foot, thynkyng nevertheless nothing at all
of his coming, set upon Naruaez with.250. men, and there took him on
Witsunday night, the rest of his company yielded them selves. In the mean while
the citizens of Themistitan revolted against their prince and the Spanyshe
government, as by a messenger dispatched thither from Cempoal, to declare
Cortesius good hap and Naruaes imprisoment, it was understood. The castle of
Themistitan besieged, in many places set a fire and undermined, the Spanyshe
Gartyson to be in great ieopardye, the fly boats they made, burnt, the
messenger him self grievously wounded, Muteezuma the king only to favor
them, and him now scarsely obeyed, the nobles to choose death rather then to
obey such geastes, that keep their king like a ward, that dispossess them
of their own city, that meyntayne therein their enemies the Tascaltecans and
Guazuingoes, even before their face at their own charges, to despite them,
that devour their vittaylles hard to come by in that city so situated in the
water, that injury them, that lay on tributes, that by hook and by crook
make away from them whatsoever good there is to ^e had, that break down their
Idolles, and suppress their ancient rytes and ceremonies.

Cortesius therefore speedily with.70. horses and five hundred footmen,
Corte^ius returns to Themistitan.
and as much artillery as he could, returns again to Themistitan, whyther
he came about mydsommer day. At Cortesius entry into the city again, the
Spanyardes, thoroughly beaten by the Barbares with darts and stones from high
pineapple trees, and an high tower that was near, began to take heart, and to
hope for good hap after their great troubles. The Barbares likewise
understanding of Cortesius coming, grew to be more cruel and fyrce* with
horrible cries, shootyng of their arrows, and throwyng an infinite number of
darts and stones, for the company of them was innumerable, that the air
seemed dark and cloudie therewith. Cortesius sent out a captain with two
hundred to rescue the Spanyardes in the palace. This captain slew many of the
Barbares, but the multitude was so great that he did little good. Four of his
souldyers were slain, he him self, greeuousely wounded, had much a do to
retire again. Cortesius set upon them at an other side, little harm did he
them likewise, for that as soon as the Barbares had spent their darts and
stones, each one gat up into the turrette of his house to save him self. The
fight held on fyrcely a good while. Cortesius was forced in the end to retire
with some danger, and loss of many of his soldiers. The which thing when the
Barbares had espied, they begane to give a new assalte on every side of the
palace, to fire the gates, and stoutely to continue batterye, fyghtyng even
upon their fellows dead carcasses, and wyshyng with them rather to be slain,
then to live in bondage under the Spanyardes. Thus spent they in arms the
whole day, yeeldyng a new supply of men (the multitude was so great) four
times an hour, and raysyng clamors all the night long to the Spanyardes great
annoy, that then could take no rest after their paynefull and dangerous
conflycte the day time, few in number, fyghtyng from morning to night without
intermission, and.80. of their company wounded. The next day the Barbares set
upon the Spanyardes again. Cortesius planteth.xiii. feelde pieces, and
furnysheth his vangarde with harquebuziers and archers, but their enemies so
little esteemed death, that seeing at one shoot a dozen of their fellows torn in
pieces, all fear set a side, they supplied still the void places. The day
following, the Spanyardes wanting victuals, issued out in open feelde: they slew
many Barbares, they overthrew the houses near ye palace, they took certain
draught bridges, but at night they returned with their General and 50. of
their company wounded, as hungry as they went forth. Wherefore they caused
warlike engines to be made of boords, in form of a fouresquare house, going
on wheels, placing in each one thereof.20. shot, whom many rascal soldiers
followed with pikeaxes and hatchets, to do harm that way in destroying their
buildings: but stones and darts came so mightily and so thick about the
Spaniardes ears, that such as went thus forth, were feign to creep home
again out of their engines torn in pieces: they that tarried at home could not
once look out but they were domaged. King Muteezuma, desirous to dissuade his
citizens from the assalt, Muteezuma slain.
showing him self unto them out of the Palace, had a blow with a stone,
whereof in three days he dyed. This Prince was of a very good nature, wise,
and very patient, his body the Spaniardes left unto the Mexicans to bury, for
that they them selves had little other leisure then to think how to save their
lives, rather than to bury the dead.

The next day the nobles of the country came to a parle with Cortesius, A
Parle.
at the same place where Muteezuma took his deaths wound. Cortesius exhorted
them to peace, otherwise threatening the utter decay and ruin of that their so
famous and noble a city, with protestation of piety on them whom once he had
taken to be his friends, promising pardon for that which was done, and setting
down what befell unto other nations that refused his friendshyp. The Mexicans
making small account of his words, answered, that they took him for no
friend, but for their enemy, that he should depart with all his train out of
their country if he would have peace, otherwise they would so long continue
their siege, until by force they had driven him out, though for every
Spanyarde slain, there dyed a thousand Mexicans, for his friendshyp they
cared not, pardon they asked not, most willingly they would all dye, so that
they might deliver their posterity from the Spanyshe tyranny.

Wherefore Cortesius, waying with him self the great danger that presently
might ensue for want of victualles if he stayed, the Mexicans continuing their
assalte, for peril to be stopped at the draught bridges if he departed, so
much the more for that these Barbares were not ignorant of.70. thousand
ducates heaped up together by him in that province: set upon them the second
time with the aforesaid engines, but all in vain. So stoutly their enemies
defended them selves, and so fiercely they resisted the assalte given. Chiefly
the Spaniardes courage appeared in winnyng of a certain Tower that always
commanded them, next in the ruin of such houses as for the nearenes thereof
bred them great incombrance and peril. After many wounds received, and great
slaughter done on both sides, the principal citizens, counterfectyng a
conclusion of peace, promised obedience unto Cortesius, so that all deeds past
might be forgotten. Cortesius lykyng well thereof, at their request set free a
priest he had of theirs in prison, to deal betwyxt them, and thoroughly
persuaded that no guyle was meant, withdrew his company from skirmishing. But he
was no sooner set down to dynner, after his restless afflictions and
continual labors, but the Mexicans took the town bridges, and voyded the
trenches, which Cortesius for passage had caused to be filled up. Presently
therefore he rushed out amongst them again with his horsemen, but the journey
went so hardly with the Spanyardes, that Cortesius wounded in the head was
scarsly able to retire again, many of his company were slain, such as escaped
were not able to continue in the field any longer, wearyed with blows, worn
out with hunger. It remained only, that now they either presently must peryshe,
or else depart out of the country. By night therefore Cortesius and his
souldyers privily thought to slyp away with Muteezumaies children, Cortesius
fleeeth out of Themistitan.
and certain of the Mexican nobles captives, charging the Spanysh king his
officers with the fif^h part of his treasure, and taking the residue thereof
with him. But the Barbares having intelligence thereof, oppressed them in the
way, took their goods, slew many of the Spaniards, and with them their
captives: if happily any escaped, they were such as marched in the most, for
both the vangarde and rereward were altogether discomfited and lost, to the
number of.150 Spanyardes 42. horses.2000 Tascaltecans, and Guazuzings, that
aided them. Thus paynefully, with great danger and no less grief, Cortesius
left Themistitan, pursued by his enemies that followed him, nothing helped by
the way as he repaired home, refreshyng his Camp with a dead horse, after five
days spent with the food of parched corn, and that in small quantity before
he came to Tascalteca.

The Tascaltecans curtuously enterteyned him and his, with whom he made his
abode.20. days, to refreshe his wearyed army: that done, he conquered other
cities in that province, either enemies unto the Tascaltecans, as Tepeaca,
where he buylte for safety of passage Segura la Frontera: or such as for
fear of the Mexicans had not yielded them selves before, to wit,
Guaccachiulla, Izzuca, and other principal towns therabout. Finally, he
sends for horsemen and shot out of the Island Hispaniola, wynneth many
Barbares favor and assistance against the Mexicans, makes provision of.13.
fly Boats, to annoye by water the citizens of Themistitan. Meteezumaes,
Nepheu, Catamazinus, the new king of Mexico, fearyng on the other side the
Spanyardes return, and seeing many of his subjects to fall from him, wants
not in any wise to set all things in a readiness for wars, especially
pykes, to annoye the horsemen, whom they most dreaded. Eightiene leagues from
Tascalteca toward Themistitan, Cortesius returns to the siege of
Themistitan,
stands Tazuco, a goodly city of the Mexicans. Cortesius first of all took
this city, and caused his provision for fly Boats wrought in Tascalteca to be
brought thither. Such was the hatred of the Tascaltecans and Guazuzings against
the Mexicans, that they carried the timber upon their shoulders from
Tascalteca to Tazuco, without any grudging, for the provision aforesaid. From
Tazuco Cortesius cut a passage into the salt Mare of Mexico, to bring his fly
Boats to the siege of Themistitan: this trenche, three English miles long,
and four fathom deep, was finyshed by.8000. pyoners of that country in
fyftie days. This navy annoyed very much the citizens, in destroying their
sculles and troughes, and stopping their passage from place to place, besides
the assal^e given therewith to the town it self. Cortesius army, ever as it
came, destroyed all such places by the way, that either persecuted him fleeing
away before, or presently might damage his return.

The city he besieged in three places at once, after that he had cut of all
the fresh water conductes, and taken the ways and bridges, and stopped all
passage for any enemy of his into the town: the number of his soldiers
amounted unto.120000. for out of all the country about, the Barbares came with
Cortesius, some for liberty, some for friendshyp, some for hope of gain. The
siege lasted nevertheless ten weeks, in the end whereof with continual
battry the city defaced, and more than.100000. citizens worn out partly in
fight, and partly wasted with misery and hunger, Cortesius took their new king
privily walkyng in a secret corner of the lake, Themistitan conquered again.
and subdued thoroughly with him the city Themistitan.14. towns by the lake
side, and all the Mexican realm and province, unto the Spanyshe crown, in the
jurisdiction whereof it does presently remain. The spoil of the city, in
value great, Cortesius divided amongst the Spanyshe souldyers, reseruyng the
fyfth part thereof, and certain fine feather works, the which he sent into
Europe, to be presented unto Charles the fyfth king of Spain, and Emperor,
than in Germany.

Who lysteth to see this history more at large, may read Cortesius
Nauigations, and Frauncis Lopez work thereof written in the Spanyshe tongue,
made not long since Italian by Lucius Maurus, and if I be not deceived, now a
doing into English. An abridgement thereof I promised, or a commentary, as
Caesar terms such kind of wrytynges, to give other men occasion to set
forth at large those things by leisure, which briefly are noted and signified
in few unto some, that willingly would not be altogether ignorant thereof,
nor yet stand to long in any such discourses. To set down particulerly each
Spanyarde and Portugale his doings in these new discovered lands, to draw
Geographically the places, to write all their battelles, victories, and
conquestes, to describe the cities rased, the towns erected, to point out the
Capitaynes personages, to show their traueyles and good hap, it would require
an other Homere, an other Thucydides, an other Liuius labor: it would require
an other Emperor to set students a work, as Justinian did his law
geatherers: the relations of the Indyshe traueylers are so many in number,
their reports so diverse, the volumes written thereof so huge, and in so sundry
languages.

R.W.

FINIS.
R. VVilles Special aduises to be observed in readyng over this work.
Fol. 6. De Medea. put out De. Fol. 7. Of my Decades, read of my first Decade.
For as the two first books of the first Decade were by. P.M. dedicated unto
Ascanio Visconte, than Cardinal and Uicechaunceller of Rome, so are the eight
books following in the same Decade written to the Cardinal of Aragonia. Fol.
54. Every Decade has ten books or Chapters, whereof it has, according to the
Greek word, that name. Fol. 20 A. and. O. etc. His meaning is, that this
self same point is extreme West, in respect of one half of the world, and
extreme East in respect of the other half, or hemisphere beneath us. Fol. 31.
Iuga de Canias. Read. Iuego de Canas. Fol. 35. Barramedabas. Read. Barrameda.
Fol. 39. To be part of the continent. This was then spoken for want of further
knowledge, as in other writings following it will appear. Fol. 45. The gold
whereof they are made is native. etc. This place should be thus Englished.
Their gold is like unto that gold in Germany, whereof the Florenes are made.
The next sentence likewise is not without some falte of the translator, for
the latin goes thus. Alibi in eo tractu intra vaginam mentularem neruum
reducunt, funicuio que praeputium alligant. Fol. 47. Gorgodes Meducias. Read.
Medusaeas, Fol 49. Being demanded of me. This place should you read thus.
Being demanded of me afterward, were it not a sea separating two lands: they
answered, the water there of to be fresh and sweet, and the further they went
up against the stream, it to be so much the more fresh and sweet, to be full
of Islands and wholesome fish. They dare aduouche the breadth thereof to be
more than.30. leagues, and the river very swiftly to fall into the sea,
yeeldyng unto the fury of the fresh water. Fol. 49. Beyond the city of
Cathayo. They supposed it according to their skyll in unknown places. Fol. 50.
Animae album. Read. Animen. Item. You shall now therefore. This sentence is not
in. P.M. But an other of the same length, wherein he abaseth his own knowledge,
in respect of T. Liuius, and avouches the fantasi^s following to be better
than Lucianus tales, for that Lucianus ^^^ned his fables, but these follyes to
be truly such in deed. Fol 51. But now most noble Prince. Three other vain
tales are here left out, of the beginning of the sea, and the original of woman
kind: all Greece could never have imagined more vain, more scornful, more
shameful fables: and so are they left to such as list to read them in that
language wherein P. Martyr did write them, with the praise of such Barbarous
ministers as do preach them. Fol. 57 The year of Christ.1520. Read.1502.
Fol. 83. Pezulana. Read. Petrus Arias. Fol. 89. Or that in Niogita. Read, or
that in the black burnt Moors country, or kingdom of Melinde. Fol. 90.
Water is turned into air. Read, air is turned into water. Fol. 98. The niene
Boats of Culchas. Read, or Culchas. Fol. 153. Co^lacutea Read. Calecut,
Cochin, Comorin Fol. 164. Etesti. Read, Etesiae Fol. 169. ^emobal Read,
Cempoal Fol. 186. The generations of nations. Read, of metalles. Fol. 231.
Eight. Read, eighteth. Item. 36. Read, 63. Fol. 232 The West Ocean. Read,
South Ocean, namely Mar del zur Fol. 234. (...) in the margin, should have
place in the text before. (...). Read, the Greek verse (...) and (...). Fol.
252. P. 231. In the margin. put it out. Fol. 253. Peruse, these four volumes,
Read, the four volumes. Fol. 260. Santlianum, Read, Santianum Fol. 265. Obo,
alias, Oba and Obi Fol. 268. Fladimer, al, Volodimer Item, Smolne, al,
Smolensko Fol. 269. Impreignable, Read, inexpugnable. Fol. 270. Nicene, Read,
Nice. And of their faith more lykely hereafter. fol 273 although fol. 302. the
former opininion be recited again. Fol. 274. Prohibit, Read, prohibited. Fol.
283* Volham, Read, Volgha Item, Diuidna, al, Duina Item, Vistiuga, Read each
where, Vstinga Fol. 279. Schondia, for these countries following see Ortelius.
45. table in his first edition, de reg, Septentional Fol. 280. Sigismundus
liberus, Read, liber, for he was Baron of Harbestein and the Deutche Barons
are called frey heren, whereof in latin also his title was written, Liber Baro
ab Herbestein, out of his works is that discourse taken. Fol. 301. Fol. 281.
Wardhus Castle.54. the one row of figures here signifies the longitude, the
other shows the Latit^de. The reader for his assurance herein, shall do
well to confer all the figures so set, with the Mappes, lest he be deceived.
Fol. 294. By unknown nations. Read, motions. Fol. 297. The river Clesma. al.
Desma. Item. Marouians. Read. Morauians Fol. 298. This tongue is spread
further. Read again of the Sclauon tongue at large. Fol. 301. Fol. 304.
Bengas, Of their money, and also of all other nations coins shall you have a
special discourse hereafter, if God send us life. Fol. 308. Tumen. It should
seem to be that Tamen spoken of before. Fol. 246. Fol. 310. To Artach. Read,
in Artachs. Fol. 311. Besermanni. What they be. Read, Fol. 335. Fol. 312. As
do the Christians, imagining so of us, for that many Christians, to wit, the
meaner sort, dwell commonly ever in one place. Fol. 316. Seven werstes, to wit,
seven Moscouian miles, that is, five English miles and somewhat more. Fol.
321. It shall suffice to the reader, put out, to. Item. Sachana. al. Sughaua.
Hisnouogrod. Read, Nisnouogrod. Tartars, Nogaies, point it thus. Tartars
Nogais. Bilbil. al Bilbek. Casbin. Read, Casmin. Baccho. al Bachu.
Fol. 323. Sharuan. al Chirua, and Seruan. Tollepan. Read, Torbante. Fol. 324.
Arash al. Exesch. Fol. 326. Unto Mecha in Arabia, to honor Mahumets tomb,
whereof you shall read in Jews Vartomannus Nauigations. Item. Ardaxuil.
Read. Ardouil. Item. Fol. 320. for Ardeuelim. Fol. 327. Ought to be beloved.
Read, believed. Fol. 329. Tulibante. Read Torbante. Fol. 329. The Persians,
to wit, the Gentlemen of Persia. Esteeming arts and sciences, for silks and
furnitures of horses. Fol. 326. and. 330. Fol. 330. Turquestan, it lies
Northeast from the Caspian sea. Item. Phison, is thought to be Ganges. it
should rather seem to be some branch of Tigris. Fol. 331. Deli. al.
Dalangar. Caraconi. al. ^orassan. His chief mansion place, it was so: but now
it is not. Fol. 322.
Fol. 337. Potofarina, read Portofainra. Boua, read ^ona.
Fol. 345. We made sail. Read, sale. Fol. 354. inclinations, diuinatio^s.
Read, diuiations or wandryng. Fol. 358. Stranger solgiers, read Soldyers. Fol.
375. In the mean time. This is the later end of the sixte Chapter, the
residue whereof the Printer has for modesty left out: And Eden him self
has in this translation also left out many things to be seen in the latin
copye, either as superfluous, or unseemly. I am not willing to defraude
Vartomannus, Eden, or the Printer of their due. Fol. 382. Condaliis. I would
read Sandaliis, as it may seem in the letter following, meaning thereby a
kind of high shoe or buskyn. Fol. 394. Rhyme. Read, rine. Fol. 429. It was
lost and not found until this day. It may be that P. Martyr did write the
history thereof at large, in Pope Clement the.7. his time, that happily was
lost at the sack of Rome: but his abridgement of the aforesaid viage shall
you find written to Pope Adrian afterward in his fyft Decade, Cap. 7. Out of
the which work, together with the reports of other traueylers that went the
aforesaid vyage, this present Pamflet has been taken. Fol. 429. A day lost in
three years and one month. I do not think but that in very deed these
Spanyardes that sailed thus round about the world, following continually the
west, did lose on day in their journey. In like manner I am of opinion, that if
the Portugales followed continually the East round about the world, they
should find at their iourneyes end one day to many. I mean it thus. Let two
passengers depart from Lisbona, the one Westward, the other Eastwarde, round
about the world, and both return home again that day which we do call
Mydsommer day. I say that day would be to the Eastern passengers the next
day after Mydsommer day, to the western traueylers but Mydsommer even. My
reason is, for that every.xv. degrees of the great circle East or West, makes
difference one hour: wherefore Eastward after fyfteene degrees, you shall begin
your day one hour sooner: after fyfteene degrees Westward, you shall end
your day one hour later, then you did in that place whence you did set
forth. The whole circle than of the world conteynyng precisely.360 degrees,
that is, four and twenty times.xv proportionably to the.24 hours of the day,
how can it be otherwise, but that these passengers traueylyng still either
Westwarde round about the world, or Eastwarde, should either mysse a day at
their iorneyes end or else find one to many. Fol. 430. The epistle of
Maximilian Transiluane. This preface is to be found in the tome of the
nauigations written in Latin. Fol. 524. Fol. 436. The pole Antartike Of these
stars, and the order thereof about the Antartike pole, may you read more at
large in Albericus Vesputius nauigations. Cap. 119. to be seen in the volume
of nauigations written in Latin. Fol. 91.
The Table.
Richard Wills Epistle dedicatorye to the Countes of Bedforde. The Preface
for the whole work. The first discoueryng of the west Indies. Fol. 1 What
manner of man Christopher Colombus was. Fol. 1 What labor Columbus took. Fol.
2 Why they were called Indians. The first part.
Fol. 3 Of the color of the Indians. Fol. 4 Plato his testimony of the west
Indies. Fol. 5 Seneca his testimony thereof. Fol. 6 P. Martyrs Epistle to
Charles the Emperor. Fol. 30 The first Decade. Fol. 8 The second Decade. Fol.
57 The third Decade. Fol. 94 The.4. Decade otherwise entitled of the west
Indish Islands. Fol. 155 A brief rehearsal of the contents of the aforesaid
Decades. Fol. 173 R. Edens preface, Gonzalus Ferdinandus Ouiedus Epistle to
Charles the 5. concerning his history of the west Indies. Fol. 185 The
ordinary navigations from Spain to the West Indies. Fol. 187 Of two notable
things as touching the west Indies: and of the great riches brought from
thence into Spain. Fol. 188 Of the gold mines and manner of woorkyng in them.
Fol. 188 The manner of fyshyng for pearls. Fol. 191 The familiarity that the
Indians have with the devil. Fol. 193 Of temperate and habitable regions under
the Equinoctial line. Fol. 195 Of diverse particular things, as Woormes
Serpents, beasts fowls. Fol. 198 Of trees, fruits, and plants. Fol. 204 Of
Reeds or Canes. Fol. 207 Of the venomouse apples wherewith the Canibales
inuenome their arrows. Fol. 209 Of fyshes and the manner of fyshyng. Fol. 211
Of the rysyng and falling of our Ocean sea and the south sea called Mar del
zur. Fol 215 Of the stricte of land between the north sea and Mar del zur.
Fol. 216 How things of one kind differ by the nature of the place, and of the
beasts called Tigers. Fol. 217 Of the manners and customs of the Indians of
the firm land and of their women. Fol. 219 Of the Islands Hispaniola and
Cuba. Fol. 221 Of the Island Cuba and other. Fol. 224 Of the land of
Baccallaos. Fol. 225 Particularly of new Spain called Noua hispania or
Mexico. Fol. 225 Of Peru. Fol. 226 Of the river called Rio de la Plata that is
the river of silver. Fol. 226 Of the lands of Laborador and Baccaleos lying
west and northwest from England, and being part of the fyrme land. Fol. 227
The description of the land Florida. The second part
Fol. 228 For master. Cap. Furbysheys passage by the northwest. Fol. 230
Reports of the province China. Fol. 237 Of the Island Giapan and other little
Isles in the east Ocean. Fol. 251 ^oysins Fr^es letters touching Giapan. Fol.
253 Of (...) Isles betwixt China and the Moluccaes. Fol. 260 A discourse o^
diverse voyages and ways by the which Spices, precious sto^es, and gold were
brought in old time from India into Europe (...) par^es of the world also of
the voyage to Cathayo and east India by the north sea, of the voyages likewise
of Sebastian Cabote and particularly of Moscouia. Fol. 254 The third part.
A b^ie^e description of Moscouia by Munster and Gastaldus. Fol. 271 A
description of the north regions and how they are habitable, contrary to the
opinion of the old writers. Fol. 275 Schondia. Fol. 279. Swecia or Sweth land.
Fol. 287. Bothnia. Fol. 187 Groenland. Fol. 280. Gothia or Gothlande. Fol. 288
Islande. Fol. 281. Futland with Emingia. Fol. 288 Laponia. Fol 282. Norway.
Fol. 284. The difference of regions and causes of great cities. Fol. 288 Paulus
Iouius history of the Moscouian embassage. Fol. 289 Other notable things
concerning Moscouia geathered out of Sigismunde Baron of Herbestein. Fol. 301 A
description of the regions and people lying north and east from Moscouia to the
river Petzora and the province of Iugra and Oby even to Cathayo. Fol. 305 Of
the famous river Tanais, Fol. 308 The way out of Moscouia to Cathayo. Fol. 309
Of the Tartars. Fol. 311 The navigations by the frostye sea. Fol. 315 K. Edward
the.6. letters to the northeasterne princes by Sir Hugh wylloughbye, in latin
and English. Fol. 318 Our English merchauntes voyage into Persia. Fol. 321 Of
master Ienkensons voyage into Persia. Fol. 322 Of the last vyage into Persia
in the year of our lord 1568. Fol. 324 Of the king of Persia his name. Fol.
330. Of the Persians religione and other their fashions. Fol. 325 Of the
Persian Empire and the original thereof. Fol. 329 Of Persia out of. M.P
Uenetus. Fol. 329 Of the Persian kingdom out of Haytthon. Fol. 330 Of Ormius
kingdom ioynyng unto Persia. Fol. 331 Of the Sophi or king of Persia according
to the late writers. Fol. 331 The trafique of Persia with other countries. Fol.
332 Of the Persian gulf. Fol. 332 The preuileages granted by the Sophi to our
merchauntes. Fol. 332 Arthur Edwardes vyage into Persia, with the continuance
of the former priuileages. Fol. 333 The commodities that Engglyshe merchauntes
may have by the trade into Persia. Fol. 335 The manner how Christians become
Busormen. Fol. 335 Of the Bombasine or Cotton tree. Fol. 336 The writing of the
Persians. Fol. 336 Of two voyages made out of England into Guinea in Afrike.
Fol. 336. A brief description of Afrike. Fol. 337. The first voyage to Guinea.
Fol. 338. Pinteado his letters patentes made him by the king of Portugale his
master for his return. Fol. 341. The second voyage to Guinea, with a more
full description of Africa, Ethiopia, and the black Moors country. Fol. 342.
The Doves of the Island Madera. Fol. 353. Of S. Thomas Island under the
Equinoctial line. Fol. 353. Jews Uertomannus navigations into Arabia, Egypt,
Persia, Syria, Ethiopia, and East India. Fol. 354. The contents of the which
voyages are these following.
The contents of the.vii. books of nauigations and voyages of Lodovicus
Vartomannus to the regions of Arabia, Egypt, Persia, Siria, east India, and
Ethiopia.
The contents of the first book.
The first Chaptere is of the navigations from Uenice to Alexandria in Egypt.
Fol. 355. Of the city named Cayrus, Alcayr, Memphis, or Babylon in Egypt,
upon the river of Nilus. Cap. 2. Fol. 355. Of the cities of Beryntho, Tripoli,
and Antioch. Cap. 3. Fol. 356. Of the cities of Aman and Menin. Cap. 4. Fol.
356. Of the city of Damasco. Cap. 5. Fol. 357. Of such things as are seen in
the city of Damasco. Cap. 6. Fol. 358. Of the Mamalukes of Damasco. Cap. 7.
Fol. 358. The journey from Damasco to Mecha: And of the manners of the Arabians.
Cap. 8. Fol. 359. Of the strength and valiantness of the Mamalukes. Cap. 9.
Fol. 361. Of the cities of Sodoma and Gomorrha. Cap. 10. Fol. 361. Of a
mountain inhabited with Jews: And of the city named Medinathalhabi, where
Mahumet was buried. Cap. 11. Fol. 362. Of the Temple or Chapel and Sepulcher
of Mahumet and his fellows. Cap. 12. Fol. 362. Of the Sect of Mahumet. Cap.
13. Fol. 363. The journey to Mecha. Cap. 14. Fol. 364. The form and situation
of the city of Mecha: And why the Mahumetans resort thither. Cap. 15. Fol.
365. Of the Merchaundies of Mecha. Cap. 16. Fol. 366. The pardons and
Indulgenses of Mecha. Cap. 17. Fol. 366. The manner of Sacrificyng in Mecha.
Cap. 18. Fol. 367. Of the Unicornes of the Temple of Mecha, which are not
seen in any other place. Cap. 19. Fol. 368. Of diverse things which chanced
to the autour in Mecha. Cap. 20. Fol. 368. Of the red sea, and why it can not
be sailed in the night. Cap. 21. Fol 370.
The contents of the secounde book.
Of the city Gezan in Arabia Foelix. That is, the blessed or happy Arabia.
Cap. 1. Fol. 371 Of certain people named Banduin. Cap. 2. Fol. 371 Of an
Island of the red sea named Camaran. Cap. 3. Fol. 371 Of the city of Aden, and
their manners and customs toward strangers. Cap. 4. Fol. 372 How the women
of Arabia are greatly in love with white men. Cap. 5. Fol. 373 Of the
liberality of the queen toward the autour. Cap. 6. Fol. 375 Of the cities of
Lagi and Aiaz in Arabia Foelyx. And of the town of Dante. Cap. 7. Fol. 375 Of
Almacharan, a city of Arabia Foelyx: And of the fruitefulnesse thereof. Cap.
8. Fol. 375 Of Reame, a city of Arabia Foelyr: And the Temperatenesse thereof.
Cap. 9. Fol. 376 Of Sana, a city of Arabia Foelyx. Cap. 10. Fol. 376 Of
Taessa, Zibith, and Damar: great cities of Arabia Foelyx. Cap. 11. Fol. 376 Of
the Soltan of the forsayde cities: And why he is named Sechamir. Cap. 12. Fol.
377 Of Monkeys and Marmasettes, and other beasts noisome to men Cap. 13. Fol.
377 Of certain places of Ethiope. Cap. 14 Fol. 377 Of the city of Zoila in
Ethiope: And the great fruitefelnesse thereof: And of certain strange beasts
seen there. Cap. 15. Fol. 377 Of Barbara, an Island of Ethiope. Cap. 16. Fol.
378 Of Ethiope, read more in the last navigations in the end of the book.
The contents of the third book.
Of Persia, and of certain towns and ports of Persia. Cap. 1. Fol. 378 Of
the Island and city of Ormus or Armusium: And of an Island of Persia where
pearls are found. Cap. 2. Fol. 378 Of the city named Eri, in Corozani, a
region of Persia, and of the riches thereof: Also of Reubarbarum. Cap. 3. Fol.
379 Of a river thought to be Euphrates: and of Castoreum. Cap. 4. Fol. 379 Of
the city of Saint Bragant, bygger then Babylon: And of the king of Persia,
named the Sophi. Cap. 5. Fol. 380
The contents of the fourth book.
Of India, and of the cities, and notable things seen there: And first of the
city of Cambaia, most fruitful. Cap. 1. Fol. 381 The manners of the people of
Cambaia: And of the Soltan of that city Cap. 2. Fol. 381 Of the city of Ceul,
and the manners of thinhabitantes. Cap. 3. Fol. 382 Of Goga an Island of India.
Cap. 4. Fol. 383 Of Decham a very fair city of India. Cap. 5. Fol. 383 Of
certain other goodly cities of India. Cap. 6. Fol. 384 Of Canonor and
Narsinga, great cities of India. Cap. 7. Fol. 384 Of the fruiteful city of
Bisinagar in the kingdom of Narsinga. Cap. 8. Fol. 384 Of the Docilitie,
agilitie and wit of Elephantes. Cap. 9. Fol. 385 Of the ingendryng of
Elephantes: And of the magnificence and riches of the king of Narsinga. Cap.
10. Fol. 386
The contents of the fyfth book.
Of the famous and rich city of Calecut Cap. 1. Fol. 387 Of the king of
Calecut: And of their Idolatrye. Cap. 2. Fol. 387 Of the manner which the king
uses at his meat. Cap. 3. Fol. 388 Of the Priests of Calecut named Bramini.
Cap. 4. Fol. 388 Of the diverse sects of Idolatours in the city of Calecut
Cap. 5. Fol. 398 The apparel of the king, queen, and the inhabitants of the
city of Calecut: And of their manner of feedyng. Cap. 6. Fol. 389 Of their
custom after the death of the king. Cap. 7. Fol. 389 Of their changyng of
wives. Cap. 8. Fol 390 The manner of feedyng of the common people of the
Idolaters: And of these Justice. Cap 9. Fol. 390 Of their honoring of Idols.
Cap. 10. Fol. 390 Of their manner of war. Cap. 11. Fol. 391 Of their ships
and manner of saylyng on the sea. Cap. 12. Fol. 391 The palace and court of the
king of Calecut. Cap. 13. Fol. 392 The Spices of Calecut. Cap. 14. Fol. 392 The
fowls and birds of Calecut. Cap. 15. Fol. 393 Of a most fruitful tree of
all the world. Cap. 16. Fol. 393 How they sow Rise. Cap. 17. Fol. 394 How
their Physicians visit the sick folks. Cap. 18. Fol. 394 Of their
exchaungers, bankers, and brokers. Cap. 19. Fol. 395 Of thinhabitantes of
Poltar and Hiraua. Cap. 20. Fol. 395 Of four fouted beasts, fowls, and
birds of Calecut. Cap. 21. Fol. 395 Of certain Serpents which are seen in
Calecut. Cap. 22. Fol. 396 Of the lyghtes and lamps which are seen in the
palace of the king of Calecut. Cap. 23. Fol. 396 The great multitude of
Idolaters which resort to Calecut for pardon of their sins. Cap. 24. Fol.
396
The contents of the syxth book, of the Navigations of India.
Of the city of Calcolon and Colon. Cap. 1. Fol. 397 Of Cyromandel a city of
India. Cap. 2. Fol. 397 Of the Island of Zailon, and the precious stones found
there. Cap. 3. Fol. 398 Of the tree of Cinamome in the Island of Zailon. Cap.
4. Fol. 398 Of Paleachet, a city of India. Cap. 5. Fol. 399 Of Tarnasari, a
City of India. Cap. 6. Fol. 399 Of the wild and tame beasts in the city of
Tarnasari. Cap. 7. Fol. 399 The manner which the king of Tarnasari uses when
he permits his wife to be deflowred of white men. Cap. 8. Fol. 400 The manner
of burning dead bodies in the city of Tarnasari. Cap. 9. Fol. 400 The Justice
which thinhabitants of Tarnasari observe. Cap. 10. Fol. 401 How the Mahumetans
are buried in the city of Tarnasari. Cap. 11. Fol. 401 The diverse sorts of
their shyps or other vessels of sailing. Cap. 12. Fol. 401 Of Bangella, a
great and rich city of India: And of the great power of the king of that
city. Cap. 13. Fol. 401 Of certain Christian merchauntes which trafique
there. Cap. 14. Fol. 402 Of Pego a famous city of India. Cap. 15. Fol. 402 Of
the magnificence, humanity, and great riches of the king of Pego. Cap. 16.
Fol. 403 Of the city of Melacha, and the great river of Gaza. Cap. 17 Fol. 404
Of the Island of Sumatra or Taprobana. Cap. 18. Fol. 405 Of an other kind of
Pepper: Also of sylke, and the precious gum called Laserpitium or Belzoe.
Cap. 19. Fol. 405 Of three sorts of the tree of Aloes. Cap. 20. Fol. 405 How
the gummes of Aloes and Laserpitium, are proved. Cap. 21. Fol. 406 Of diverse
merchauntes in the Island of Sumatra or Taprobana. Cap. 22. Fol. 406 Of the
Island of Bandan where Nutmegges and Mase are found. Cap. 23. Fol. 407 Of the
Island of Monoch, where Cloves grow. Cap. 24. Fol. 407 Of the Island of
Bornei* Cap. 25. Fol. 407 Of certain observations used in the navigations to
the Island of Giaua. Cap. 26. Fol. 408 Of the Island of Giaua, and the manners of
the people. Cap. 27. Fol. 408 Of the cruel manners in sleying their parents to
the Anthropophagi to be eaten. Cap. 28. Fol. 409 Of the strange course of the
Sun in the Island of Giaua. Cap. 29. Fol. 409 Of their return from the Island
of Giaua. Cap. 30. Fol. 409 Again of the city of Calecut after their return
thither. Cap. 31. Fol. 410 Of the coming of the king of Portugales shyps to
the city of Canonor* Cap. 32. Fol. 411 How the autour playde the physician,
and counterfeit holiness, lest he should be taken for a spy of the Portugales.
Cap. 33. Fol. 411 How the Mahumeta^ priests call the people to their church.
Cap. 34. Fol. 412 The manner of praying among the Mahumetans. Cap. 35. Fol. 412
What subtlety the autour used to depart from Calecut, to go to the Portugales.
Cap. 36. Fol. 413 How he fled to the Portugales from the city of Canonor. Cap.
37. Fol. 413 Of the navy of the city of Calecut, and of the memorable
conflicte between the Christians and Mahumetans: In the which the Portugales
with incredible valiantness, gave their enemies the overthrow: And how the
king of Canonor rejoiced at the victory. Cap. 37. Fol. 415
The contents of the seventh and last book.
The voyage or navigations of Ethiopia. Cap. 1. Fol. 419 Of diverse and many
Islands of Ethiop^. Cap. 2. Fol. 419 Of the Island of Monzambrich, and the
inhabitants thereof. Cap. 3. Fol. 419 Of the Cape, named Caput Bone Spei: That
is, the the Cape of good hope. Cap. 4. Fol. 421 Of the higher east India,
called Terciera. Fol. 42 Of the pryces of precious stones and spyces, with
their weyghtes and measures, as they are accustomed to be sold both of the
Moors, and the Gentyles: and of the places where they grow. Fol. 423. Of the
Rubie. Fol. 423 Of the Rubies which grow in the Island of Zeilam. Fol. 423 Of
the kind of Rubies called Spinelle. Fol. 424 Of the Rubies called Balasni.
Fol. 424 Of the Diamondes of the old mine. Fol. 424 Of Saphires. Fol. 425 Of
Topasies. Fol. 425 Of Turquesses. Fol. 425 Of Iacinthes. Fol. 426 Of Smaragdes
or Emeraldes. Fol. 426 Of diverse kinds of spices, where they grow, what they
are worth in Calecut, and whyther they are carried from thence. And first of
Pepper. Fol. 426 Of Cloves. Fol. 427 Of Cinamome. Of Ginger called Beledi. Of
Ginger Mechino. Fol. 427 Of green Ginger in conserues. Of the Apothecaries
drugges, and of what price they are in Calecut and Malabar. Fol. 428 Of the
weyghtes of Portugale and India, and how they agree. Fol. 429 Of the vyage made
by the Spanyardes round about the world. Fol. 429 Maximilian Transiluanus
letter thereof to the Cardinal of Saltzburge. Fol. 430 The debate and strife,
between the Spaniardes and Portugales for the division of the Indies, and the
trade of Spices, and the Moluccaes, out of Lopez de Gomara. Fol. 448 The
repartition and division of the Indies and new world between the Spanyardes
and the Portugales. Fol. 448 The cause and authority whereby they divided the
Indies. Fol. 450 How and by what occasion the Emperor laid the Islands of
Moluccaes to pledge to the king of Portugale. Fol. 451 Pope Alexander the.6.
his Bull touching the aforesaid partition of the Indies, Latin and English.
Fol. 452. and. Fol. 454 An abridgement of.P. Martyr his.5.6.7. and.8. Decades,
and particularly of F. C. conquest of Mexico by. R.W. Fol. 457
FINIS.
Imprinted at London by Rychard Judge. Anno. 1577.

Cum Priuilegio.


