THE VVonderfull year. 1603.

Wherein is showed the picture of London, lying sick of the Plague.

At the end of all (like a merry Epilogue to a dull Play) certain Tales are
cut out in sundry fashions, of purpose to shorten the lives of long winters
nights, that lie watching in the dark for us.

Et me rigidi legant Catones.

LONDON Printed by Thomas Creed, and are to be sold in Saint Donstones
Church-yarde in Fleet-streete.

TO HIS VVELRESPECTED GOOD friend, M. Cutbert Thuresby, Water Bayliffe of
London.
Books are but poor gifts, yet Kings receive them: upon which I presume, you
will not turn This out of doors. Yet cannot for shame but bid it welcome,
because it bringes to you a great quantity of my love: which, if it be worth
little, (and no marvel if Love be sold underfoot, when the God of Love
himself goes naked) yet I hope you will not say you have a hard bargain,
Sithe^ce you may take as much of it as you please for nothing. I have clapped the
Cognizance of your name, on these scribled papers, it is their livery: So that
now they are yours: being free from any vile imputation, save only, that they
thrust themselves into your acquaintance. But gene^all errors, have general
pardons: for the title of other men's names, is the common Heraldry which all
those lay claim too, whose crest is a Pen-and-Inckhorne. If you read, you may
happily laugh; it is my desire you should, because mirth is both Physical, and
wholesome against the Plague: with which sickness, (to tell truth) this book
is, (though not sorely) yet somewhat infected. I pray, drive it not out of your
company for all that; for (assure your soul) I am so jealous of your health,
that if you did but once imagine, there were gall in mine Incke, I would cast
away the Standish, and forswear meddling with any more Muses.

To the Reader.
AND why to the Reader? Oh good Sir! there is as sound law to make you give good
words to the Reader, as to a Constable when he carries his watch about him to
tell how the night goes, tho (perhaps) the one (oftentimes) may be served in
for a Goose, and the other very fitly furnish the same mess: Yet to maintain
the scuruy fashion, and to keep Custom in reparations, he must be honyed, and
come-ouer with Gentle Reader, Courteous Reader, and Learned Reader, though he
have no more Gentilitie in him than Adam had (that was but a gardner) no more
Ciuili^ie than a Tartar, and no more Learning than the most errand Stinkard,
that (except his own name) could never find any thing in the Horne-booke.

How notoriously therefore do good wits dishonor, not only their Calling, but
even their Creation, that worship Glowwormes (in stead of the Sun) because of a
little false glistering? In the name of Phoebus what madness leads them unto
it? For he that dares hazard a pressing to death (that's to say, To be a man in
Print) must make account that he shall stand (like the old Weathercock over
Powles steeple) to be beaten with all storms. Neither the stinking
Tabacco^breath of a Sattingull, the Aconited sting of a narrow-eyde Critic,
the faces of a fantastic Stage-monkey, nor the Ind^ede-la of a Puritanicall
Citizen, must once shake him. No, but desperately resolve (like a French Post)
to ride through thick and thin: endure to see his lines torn pitifully on the
rack: suffer his Muse to take the Bastoone, yea the very stab, and himself
like a new stake to be a mark for every Hagler, and therefore (setting up all
^hese rests) why should he regard what fools bolt is shot at him? Besides, if
that which he presents upon the Stage of the world be Good, why should he
basely cry out (with that old poetical mad-cap in his Amphitruo) Iouis summi
causa clare plaudite, beg a Plaudite for God-sake! If Bad, who (but an Ass)
would entreat (as Players do in a cogging Epilogue at the end of a filthy
Comedy) that, be it never such wicked stuff, they would forbear to hiss, or
to dam it perpetually to lie on a Stationers stall. Eor he that can so cosen
himself, as to pocket up praise in that silly sort, makes his brains fat with
his own folly.

But Hinc Pudor! or rather Hinc Dolor, heeres the Devil! It is not the rattling
of all this former haile-shot, that can terrisie our Band of Castalian Penmen
from entering into the field: no, no, the murdring Artillery indeed lies in the
roaring mouths of a company that look big as if they were the sole and
singular Commanders over the maine Army of Poesy, yet (if Hermes muster-booke
were searched over) they will be found to ^e most pitiful pure fresh water
soldiers: they give out, that they are heires-apparent to Helicon, but an easy
Herald may make them mere younger brothers, or (to say troth) not so much.
Bear witness all you whose wits make you able to be witnesses in this cause,
that here I meddle not with your good Poets, Nam tales, nusquam sunt hic
amplius, If you should rake hell, or (as Aristophanes in his Frog says) in any
Celler deeper than hell, it is hard to find Spirits of that Fashion. But those
Goblins whom I now am co^iuring up, have bladder-cheekes puffed out like a
Swizzers breeches (yet being pricked, there comes out nothing but wind)
thin-headed fellows that live upon the scraps of invention, and travel with
such vagrant souls, and so like Ghosts in white sheets of paper, that the
Statute of Rogues may worthily be sued upon them, because their wits have no
abiding place, and yet wander without a passe-port. Alas, poor wenches (the
nine Muses!) how much are you wronged, to have such a number of Bastards lying
upon your hands? But turn them out a begging; or if you cannot be rid of their
Riming company (as I think it will be very hard) then lay your heavy and
immortal curse upon them, that what^oeuer they weaue (in the motley-loome of
their rustie pates) may like a beggars cloak, be full of stolen patches, and
yet never a patch like one another, that it may be such true lamentable stuff,
that any honest Christian may be sorry to see it. Banish these Word-pirates,
(you sacred mistresses of learning) into the gulf of Barbarism: doom them
everlastingly to live among dunces: let them not once lick their lips at the
Thespian bowl, but only be glad (and thank APollo for it too) if hereafter
(as hitherto they have always) they may quench their poetical thirst with
small beer. Or if they will needs be stealing your Heliconian Nectar, let
them (like the dogs of Nylus, only lap and away. For this Goatish swarm are
those (that where for these many thousand years you went for pure maids) have
taken away your good nemes, these are they that de^lowre your beauties. These
are those ranck-riders of Art, that have so spur-gald your lusty winged
Pegasus, that now he begins to be out of flesh, and (even only for prouander
sake) is glad to show tricks like Bancks his Curtall. O you Bookes-sellers
(that are Factors to the Liberal Sciences) over whose Stalles these Drones do
daily fly humming; let Homer, Hesiod, Euripid^s, and some other mad Greeks
with a band of the Latins, lie like musketshot in their way, when these Goths
and Getes set upon you in your paper fortifications; it is the only Canon, upon
whose mouth they dare not venture, none but the English will take their parts,
therefore fear them not, for such a strong breath have thesee chese-eaters,
that if they do but blowvpon a book they imagine straight it is blasted: Quod
supra nos, Nihil ad nos, (they say) that which is above our capacity, shall
not pass under our commendation. Yet would I have these Zoilists (of all
other) to read me, if ever I should write any thing worthily: for the blame
that knowne-fooles heap upon a deserving labor, does not discredit the same,
but makes wise men more perfectly in love with it. Into such a ones hands
therefore if I fortune to fall, I will not shrink an inch, but even when his
teeth are sharpest, and most ready to bite, I will stop his mouth only with
this, Haec mala sunt, sed tu, non meliora facis.

Reader.
WHereas there stands in the Rere-ward of this Book a certain mingled Troop
of strange Discourses, fashioned into Tales, Know, that the intelligence which
first brought them to light, was only slying Report: whose tongue (as it often
does) if in spreading them it have tript in any material point, and either
slipped too far, or fallen too short, bear with the error: and the rather,
because it is not wilfully committed. Neither let any one (whom those Reports
shall seem to touch) cavil, or complain of injury, sithence nothing is set
down by a malicious hand. Farewell.

THE VVONDERfull year.
VErtumnus Vertumnus God of the year.
being attired in his accustomed habit of changeable silk, had newly passed
through the first and principal Court-gate of heaven: to whom for a farewell,
Description of the Spring.
and to show how dutiful he was in his office, Ianus (that bears two faces
under one hood) made a very mannerly low leg, and (because he was the only
Porter at that gate) presented unto this King of the Months, all the
New-yeares gifts, which were more in number, and more worth then those that are
given to the great Turk, or the Emperor of Persia: on went Vertumnus in his
lusty progress, Priapus, Flora, the Dryades, and Ha^^adryades, with all the
wooden rabble of those that dressed Orchards and Gardens, perfuming all the
ways that he went, with the sweet Odours that breathed from flowers; herbs
and trees, which now began to peep out of prison: by virtue of which excellent
aires, the sky got a most clear completion; lookte s^^g and smoothe, and had
not so much as a wart st^^king on her face: the Sun likewise was freshly and
very richly apparelled in cloth of gold like a Bridegroom, and in stead of
gilded Rosemary, Upon the 23. of March the Spring begins, by reason of the
Suns entrance into Aries.
the horns of the Ram, (being the sign of that celestial bride house where
he lay, to be married to the Spring) were not like your common horns parcel
gilt, but double double-gilt, with the liquid gold that melted from his beams,
for joy wereof the Lark sung at his window every morning, the Nightingale
every night the Cuckooe (like a single sole Fiddler, that reeles from Tavern
to Tavern) plide it all the day long: Lambs friskte up and down in the
valleys, Kids and Goats leapt too and fro on the Mountains: Shepherds sat
piping, country wenches singing: Lovers made Sonnets for their Lasses, whilst
they made Garlands for their Lovers: And as the Country was frolike, so was the
City merry: Olive Trees (which grow no where but in the Garden of peace) stood
(as common as Beech does at Midsomer) at every man's door, branches of Palm
were in every man's hand: Streets were full of people, people full of joy:
every house seemde to have a Lord of misrule in it, in every house there was
so much ^ollity: no Scritch-Owle frighted the silly Countryman at midnight, nor
any Drum the Citizen at noonday; but all was more calm than a still water,
all hushed, as if the Spheres had been playing in Consort: In conclusion, heaven
looked like a Palace, and the great hall of the earth, like a Paradise. But O
the short liu'de Felicity of man! O world of what slight and thin stuff is
thy happiness! Just in the midst of this iocund Holy Day, a storm rises in
the West: The Queens ^icknes.
Westward (from the top of a Ritch-mount) descended a hidious tempest, that
shook Cedars, terrified the tallest Pines, and cleft in sunder even the
hardest hearts of Oak: And if such great trees were shaken, what think you
became of the tender Eglantine, and humble Hawthorne; they could not
(doubtless) but droope, they could not choose but die with the terror. The
Element (taking the Destinies part, who indeed set abroach this mischief)
scowled on the earth, and filling her hie forehead full of black wrinckles,
tumbling long up and down (like a great bellyed wife) her sighs being
whirlewindes, and her groans thunder, at length she fell in labor, and was
delivered of a pale, meagry, weak child, named Sickness, whom Death (with a
pestilence) would needs take upon him to nurse, and did so. This starueling
being come to his full growth, had an office given him for nothing (and that's a
wonder in this age) Death made him his Herald: attirde him like a Courtier,
and (in his name) chargde him to go into the Privy Chamber of the English
Queen, to sommon her to appear in the Star Chamber of heaven.

The sommons made her start, but (having an invincible spirit) did not amaze
her: yet whom would not the certain news of parting from a King^ome amaze!
But she knew where to find a richer, Her death.
and therefore lightly regarded the loss of this, and thereupon made ready
for that heavenly Coronation, being (which was most strange) most dutiful to
obey, that had so many years so powrefully commanded. She obayed Deaths
messenger, and yielded her body to the hands of death himself. She dyed,
res^gning her Scepter to posterity, and her Soul to immortality.

To report of her death (like a thunderclap) was able to kill thousands, it
took away hearts from millions: for having brought up (even under her wing) a
nation that was almost begotten and borne under her; that never shouted any
other Aue than for her name, never saw the face of any Prince but her self,
never understood what that strange outlandish word Change signified: how was
it possible, but that her sickness should throw abroad an universal fear, The
genera^^ terror that her death bred.
and her death an astonishment? She was the Courtiers treasure, therefore he
had cause to mourn: the Lawyers sword of justice, he might well faint: the
Merchants patroness, he had reason to look pale: the Citizens mother, he
might best lament: the Sepheards Goddess, and should not he droope? Only the
Soldier, who had walked a long time upon wodden legs, and was not able to give
Arms, though he were a Gentleman, had brisseld up the quills of his stiff
Porcupine mustachio, and swore by no beggars that now was the hour come for
him to be^^irre his stumps: Usurers and Brokers (that are the Devils Ingles,
and dwell in the long-lane of hell) quak^ like aspen leaves at his oaths:
those that before were the only cut-throates in London, now stood in fear of
no other death: but my Signior Soldado was deceived, the Tragedy went not
forward.

Never did the English Nation behold so much black worn as there was at her
Funeral: It was then but put on, to try if it were ^it, for the great day of
mourning was set down (in the book of heaven) to be held afterward: that was
but the dumb show, the Tragical Act has been playing ^uer since. Her Hearse
(as it was^borne) s^emed to be an Island swimming in water, for round about it
there rayned showers of tears, about her deathbed none: for her departure was
so sudden and so strange, that men knew not how to weep, because they had
never bin taught to shed tears of that making. They that durst not speak
their sorrows, whisperd them: they that durst not whisper, sent them forth in
sighs. Oh what an Earthquake is the alteration of a State! Look from the
Chamber of Presence, to the Farmers cottage, and you shall find nothing but
distraction: the whole Kingdom s^emes a wilderness, and the people in it are
transformed to wild men. The May of a Country so pitifully distracted by the
horor of a change, if you desire perfectly to behold, cast your eyes then on
this that follows, which being heretofore in private presented to the King, I
think may very worthily show it self before you: And because you shall see
them attirde in the same fashion that they wore before his Maiesity, let these
few lines (which stood then as Prologue to the rest) enter first into your
ears.

NOt for applauses, shallow fools adventure,
I plunge my verse into a sea of censure,
But with a liver dressed in gall, to see
So many Rookes, catch-polls of poesy,
That feed upon the fallings of hye wit,
And put on cast inventions, most unfit,
For such am I pressed forth in shops and stalls,
Pasted in Powles, and on the Lawyers walls,
For every basilisk-eyde Critics bait,
To kill my verse, or poison my conceit:
Or some smoakt gallant, who at wit repines,
To dry Tobacco with my wholesome lines,
And in one paper sacrifice more brain,
Than all his ignorant scull could ere contain:
But merit dreads no martyrdom, nor stroke,
My lines shall live* when he shall be all smoke.
Thus far the Prologne, who leaving the Stage cleer^, the fears that are
bred in the womb of this al^ring kingdom do next step up, acting thus.

THe great impostume of the realm was draw^e
Even to a head: the multitudino^s spawne
Was the corruption, which did make it swell
With hoped sedition (the burnt seed of hell.)
Who did expect but ruin, blood, and death,
To share our kingdom, and divide our breath.
Religions without religion,
To let each other blood, confusion
To be next Queen of England, and this year
The civil wars of France to be played here
By Englishmen, ruffians, and pandering slaves,
That feign would dig up gowtie usurers graves:
At such a time, villains their hopes do honey,
And rich men look as pale as their white money:
Now they remove, and make their silver sweat,
Casting themselves into a covetous heat,
And then (unseen) in the confederate dark,
Bury their gold, without or Priest, or Clarke.
And say no prayers over that dead pelf,
True: Gold's no Christian, but an Indian elfe.
Did not the very kingdom seem to shake
Her precious massy limbs? did she not make
All English cities (like her pulses) beat
With people in their veins? the fear so great,
That had it not been phisickt with rare peace,
Our populous power had lessend her increase.
The Springtime that was dry, had sprung in blood,
A greater dearth of men, than e're of food:
In such a panting time, and gasping year,
Victuals are cheapest, only men are dear.
Now each wise-acred Landlord did despair,
Fearing some villain should become his heir,
Or that his son and heir before his time,
Should now turn villain, and with violence clime
Up to his life saying father you have seen
King Henry, Edward, Mary, and the Queen,
I wonder you will live longer! then he tells him
He Is loath to see him killed, therefore he kills him,
And each vast Landlord dies like a poor slave,
Their thousand acres makes them but a grave,
At such a time great men convey their treasure
Into the trusty City: wayts the leisure
Of blood and insurrection, which war clips,
When every gate shutts up her Iron lips,
Imagine now a mighty man of dust,
Stands in doubt, what servant he may trust,
With Plate worth thousands: Jewels worth far more*
If he prove false, then his rich Lord proves poor:
He calls forth one by one, to note their graces,
Whilst they make legs he copies out their faces,
Examines their eye-browe, consters their beard,
Singles their Nose out, still he rests afeard:
The first that comes by no means heel allow,
Has spyed three Hares starting between his brow,
Quite turns the word, names it Celeritie,
For Hares do run away, and so may he:
A second shown: him he will scarce behold,
His beard's too red, the color of his gold:
A third may please him, but it is hard to say,
A rich man's pleased, when his goods part away.
And now do cherrup by, fine golden nests
Of well hatched bowls: such as do breed in feasts,
For war and death cupboords of plate down pulls,
Then Bacchus drinks not in gilt-bowles, but sculls.
Let me descend and stoop my verse a while,
To make the Comicke cheek of Poesy smile;
Rank peny-fathers scud (with their half hammes,
Shadowing their calves) to save their silver dammes,
At every gun they start, tilt from the ground,
One drum can make a thousand Usurers sound.
In unsought Allies and unwholesome places,
Back-wayes and by-lanes, where appear few faces,
In shamble-smelling rooms, loathsome prospects,
And penny-lattice-windowes, which reiects
All popularitie: there the rich Cubs lurk,
When in great houses ruffians are at work,
Not dreaming that such glorious booties lie
Under those nasty roofes: such they pass by
Without a search, crying there is naught for us,
And wealthy men deceive poor villains thus:
Tongue-trauelling Lawyers faint at such a day,
Lie speechless, for they have no words to say.
Physicians turn to patients, their Arts dry,
For then our fat men without Physic die.
And to conclude, against all Art and good,
War taints the Doctor, lets the Surgion blood.
Such was the fashion of this Land, when the great Land-Lady thereof left it:
She came in with the fall of the leaf, and went away in the Spring: her life
(which was dedicated to Uirginitie, both beginning and closing up a miraculous
Maiden circle: for she was borne upon a Lady Eve, and died upon a Lady Eve: her
Nativity and death being memorable by this wonder: the first and last years
of her Reign by this, that a Lee was Lords Mayor when she came to the Crown,
and a Lee Lord Mayor when she departed from it. Three places are made famous
by her for three things, Greenewich for her birth, Richmount for her death,
White Hall for her Funeral: upon her removing from whence, (to lend our tiring
prose a breathing time) stay, and look upon these Epigrams, being composed,

1. Upon the Queens last Remove being dead.
THe Queene's remou'de in solemn sort,
Yet this was strange, and seldom seen;
The Queen used to remove the Court,
But now the Court remou'de the Queen.
2. Upon her bringing by water to White Hall.
THe Queen was brought by water to White Hall,
At every stroke, the Oars ^eares let fall.
More clung about the Barge: Fish under water
Wept out their eyes of pearl, and swom blind after.
I think the Barge-men might with easier thyes
Have rowde her thither in her peoples eyes:
For howsoever, thus much my thoughts have skand,
S'had come by water, had she come by land.
3. Upon her lying dead at White Hall.
THe Queen lies now at White Hall dead,
And now at White Hall living,
To make this rough objection even,
Dead at White Hall at Westminster,
But living at White Hall in Heaven.
Thus you see that both in her life and her death she was appointed to be the
mirror of her time: And surely, if since the first stone that was laid for the
foundation of this great house of the world, there was ever a year ordained to
be wondered at, it is only this: the Sibils, Octogesimus, Octauus Annus, That
same terrible 88. 1603. A more wonderful year than 88.
which came sailing hither in the Spanish Armado, and made men's hearts colder
then the frozen Zone, when they heard but an inckling of it: That 88. by whose
horrible predictions, Almanack-makers stood in bodily fear their trade would
be utterly overthrown, and poor Erra Pater was threatened (because he was a
Jew) to be put to ^aser offices, than the stopping of mustard^pots: That same
88. which had more prophecies waiting at his heels, tha^ ever Merlin the
Magitian had in his head, was a year o^ Iubile to this. Platoes Mirabilis
Annu^, (whether it be past already, or to come within these four years) may
throw Platoes cap at Mirabilis, for that title of wonderful is bestowed upon
1603. If that sacred Aromatically persumed fire of wit (out of whose flames
Phoenix poesy does arise) were burning in any breast, I would feed it with no
other stuff for a twelue-moneth and a day than with kindling papers full of
lines, that should tell only of the chances, changes, and strange shapes that
this Protean Climactericall year has metamorphosed himself into. It is able
to find ten Chroniclers a competent living, and to set twenty Printers at
work. You shall perceive I lie not, if (with Peter Bales) you will take the
pains to draw the whole volume of it into the compass of a penny. As first,
to begin with the Queens death, then the Kingdoms falling into an Ague upon
that. Next, follows the curing of that fever by the wholesome receipt of a
proclaimed King. That wonder begat more, for in an hour, two mighty Nations
were made one: wild Ireland became tame on the sudden, and some English great
ones that before seemed tame, on the sudden turned wild: The same Park which
great Julius Caesar enclosed, to hold in that Dear whom they before hunted,
being now circled (by a second Caesar) with stronger pales to keep them from
leaping over. And last of all (if that wonder be the last and shut up the
year) a most dreadful plague. This is the abstract, and yet (like Stowes
Chronicle of Decimo sexto to huge Hollinshead) these small pricks in this
Set-card of ours, represent mighty Countries; whilst I have the quill in my
hand, let me blow them bigger.

The Queen being honored with a Diadem of Stars, France, Spain, and
Belg^a, lift up their heads, preparing to do as much for England by giving
aim, whilst she shot arrows at her own breast (as they imagined) as she had
done (many a year together) for them: and her own Nation betted on their
sides, looking with distracted countenance for no better guests than Civil
Sedition, Uprores, Rapes, Murders, and Massacres. But the wheel of Fate
turned, a better Lottery was drawn, Pro Troia stabat Apol^o, God stuck
valiantly to us. For behold, up rises a comfortable Sun out of the North,
whose glorious beams (like a fan) dispersed all thick and contagious clouds.
The loss of a Queen, was paid with the double interest of a King and Queen.
The Cedar of her government which stood alone and bare no fruit, is changed now
to an Olive, upon whose spreading branches grow both Kings and Queens, Oh it
were able to still a hundred pair of writing tables with notes, but to see the
parts played in the compass of one hour on the stage of this newfound world!
Upon Thursday it was treason to cry God save king James king of England, King
James proclaimed.
and upon Friday hy^ treason not to cry so. In the morning no voice heard but
murmures and lamentation, at noone nothing but shoutes of gladness and triumpe.
S. George and S. Andrew that many hundred years had de^^^d one another, were
now sworn brothers: England and Scotland (being parted only with a narrow
River, and the people of both Empires speaking a language less differing than
english within it self, as the providence had enacted, that one day those two
Nations should marry one another) are now made sure together, and king James
his Coronation, is the solemn wedding day. Happiest of all thy Ancestors (thou
mirror of all Princes that ever were or are) that at seven of the clock were a
king but over a piece of a little Island, and before eleven the greatest Monarch
in Christendom. Now

-- Silver Crowds
Of blisfull Angels and tried Marytrs tread
On the Star-^eeling over Englands head:
Now heaven broke into a wonder, and brought forth
Our omne bonum from the wholesome North
(Our fruitful sovereign) Iamns, at whose dread name
Rebellion swounded, and (ere since) became
Groueling and nerue-lesse, wanting blo^d to nourish,
For Ruin gnawes her self when kingdoms flourish,
Nor are our hopes planted in regal springs,
Never to wither, for our air breeds kings:
And in all ages (from this sovereign time)
England shall still be calde the royal clime.
Most blisfull Monarch of all earthen powers,
Served with a mess of kingdoms, four such bowers
(For prosperous hiues, and rare industrious swarms)
The world contains not in her solid arms.
O thou that art the Meeter of our days,
Poets Apollo! deal thy Daphnean bays
To those whose wits are bay-trees, ever green,
Upon whose hye tops, Poesy chirps unseen:
Such are most fit, t'apparell Kings in rimes,
Whose silver numbers are the Muses chimes,
Whose spritely caracters (being once wrought on)
Out-liue the marble they are insculpt upon:
Let such men chaunt thy virtue, then they fly
On Learnings wings up to Eternity.
As for the rest, that limp (in cold desert)
Having small wit, less judgment, and least Art:
Their verse! it is almost heresy to hear,
Banish their lines some furlong, from thine ear:
For it is held dangerous (by Apolloes sign)
To be infected with a leaprous line*
O make some Adamant Act (n'ere to be worn)
That none may write but those that are true-borne:
So when the worlds old cheeks shall race and peele,
Thy Acts shall breath in Epitaphs of Steel.
By these Comments it appears that by this time Ling James is proclaimed: The
joys that followed upon his proclayming.
now does fresh blood leap into the cheeks of the Courtier: the Soldier now
hangs up his armor, and is glad that he shall feed upon the blessed fruits of
peace: the Scholar sings Hymns in honor of the Muses, assuring himself now
that Helicon will be kept pure, because Apollo himself drinks of it. Now the
thriftie Citizen casts beyond the Moon, and seeing the golden age returned
into the world again, resolves to worship no Saint but money. Trades that lay
dead and rotten, and were in all men's opinion utterly dambd, started out of
their trance, as though they had drunk of Aqua Caelestis, or Unicornes horn,
and swore to fall to their old occupations. Tailors meant no more to be called
Merchant-taylors, but Merchants, for their shops were all lead forth in leases
to be turned into ships, and with their sheares (in stead of a Rudder) would
they have cut the Seas (like Leuant Taffaty) and sayld to the West Indies for
no worse stuff to make hose and doublets of, than beaten gold: Or if the
necessity of the time (which was likely to stand altogether upon bravery)
should press them to serve with their iron and Spanish weapons upon their
stalls, then was there a sharp law made amongst them, that no workman should
handle any needle but that which had a pearl in his eye, nor any copper
thimble, unless it were linde quite through, or bumbasted with silver. What
Mechanical hardhanded Uulcanist (seeing the dice of Fortune run so sweetly,
and resolving to strike whilst the iron was hot) but persuaded himself to be
Master or head Warden of the company ere half a year went about? The worst
players Boy stood upon his good parts, swearing tragical and busking oaths,
that how vilainously soever he randed, or what bad and unlawful action soever
he entered into, he would in despite of his honest audience, be half a sharer
(at least) at home, or else strowle (that's to say travel) with some notorious
wicked sloundring company abroad. And good reason had these timecatchers to be
led into this fools paradise, for they saw mirth in every man's face, the
streets were plumd with gallants, Tabacconists filled up whole Tauernes:
Uintners hung our spicke and span new Iuy bushes (because they wanted good
wine) and their old raine-beaten lattices marched under other colors, having
lost both company and colors before. London was never in the high way to
preferment till now; now she resolved to stand upon her pantoffles: now (and
never till now) did she laugh to scorn that worme-eaten proverb of Lincoln
was, London is, and York shall be, for she saw her self in better state then
Jerusalem, she went more gallant then ever did Antwerp, was more courted by
amorous and lusty suitors then Venice (the minion of Italy) more lofty towers
stood (like a Coronet, or a spangled head-tire) about her Temples, then ever
did about the beautiful forehead of Rome: Tyrus and Sydon to her were like two
thatcht houses, to Theobals: ye grand Cayr but a hogsty. Hinc illae lachrimae,
She wept her belly full for all this. Whilst Troy was swilling sack and sugar,
and mowsing ^at venison, the made Greeks made bonefires of their houses: Old
Priam was drinking a health ^o the wooden horse, and before it could be pledgd
had his throat cut. Corn is no sooner ripe, but for all the pricking up of his
ears he is pard off by the shins, and made to go upon stumps. Flowers no
sooner budded, but they are plucked up and dye. Night walks at the heels of the
day, and sorrow enters (like a tauerne-bill) at the tail of our pleasures: for
in the Appenine height of this immoderate joy and security (that like Powles
Steeple over looked the whole City) Behold, that miracle-worker, who in one
minute ^urnd our general mourning to a general mirth, does now again in a
moment alter tha^ gladness to shrikes and lamentation.

Here would I feign make a full point, The Pl^gu^
because posterity should not be frighted with those miserable Tragedies,
which now my Muse (as Chorus) stands ready to present. Time would thou had
never been made wretched by bringing them forth: Oblivion would in all the
graves and sepulchers, whose rank jaws thou have already closo up, or shall
yet hereafter burst open, thou could likewise bury them for ever.

A stiff and freezing horror sucks up the rivers of my blood: my hair stands
an end with the panting of my brains: mine eye balls are ready to start out,
being beaten with the billows of my tears: out of my weeping pen does the
inck mournefully and more bitterly than gall drop on the pale^ac'd paper, even
when I do but think how the bowels of my sick Country have been torn, Apollo
therefore and you bewitching siluer-tongd Muses, get you gone, Invoke none of
your names: Sorrow and Truth, sit you on each side of me, whilst I am delivered
of this deadly burden: prompt me that I may utter ruthful and passionate
condolement: arm my trembling hand, that it may boldly rip up and Anotimize
the v^cerous body of this Anthropophagized Anthropophagi are Scithia^s, that
feed on men's flesh.
plague: lend me Art (without any counterfeit shadowing) to paint and delineate
to the life the whole story of this mortal and pestifero^s battle, and you
the ghosts of those more (by many) then 40000. that with the vir^lent poison of
infection have been driven out of your earthly dwellings: you desolate
hand-wringing widows, that beat your bosoms over your departing husbands:
you woefully distracted mothers that with disheueld hair fallen into swounds,
whilst you lie kissing the insensible cold lips of your breathless Infants:
you outcast and downe-troden Orphans, that shall many a year hence remember
more freshly to mourn, when your mourning garments shall look old and be for
gotten; And you the Genij of all those emptyed families, whose habitations are
now among the Antipodes: Join all your hands together, and with your bodies
cast a ring about me: let me behold your ghastly vizages, that my paper may
receive their true pictures: Echo forth your groans through the hollow truncke
of my pen, and rain down your gummy tears into mine Incke, that even marble
bosoms may be shaken with terror, and hearts of Adamant melt into compassion.

What an unmatchable torment were it for a man to be ^ard up every night in a
vast silent Charnell-house? hung (to make it more hideous) with lamps dimly and
slowly burning, in hollow and glimmer^ng corners: where all the pauement should
in stead of green rushes, be strewde with blasted Rosemary: withered
Hyacinthes, fatal Cipresse and Ewe, thickly mingled with heaps of dead men's
bones: the bare ribs of a father that begat him, lying there: here the
Chaplesse hollow scull of a mother that bore him: round about him a thousand
Coarses, some standing bolt upright in their knotted winding sheets: others
half mouldred in rotten coffins, that should suddenly yawne wide open, filling
his nosthrils with noisome stench, and his eyes with the sight of nothing but
crawling worms. And to keep such a poor wretch waking, he should hear no
noise but of Toads croaking, Screech-Owles howling, Mandrakes shriking: were
not this an infernal prison? would not the strongest, hearted man (beset with
such a ghastly horror) look wild? and run mad? and die? And even such a
formidable shape did the diseased City appear in: For he that durst (in the
dead hour of gloomy midnight) have been so valiant, as to have walked through
the still and melancholy streets, what think you should have been his music?
Surely the loud groans of rauing sick men: the struggling panges of souls
departing: In every house grief striking up an Allarum: Servants crying out
for masters: wives for husbands, parents for children, children for their
mothers: here he should have met some frantickly running to knock up Sextons;
there, others fearfully sweating with Coffins, to steal forth dead bodies,
least the fatal handwriting of death should seal up their doors. And to
make this dismal consort more full, round about him Bells heavily folling in
one place, and ringing out in another: The dreadfulnesse of such an hour, is
in vtterable: let us go further.

If some poor man, suddeinly starting out of a sweet and golden slumber,
should behold his house flaming about his ears, all his family destroyed in
their sleeps by the merciless fire; himself in the very midst of it, woefully
and like a mad man calling for help: would not the misery of such a
distressed soul, appear the greater, if the rich Usurer dwelling next door
to him, should not stir, (though he felt part of the danger) but suffer him
to perish, when the thrusting out of an arm might have saved him? O how many
thousands of wretched people have acted this poor man's part? how often has
the amazed husband waking, ^ound the comfort of his bed lying breathless by
his side! his children at the same instant gasping for life! and his servants
mortally wounded at the heart by sickness! the distracted creature, beats at
death doors, exclaimes at windows, his cries are sharp enough to pierce
heaven, but on earth no ^are is opend to receive them.

And in this manner do the tedious minutes of the night stretch out the sorrows
of ten thousand: It is now day, let us look forth and try what Consolation
rizes with the Sun: not any, not any: for before the Jewel o^ the morning be
fully set in silver, hundred hungry graves stand gaping, and every one of them
(as at a breakfast) has swallowed down ten or eleven liuelesse carcases:
before dinner, in the same gul^e are twice so many more devoured: and before
the sun takes his rest, those numbers are doubled: Threescore that not many
hours before had every one several lodgi^gs very delicately furnished, are now
thrust altogether into one close room: a litie noisome room: not fully ten
foot square. Does not this strike coldly to ye heart of a worldly mizer? To
some, the very sound of deaths name, is in stead of a passing bell: what shall
become of such a coward, being told that the selfe^same body of his, which now
is so pampered with superfluous fare, so per^umed and bathed in odoriferous
waters, and so gaily apparelled in variety of fashio^s, must one day be
thrown (like stinking carrion) into a rank and rotten grave; where his goodly
eyes, y^ did once shoot forth such amorous gla^ces, must be beaten out of his
head: his locks that hang wantonly dangling, trodden in dirt underfoot: this
doubtless (like thunder) must needs strike him into the earth. But (wretched
man!) when thou shall see, and be assured (by tokens sent thee from heaven)
that to morrow thou must be tumbled into a Mucke-pit, and s^ffer thy body to be
bruisde and pressed with threescore dead men, lying ^louenly upon thee, and thou
to be undermost of all! yea and perhaps half of that number were thine
enemies! (and see how they may be revenged, for the worms that breed out of
their putrefying carcasses, shall crawle in huge swarms from them, and quite
devour thee) what agonies will this strange news drive thee into? If thou art
in love with thy self, this cannot choose but possess thee with frenzy. But
thou art gotten safe (out of the civil city Calamity) to thy Parkes and
Palaces in the Country, lading thy asses and thy Mules with thy gold, (thy
god), thy plate, and thy Jewels: and the fruits of thy womb thriftily growing
up but in one only son, (the young Landlord of all thy careful labors) him
also have thou rescued from the arrows of infection; Now is thy soul iocund,
and thy senses merry. But open thine eyes thou Fool and behold that darling of
thine eye, (thy son) turned suddeinly into a lump of clay; the hand of
pestilence has smote him even under thy wing: Now do thou rent thine hair,
blaspheme thy Creator, cursest thy creation, and basely descendest into
brutish and unmanly passions, threatening in despite of death and his Plague,
to maintain the memory of thy child, in the everlasting breast of Marble: a
tomb must now defen^ him from tempests: and for that purpose, the swetty hind
(that digs the rent he paies thee out of the entrails of the earth) he is sent
for, to convey forth that burden of thy sorrow: But no^e how thy pride is
disdained: that weather-beaten sunburned drudge, that not a month since fawnd
upon thy worship like a Spaniell, and like a bond-slaue, would have stoopt
lower than thy feet, does now stop his nose at thy presence, and is ready
to set his Mastiue as hye as thy throat, to drive thee from his door: all thy
gold and silver cannot hire one of those (whom before thou did scorn) to
carry the dead body to his last home: the Country round about thee shun thee,
as a Basiliske, and therefore to London (from whose arms thou cowardly fledst
away (poast upon poast must be galloping, to fetch from thence those that may
perform that Funeral Office: But there are they so full of graue-matters of
their own, that they have no leisure to attend thine: does not this cut thy
very heart strings in sunder? If that do not, the shutting up of the Tragical
Act, I am sure will: for thou must be enforced with thine own hands, to wind
up (that blasted flower of youth (in the last linen, that ever he shall wear:
upon thine own shoulders must thou bear part of him, thy amazed servant the
other: with thine own hands must thou dig his grave, (not in the Church, or
common place of burial,) thou have not favor (for all thy riches) to be so
happy,) but in thine Orcharde, or in the proud walks of thy Garden, wringing
thy palsie-shaking hands in stead of belles, (most miserable father) must thou
search him out a sepulcher.

My spirit grows faint with rowing in this Stygian Ferry, it can no longer
endure the transportation of souls in this doleful manner: let us therefore
shift a point of our Compass, and (since there is no remedy, but that we must
still be tossed up and down in this Mare mortuum) hoist up all our sails, and
on the merry wings of a lustier wind seek to arrive on some prosperous
shore.

Imagine then that all this while, Death (like a Spanish Leagar, or rather like
stalking Tamberlaine) has pitched his tents, (being nothing but a heap of
winding sheets tackt together) in the sinfully-polluted Suburbs: the Plague
is Muster-maister and Marshall of the field: Burning Feauers, Boyles, Blaines,
and Carbuncles, the Leaders, Lieutenants, Serieants, and Corporalls: the maine
Army consisting (like Dunkirke) of a mingle-mangle, viz. dumpish Mourners,
merry Sextons, hungry Coffin-sellers, scrubbing Bearers, and nastie
Graue-makers: but indeed they are the Pioners of the Camp, that are employed
only (like Moles) in casting up of earth and digging of trenches; Fear and
Trembling (the two Catch-polles of Death) arrest every one: No parley will be
granted, no composition stood upon, But the Allarum is struck up, the Toxin
ringes out for life, and no voice heard but Tue, Tue, Kill, Kill; the little
Belles only (like small shot) d^e yet go^ off, and make no great work for
worms, a hundred or two l^st in every skirmish, or so: but alas that's nothing:
yet by those desperate sallies, what by open setting upon them by day, and
secret Ambuscadoes by night, the skirts of London were pitifully pared off, by
little and little: which they within the gates perceiving, it was no bo^t to bid
them take their heels, for away they trudge thick and threefold; some riding,
some on foot: some without boots, some in their slippers, by water, by land,
In shoales swo^ they Westward, mary to Grauesend none went unless they be
driven, for whosoever landed there never came back again: Hacknies, watermen
and Wagon^, were not so terribly employed many a year; so that within a short
time, there was not a good horse in Smith-field, nor a Coach to be set eye on.
For after the world had once run upon the wheels of the Pest-cart, neither
coach nor caroach durst appear in his likeness.

Let us pursue these runnawayes no longer, but leave them in the unmerciful
hands of the Country-hard-hearted Hobbinolls, (who are ordaind to be their
Tormentors,) and return back to the stege of the City; for the enemy taking
advantage by their ^^ight, planted his ordinance against the walls; here the
Canons (like their great Bells) roard: the Plague took sore pains for a
breach; he laid about him cruelly, ere he could get it, but at length he and
his tiranous band entered: his purple colour^ were presently (with the sound of
Bow-bell in stead of a trompet) advanced, and joined to the Standard o^ the
City; he marched even through Cheapside, and the capital streets of Troynouant:
the only bl^t of dishonor that struck upon this Inuader, being this, that he^
plaid^ the tyrant, not the conqueror, making ha^ocke of all, when h^ had all
lying at the foot of his mercy. Men, women and children dropped down before
him: houses were ri^led, streets (...), beautiful maidens thrown on their
beds, and ravished by sickness: rich men's Cofers broken open, and shared amongst
prodigal heirs and vnthri^tie servants: poor men used poorly, but not
pitifully: he did very much hurt, yet some say he did very much good.
Howsoever he behaved himself, this intelligence runs current, that every house
lookte like S. Bartholmewes Hospital, and every street like Bucklersbury, for
poor Methrid^tum and Dragon-water (being both of them in all the world, scarce
worth threepence) were ^oxt in every corner, and yet were both drunk^ every
hour at other men's cost. Lazarus lay groaning at every man's door, mary no
Dives was within to send him a cru^, (for all your Gold-^^nches were fled to
the woods) nor a dog left (...) lick up his sores, for they (like Curres)
were knocked down like Oxen, and fell thicker then Acornes.

I am amazed to remember what dead Marches were made of three thousand trooping
together; husbands, wives and children, being led as ordinarily to one grave,
as if they had gone to one bed. And those that ^ould shift for a time, and
shrink their heads out of the collar (as many did) yet went they (most
bitterly) miching and muffled up and down with Rue and Wormwood ^^utt into
their ^ares and nosthrils, looking like so many Bores heads stuck with branches
of Rosemary, to be served in for Brawne at Christmas.

This was a rare world for the Church, who had wont to complain for want of
living, and now had more living thrust upon her, than she knew how to bestow:
to have been Clarke now to a parish Clarke, was better then to serve some
foolish Iustic^ of Peace, or than the year before to have had a Bene^ice.
Sextons gave out, if they might (as they hoped) continue these doings but a
tweluemoneth longer, they and their posterity would all ride upon
footecloathes to the end of the world. Amongst which worme-eaten generation,
the three bald Sextons of limpi^g Saint Gyles, Saint Sepulchers, and Saint
Olaues, ruled the roaste more hotly, than ever did the Triumuiri of Rome*
Iehochanan, Symeon, and Eleazar, never kept such a plaguey coil in Jerusalem
among the hunger-starued Jews, as these three Sharkers did in their Parishes
among naked Christians. Cursed they were I am sure by some to the pit of
hell, for tearing money out of their throats, that had not a cross in their
purses. But alas^ they must have it, it is their Fee, and therefore give the
Devil his due: Only Hearbe-wiues and Gardeners (that never prayed before,
unless it were for Rain or fair Weather, were now day and night upon their
marybones, that God would bless the labors of those molecatchers, because they
suck sweetness by this; for the price of ^low^rs, Herbs and garlands, rose
wonderfully, in so much that Rosemary which had wont to be sold for 12. pence
an armefull, went now for six shillings a handful.

A fourth sharer likewise (these winding-sheete-weauers) deserves to have my
pen give his lips a Jews Letter, but because he worships the Bakers good
Lord and Master, charitable S. Clement (whereas none of the other three ever
had to do with any Saint) he shall escape the better* only let him take heed,
that having all this year buried his prayers in the bellies of Fat ones, and
plump Capon-eaters, (for no worse meat would down this Bly-foxes stomach) let
him I say take heee least (his flesh now falling away, his carcas be not
plagude with lean ones, of whom (whilst the ^ill of Lord have mercy upon us,
was to be denied in no place) it was death for him to hear.

In this pitiful (or rather pitiless) perplexity stood London; forsaken
like a Lover, forlorn like a widow, and disarmde of all comfort: disarmde I
may well say, for five Rapiers were not stirring all this time, and those that
were worn, had never bin seen, if any money could have been lent upon them,
so hungry is the Estridge disease, that it will ^euoure even Iron: let us
therefore with bag and baggage march away from this dangerous sore City, and
visit those that are fled into the Country. But alas! Decidis in Scyllam, you
are pepperd if you visit them, for they are visited already: the broad Arrow
of Death, flies there up and down, as swiftly as it does here: they that rode
on the lust^est geldings, could not out-gallop the Plague, It ouer-tooke them,
and ouerturnd them too, horse and foot.

You whom the arrows of pestilence have reach at eighteen and twenty score
(tho you stood far enough as you thought from the mark (you that sickning in
the hie way, would have been glad of a bed in an Hospital, and dying in the
open fields, have been buried like dogs, how much better had it bin for you,
to have ly^^ ^uller of byles and Plague-sores than ever did Job, so you might
in that extremity have received both bodily and spiritual comfort, which there
was denied you? For those misbeleeuing Pagans, the plough-driuers, those worse
then Infidels, that (like their* Swine never look up so high as Heaven: when
Citizens boorded them they wrung their hands, and wished rather they had fallen
into the hands of Spaniards: for the sight of a flat-cap was more dreadful to
a Lob, then the discharging of a Caliuer: a treble-ruffe (being but once named
the Merchants set) had power to cast a whole household into a cold sweat. If one
new suite of Sackcloth had been but known to have come out of Burchin-lane
(being the common Wardrope for all their Clowne-ships) it had been enough to
make a Market town give up the ghost. A Crow that had been seen in a
Sunshine day, standing on the top of Powles, would have been better than a
Beacon on sire, to hau^ raizd all the towns within ten miles of London, for
the keeping her out.

Never let any man ask me what became of our Physicians in this Massacre, they
hid their Synodicall heads as well as the prowdest: and I cannot blame them, for
their Phlebotomies, Lo^inges, and Electuaries, with their Di^catholicons,
Diacodions, Amulets, and Antidotes, had not so much strength to hold life and
soul together, as a pot of Pinders Ale and a Nutmeg: their Drugs turned to
durst, their simples where simple things: Galen could do no more good, than Sir
Giles Goosecap: Hipocrates, Auicen, Paraselsus, Rasis, Fernelius, with all
their succeeding rabble of Doctors and Water-casters, were at their wite end,
or I think rather at the worlds end, for no^ one of them durst peep abroad;
or if any one did take upon him to play the ventrous Knight, the Plague pu^ him
to his Nonpl^s; in such strange, and such changeable shapes did this
Camel^onlike si^k^es appear, that they could not (with all the cunning in
their budgets) make pursen^ts to take him napping.

Only a band of Desper-vewes, some few Empiricall madcaps (for they could
never be worth velvet caps) tu^ned themselves into Bees (or more properly into
Drones) and went humming up and down, with hony-brags in their mouths,
sucking the sweetness of Silver (and now and then of Aurum Potabile) out of the
poison of Blaines and Carbuncles: and these jolly Mountibanks clapped up their
bills upon every po^t (like a Fencers Challenge) threatening to canuas the
Plague, and to ^^ght with him at all his own several weapons: I know not how
they sped, but some they sped I am sure, for I have heard them band for the
Heavens, because they sent those thither, that were wished to tarry longer upon
earth.

I could in this place make your cheeks look pale, and your hearts shake,
with telling how some have had 18* sores at one time running upon them, others
10. and 12. many 4. and 5. and how those that have bin four times wounded by
this years infection, have dyed of the last wound, whilst others (that were
hurt as often) go up and down now with sounder limbs, then many that come
out of France, and the Nether-lands. And descending from these, I could draw
forth a Catalogue of many poor wretches, that in fields, in ditches, in
common Cages, and under stalls (being either thrust by cruel maister^ out of
doors, or wanting all worldly succor but the common benefit of earth and
air) have most miserably perished. But to Chronicle these would weary a second
Fabian.

We will therefore play the Soldiers, who at the end of any notable battle,
with a kind of sad delight rehearse the memorable acts of their friends that
lie mangled before them: some showing how bravely they gave the onset: some,
how politickly they retirde: others, how manfully they gave and received
wounds: a fourth steps forth, and glories how valiantly he lost an arm: all
of them making (by this means) the remembrance even of tragical and
mischievous events very delectable. Let us strive to do so, discoursing (as it
were at the end of this mortal stege of the Plague) of the several most
worthy accidents, and strange birthes which this pestiferous year has brought
^oorthsome of them yielding Comicall and ridiculous stuff, others lamentable:
a third kind, upholding rather admiration, then laughter or pity.

As first, to relish the pallat of lickerish expectation, and withal to give
an Item how sudden a stabber this ruffianly swaggerer (Death) is, You must
belee^e, that amongst all the weary number of those that (on their bare feet)
have trauaild (in this long and heavy vocation) to the Holy Land, one (whose
name I could for need bestow upon you) but that I know you have no need of it,
tho many want a good name) lying in that common Inn^ of sick-men, his bed, and
seeing the black and blew stripes of the plague sticking on his flesh, which he
received as tokens (from heaven) that he was presently to go dwell in the
upper world, most earnestly requested, and in a manner coniured his friend (who
came to enterchange a last farewell) that he would see him go handsomely
attirde into the wild Irish country of worms, and for that purpose to bestow
a Coffin upon him: his friend loving him (not because he was poor (yet he was
poor) but because he was a Scholar: Alack that the West Indies stand so
far from Uniuersities! and that a mind richly apparelled should have a
threed-bare body!) made faithful promise to him, that he should be naild up,
he would board him, and for that purpose went instantly to one of the newfound
trade of Coffin-cutters, bespake one, and (like the Surueyour of deaths
buildings) gave direction how this little Tenement should be framed, paying all
the rent for it before hand. But note upon what slippery ground, life goes!
l^ttle did he think to dwell in that room himself which he had taken for his
friend: yet it seemed the common law of mortality had so decreede, for he was
called into the cold company of his gra^e neighbors an hour before his
infected friend, and had a long lease (even till doomes day) in the same
lodging, which in the strength of health he went to prepare for another. What
credit therefore is to be given to breath, which like an harlot will run away
with every minute. How nimble is sickness, and what skill has he in all the
weapons he plays withal? The greatest cutter that takes up the Mediterranean
I Will in Powles for his Gallery to walk in, cannot ward off his blows. He Is the
best Fencer in the world: Vincentio Sauiolo is no body to him: He has his
Mandrit^aes, Imbrocataes, Stramazones, and S^occataes at his ^ingers ends:
heel make you give him ground, though y^ were never worth foot of land, and
beat you out of breath, though Aeolus himself plai^ upon your windpipe.

To witness which, I will call forth a Dutchman (yet now he is past calling for,
has lost his hearing, for his ears by this time are eaten off with worms) who
(though he dwell in Bedlem) was not mad, yet the very looks of the Plague
(which indeed are terrible) put him almost out of his wits, for when the snares
of this cunning hunter (the Pestilence) were but newly. laid, and yet laid (as
my Dutchman semlt it out well enough) to entrap poor men's lives that meant
him no hurt, away sneakes my clipper of the kings english, and (because
Musket Shot should not reach him) to the Low Countries (that are built upon
butter^irkins, and Holland cheese) sails this plaguie fugitive, but death,
(who has more authority there than all the seven Electors, and to show him
that there were other Low Country besides his own) takes a little Frokin (one
of my Dutch runnawayes children) and sends her packing, into those Netherlands
she departed: O how pitifully looked my Burgomaister, when he understood that
the sickness could swim! It was an easy matter to escape the Donkirks, but
Deaths Gallyes made out after him swifter then the great Turks. Which he
perceiving, made no more adoo, but drunk to the States five or six healths
(because he would be sure to live well) and back again comes he, to try the
strength of English Beer: his old Randeuous of madmen was the place of
meeting, where he was no sooner arrived, but the Plague had him by the back,
and arrested him upon an Exeat Regnum, ^or running to the enemy, so that for
the mad tricks he played to cozen our English worms of his Dutch carkas (which
had been fatted here) sickness and death clapped him up in Bedlem the second
time, and there he lies, and there he shall lie till he rot before i will meddle
any more of with him.

But being gotten out of Bedlem, let us make a journey to Bristow, taking an
honest known Citizen along with us, who with other company travailing thither
(only for fear the air of London should conspire to poison him) and setting
up his rest not to hear the sound of Bow-bell till next Christmas, was
notwithstanding in the hye way singled out from his company, and set upon by
the Plague, who had him stand, and deliver his life. The rest at that word
shifted for themselves, and went on, he (amazed to see his friends fly, and
being not able to defend himself, for who can defend himself meeting such an
enemy?) yielded, and being but about forty miles from London, used all the
slights he could to get loose out of the hands of death, and so to hide
himself in his own house, whereupon, he called for help at the same Inn,
where not long before he and his fellow pilgrims obtained for their money
(mary yet with more prayers then a beggar makes in three Terms) to stand and
drink some thirty foot from the door. To this house of tippling iniquity
he repaires again, coniuring the Lares or walking Sprites in it, if it were
Christmas (that it was well put in) and in the name of God, to succor and
rescue him to their power out of the hands of infection, which now assaulted
his body: the Devil would have been afraid of this coniuration, but they were
not, yet afraid they were it seemed, for presently the doors had their wooden
ribs crushed in pieces, by being beat^n together: the casements were shut more
close than an Usurers greasy velvet powch: the drawing windows were hanged,
drawn, and quartred: not a creuis but was stopped, not a mouse-hole left open,
for all the holes in the house were most wickedly dambd up: mine Host and
Hostess ran over one another into the backe-side, the maids into the
Orchard, quiuering and quaking, and ready to hang themselves on the innocent
Plumb trees (for hanging to them would not be so sore a death as the Plague,
and to die maids too! O horrible!) As for the Tapster, he fled into the
Cellar, rapping out five or six plain Country oaths, that he would drown
himself in a most villainous Stand of Ale, if the sick Londoner stood at the
door any longer. But stand there he must, for to go away (well) he cannot, but
continues knocking and calling in a faint voice, which in their ears sounded,
as if some staring ghost in a Tragedy had exclaimd upon Rhadamanth: he might
knock till his hands akte, and call till his heart akte for they were in a
worse pickle within, then he was without: he being in a good way to go to
Heaven, they being so frighted, that they scarce knew whereabout Heaven stood,
only they all cried out, Lord have mercy upon us, yet Lord have mercy upon us
was the only thing they feared. The doleful catastrophe of all is, a bed could
not be had for all Babylon: not a cup of drink, no, nor cold water be gotten,
though it had (...) or Alexander the great:(...) a draught of Aqua^v^tae might
have saved his soul, the town denied to do God that good service.

What misery continues ever? the poor man standing thu^ at deaths door, and
looking every minute when he should be let in, behold, another Londoner that
had likewise been in the Frigida zona of the Country, and was returning (like
Aeneas out of hell) to the heaven of his own home, makes a stand at this
sight, to play the Physician, and seeing by the complexion of his patient that
he was sick at heart, applies to his soul the best medicines that his
comforting speech could make, for there dwell no Poticary near enough to help
his body. Being therefore driven out of all other shi^tes, he leads him into a
field (a bundle of Stawe, which with much ado he bought for money, serving in
stead of a Pillow.) But the Destinies hearing the diseased party complain and
take on, because he lay in a field^bedde, when before he would have been
glad of a mattresse, for very spite cut the threade of his life, the cruelty
of which deed made the other that played Charities part) at his wits end,
because he knew not where to purchase ten foot of ground for his grave: the
Church nor Churchyard would let none of their lands. Master Uiear was struck
dumb, and could not give the dead a good word, neither Clarke nor Sexton could
be hired to execute their Office; no, they themselves would first be executed:
so that he that never handled shouell before, got his implements about him,
ripped up the belly of the earth, and made it like a grave, stripped the cold
carcass, bound his shirt about his teete, pulled a linen night cappe over his
eyes, and so laid him in the rotten bed of the earth, covering him with
clothes cut out of the same piece: and learning by his last words his name and
habitation, this sad Trauailer arriues at London, delivering to the amazed
widow and children, in stead of a father and a husband, only the outside of
him, his apparel. But by the way note one thing, the bringer of these heavy
tidings (as if he had lived long enough when so excellent a work of piety and
pity was by him finished) the very next day after his coming home, d^parted
out of this world, to receive his reward in the Spiritual Court of heaven.

It is plain therefore by the evidence of these two witnesses, that death,
like a thief, sets upon men in the hie way, dogs them into their own houses,
breaks into their bed chambers by night, assaults them by day, and yet no law
can take hold of him: he deuoures man and wife: offers violence to their fair
daughters: kills their youthf^ll sons, and deceiues them of their servants:
yea, so full of treachery is he grown (since this Plague took his part) that
no Lovers dare trust him, nor by their good wills would come near him, for he
works their downfall, even when their delights are at the highest.

Too ripe a proof have we of this, in a pair of Lovers; the maid was in the
pride of fresh blood and beauty: she was that which to be now is a wonder,
young and yet chaste: the gifts of her mind were great, yet those which fortune
bestowed upon her (as being well descended) were not much inferior: On this
lovely creature did a young man so steadfastly ^ixe his eye, that her looks
kindled in his bosom a desire, whose ^^ames burnt the more brightly, because
they were fed with sweet and modest thoughts: Hymen was the God to whom he
prayed day and night that he might marry her: his prayers were received, at
length (after many tempests of her denial, and frowns of kinsfolk) the
element grew clear, and he saw ye happy landing place, where he had long
sought to ariue: the prize of her youth was made his own, and the solemn day
appointed when it should be delivered to him. Glad of which blessedness (for to
a lover it is a blessedness) he wrought by all the possible art he could use to
shorten the expected hour, and bring it nearer: for, whether he feared the
interception of parents, or that his own soul, with excess of joy, was
drowned in strange passions, he would often, with sighs mingled with kisses,
and kisses half sinking in ^eares, prophetically tell her, that sure he should
never live to enjoy her. To discredit which opinion of his, behold, the sun
had made have and wakened the bridale morning. Now does he call his heart
traitor, that did so ^alsly conspire against him: lively blood leapeth into
his cheeks: he is got up, and gaily attirde to play the bridegroom, she
likewise does as cunningly turn her self into a bride: kindred and friends
are met together, soppes and muscadine run sweating up and down till they
drop again, to comfort their hearts, and beca^se so many coffins pestred
London Churches, that there was no room left for weddings, Coaches are
provided, and away rides all the train into the Country. On a monday morning
are these lusty Lovers on their journey, and before noone are they alighted,
entering (insteade of an Inn) for more state into a Church, where they no
sooner appeared, but the Priest fell to his business, the holy knot was a tying,
but he that should fasten it, coming to this, In sickness and in health,
there he stopped, for suddenly the bride took hold of, in sickness, for in
health all that stood by were in fear she should never be kept. The
maiden-blush into which her cheeks were lately died, now began to loose
color: her voice (like a coward) would have shrunk away, but that her Lover
reaching her a hand, which he brought thither to give her, (for he was not yet
made a full husband) did with that touch somewhat revive her: on went they
again so far, till they met with For better, for worse, there was she
worse than before, and had not the holy Officer made haste, the ground on which
she stood to be married might easily have been broken up for her buryall. All
ceremonies being finished, she was led between two, not like a Bride, but
rather like a Coarse, to her bed: That; must now be the table, on which the
wedding dinner is to be served up (being at this time, nothing but tears,
and sighs, and lamentation) and Death is chief waiter, yet at lenght her
weak heart wrestling with the pangs, gave them a fall, so that up she stood
again, and in the fatal funeral* Coach that carried her forth, was she
brought back (as upon a beer) to the City: but see the malice of her enemy
that had her in chase, upon the wensday following being overtaken, was her life
overcome, Death rudely lay with her, and spoild her of a maiden head in spite
of her husband. Oh the sorrow that did round beset him! now was his divination
true, she was a wife, yet continued a maid: he was a husband and a widdower,
yet never knew his wife: she was his own, yet he had her not: she had him, yet
never enjoyed him: here is a strange alteration, for the rosemary that was
washed in sweet water to set out the Bridal, is now wet in tears to furnish
her burial: the music that was heard to sound forth dances, can not now he
heard for the ringing of belles: all the comfort that happened to either side
being this, that he lost her, before she had time to be an ill wife, and she
left him, ere he was able to be a bad husband.

Better fortune had this Bride, to fall into the hands of the Plague, then one
other of that frail female sex, (whose picture is next to be drawn) had so
escape out of them. An honest cobbler (if at least cobblers can be honest, that
live altogether amongst wicked soales) had a wife, who in the time of health
treading her shoe often away, determined in the agony of a sickness (which
this year had a saying to her) to fall to mending as well as her husband did.
The bed that she lay upon (being as she thought or rather feared) the last bed
that ever should bear her, (for many other beds had bo^ne her you must
remember) and the worm of sin tickling* her conscience, up she calls her
very innocent and simple husband out of his virtuous shop, where like Justice
he sat distributing amongst the poor, to some, halfe-penny pieces, penny
pieces to some, and two-penny pieces to others, so long as they would last, his
provident care being always, that every man and woman should go upright. To the
beds side of his plaguey wire approaches Monsieur Cobbler, to understand what
deadly news she had to tell him, and the rest of his kind neighbors that
there were assembled: such thick tears standing in both the gutters of his
(...), to see his beloved lie in such a pickle, that in their salt water, all
his utterance was drowned: which she perceiving, wept as fast as he: But by the
warm counsel that sat about the bed, the shower ceast, she wiping her cheeks
with the corner of one of the sheets: and he, his sullie^ face, with his
leatherne apron. At last, two or three sighs (like a Chorus to the tragedy
ensuing) stepping out first, wringing her hands (which gave the better action)
she told the pitiful Actaeon her husband, that she had often done him wrong:
he only shook his head at this, and cried humh! Which humh, she taking as
the watchword of his true patience, vnraueld the bottom of her frailetie at
length, and concluded, that with such a man (and named him, but I hope you
would not have me follow her steps and name him too) she practiced the
universal and common Art of grafting, and that upon her good man's head, they
two had planted a monstrous pair of invisible horns: At the sound of the
horns, my cobbler started up like a march Hare, and began to look wild: his
awle never ran through the sides of a boot, as that word did through his
heart: but being a polliticke cobbler, and remembering what piece of work he was
to vnder-lay, stroking his beard, like some grave headborough of the Parish,
and giving a nodde, as who should say, go on, bade her go on indeed, clapping
to her sore soul, this general salve, that All are sins, and we must
forgive, etc. For he hoped by such wholesome Physic, (as Shooemakers wax
being laid to a byle) to draw out all the corruption of her secret villainies.
She good heart being tickled under gilles, with the finger of these kind
speeches, turns up the white of her eye, and fetches out an other. An other, O
thou that art trained up in nothing but to handle pieces:) Another has
discharged his Artillery against thy castle of fortification: here was pass^on
predominant: Vulcan struck the cobblers ghost (for he was now no cobbler) so
hardy upon his breast, that he cried Oh! his neighbors taking pit to see
what terrible stitches pulld him, rubde his swelling temples with the juice of
patience, which (by virtue of the blackish sweat that stood reaking on his
brows, and had made them supple) entered very easily into his
now-parlous-vnderstanding scull: so that he left wenching, and sat quiet as a
Lamb, falling to his old vomit of council, which he had cast up before, and
swearing (because he was in strong hope, this shoo should wring him no more) to
seal her a general acquittance, prick^ forward with this gentle spur, her
tongue mends his pace, so that in her confession she ouertooke others, whose
po^tes had been set all night on the Cobblers laast, bestowing upon him the
poe sie of their names, the time, and place, to thin tent it might be put in to
his next wifes wedding ring. And although she had made all these blots in his
tables, yet the bearing of one man false (whom she had not yet discovered)
stuck more in her stomach than all the rest, O valiant Cobbler, cries out one
of the Auditors, how art thou set upon? how are thou tempted? happy art thou,
that thou art not in thy shop, for in stead of cutting out pieces of leather,
thou would doubtless now pare away thy heart: for I see, and so do all thy
neighbors here (thy wifes ghostly fathers) see that a small matter would now
cause thee turn turk, and to meddle with no more patches: but to live within
the compass of thy wit: lift not up thy collar: be not horn mad: thank
heaven that the murder is reueald: study thou Baltazars Part in Ieronimo, for
thou have more cause (though less reason) than he, to be glad and sad.

Well, I see thou art worthy to have patient Griseld to thy wife, for thou
bear more than she: thou shewst thy self to be a right cobbler, and no
sowter, that can thus cleanely clowt up the seam-rent sides of thy affection.
With this learned Oration the Cobbler was tutord: laid his singer on his mouth,
and cried paucos palabros: he had sealed her pardon, and therefore bid her not
fear: heervpon he named the malefactor, I could name him too, but that he
shall live to give more Cobblers heads the Bastinado. And told, that on such a
night when he supt there (for a Lord may sup with a clobler, that has a pretty
wench to his wife) when the cloth, O treachero^s linen! was taken up, and
Menelaus had for a parting blow, given the other his fist: down she lights
(this half-sharer) opening the wicket, but not shutting him out of the wicket,
but conu^is him into a byroom (being the wardrob of old shoes and leather)
from whence the unicorn cobbler (that dream^ of no such spirits) being over
head and ears in sleep, his snorting giving the sign that he was cock-sure,
softly out-steales sir Paris, and to Helenaes teeth proved himself a true
Trojan.

This was the cream of her confusion, which being skimd off from the stomach
of her conscience, we looked every minute to go thither, where we should be
far enough out of the Cobblers reach. But the Fates laying their heads
together, s^nt a repriue, the plague that before meant to p^pper her, by little
and little left her company: which news being blown abro^d, Oh lamentable!
never did the old buskind tragedy begin till now: for the wives of those
husbands, with whom she had played at fast and loose, came with nails sharpened
for the nonce, like cattes, and tongues forkedly cut like the stings of adders,
first to scratch out false Cressidaes eyes, and then (which was worse) to worry
her to dath with scolding.

But the matter was took up in a Tavern; the case was altered, and brought to
a new reckoning (mary the blood of the Bordeaux grape was first shead about it)
but in the end, all anger on every side was powered into a pottle pot, and there
burnt to death. Now whether this Recantation was true, or whether the steeme of
infection, fuming up (like wine) into her brains, made her talk thus idly,
I leave it to the Jury.

And whilst they are canuasing her case, let us see what doings the Sexton of
Stepney has: whose warehouses being all full of dead commodities, saving one:
that one he left open a whole night (yet was it half full too) knowing y^
thieves this year were too honest to break into such cellers. Besides those
that were left there, had such plaguey pates, that none durst meddle with them
for their lives. About twelve of the clock at midnight, when spirits walk,
and not a mowse dare stir, because cattes go a catter-walling: Sin, that
all day durst not show his head, came reeling out of an alehouse, in the shape
of a drunkard, who no sooner smelt the wind, but he thought the ground under
him danced the Canaries: houses seemed to turn on the toe, and all things went
round: insomuch, that his legs drew a pair or Indentures, between his body
and the earth, the principal covenant being, that he for his part would stand
to nothing what ever he saw: every tree that came in his way, did he iustle,
and yet challenge it the next day to fight with him. If he had clipped but a
quarter so much of the Kings silver, as he did of the kings english, his carkas
had long ere this been carrion for Crows. But, he lived by gaming, and had
excellent casting, yet seldom won, for he drew reasonable good hands, but had
very bad feet, that were not able to carry it away. This setter up of
Malt-men, being troubled with the staggers, fell into the selfsame grave,
that stood gaping wide open for a breakfast next morning, and imagining (when
he was in) that he had stumbled into his own house, and that all his
bedfellowes (as they were indeed) were in their dead sleep, he, (never
complaining of cold, nor calling for more sheet) soundly takes a nap til he
snores again: In the morning the Sexton comes plodding along, and casting upon
his fingers ends what he hopes ye dead pay of that day will come too, by that
that which he received the day before, (for Sextons now had better doings than
either Tauernes or bawdy-houses) In that silver contemplation, shrugging his
shoulders together, he steps ere he be aware on the brimmes of that pit, into
which this worshipper of Bacchus was fallen, where finding some dead men's bones,
and a scull or two, that lay scattered here and there; before he looked into
this Coffer of worms, those he takes up, and flinges them in: one of the
sculls battered the sconce of the sleeper, whilst the bones plaide with his
nose; whose blows waking his mustie worship, the first word that he cast up,
was an oath, and thinking the Cannes had flyen about, cried zoundes, what do
you mean to crack my mazer? the Sexton smelling a voice, (fear being
stronger than his heart) believed verily some of the coarses spoke to him, upon
which, feeling himself in a cold sweat, took his heels, whilst the Goblin
scram^led up and ran after him: But it appears the Sexton had the lighter
foot, for he ran so fast, that he ran out of his wits, which being left
behind him, he had like to have dyed presently after.

A meryer bargain than the poor Sextons did a Tincker meet withal in a
Country Town; through which a Citizen of London being driven (to keep
himself under the leeshore in this tempest^ous contagion) and casting up his
eye for some harbor, spied a bush at the end of a pole, (the ancient ^adge
of a Country Alehouse:) Into which as good luck was, (without any resistance
of the Barbarians, that all this year used to keep such landing places)
veiling his Bonnet, he struck in. The Host had been a mad Greek, (mary he
could now speak nothing but English,) a goodly fat Burger he was, with a belly
Arching out like a Beere-barrell, which made his legs (that were thick and
short, like two piles driven under London Bridge) to stradle half as wide as
the top of Powles, which upon my knowledge has been burnt twice or thrice. A
leatherne pouch hung at his side, that opened and shut with a Snap-hance, and
was indeed a flaske for gunpowder when King Henry went to Bulloigne. An
Antiquary might have picked rare matter but of his Nose, but that it was
worme-eaten (yet that proved it to be an ancient Nose:) In some corners of it,
there were bluish holes that shone like shelles of mother of Pearl, and to
too his nose right, Pearls had been gathered out of them: other were richly
garnisht with Rubies, Chrisolites and Car^unckles, which glistered so oriently,
that the Hamburgers offered I know not how many Dollars, for his company in an
East-Indian voyage, to have stood a nights in the Poope of their Admiral,
only to save the charges of candles. In conclusion, he was an Host to be led
before an Emperor, and though he were o^e of the greatest men in all the
shire, his bigness made him not proud, but he humbled himself to speak the
base language of a Tapster, and upon the Londoners first arrival, cried
welcome, a cloth for this Gentleman: the Linen was spread, and furnished
presently with a new Cake and a Can, the room voided, and the Guest left (like
a French Lord) attended by no body: who drinking half a Can (in conceit) to
the health of his best friend in the City, which lay extreme ^icke, and had
never more need^ of health, I know not what qualmes came over his stomach, but
immediately he fell down without uttering any more words, and never rose
again.

Anon (as it was his fashion) enters my puffing Host, to relieve with a fresh
supply out of his Celler,) the shrinking Can, if he perceived it stood in
danger to be overthrown. But seeing the chief Leader dropped at his feet, and
imagining at first he was but wounded a little in the head, held up his gowty
golles and blessed himself, that a Londoner (who had wont to be the most valiant
rob-pots) should now be struck down only with two hoopes: and thereupon iogd
him, fombling out these comfortable words of a soldier, If thou be a man stand
a thy legs: he stird not for all this: whereupon the Maids being raisde (as
it had been with a hue and cry) came hobling into the room, like a flock of
Geese, and having upon search of the body given up this verdict, that the man
was dead, and murdered by the Plague; Oh daggers to all their hearts that
heard it! Away ^^udge the wenches, and one of them having had a freckled face
all her life time, was persuaded presently that now they were the tokens, and
had liked to have turned up her heels upon it: My gorbelly Host, that in many
a year could not without grunting, crawle over a threshold but two foot
broad, leapt half a yard from the coarse (It was measured by a Carpenters
rule) as nimbly as if his guts had been taken out by the hangman: out of the
house he wallowed presently, being followed with two or three dozen of napkins
to dry up the larde, that ran so fast down his heels, that all the way he
went, was more greazie than a kitchin-stuffe-wifes basket: you would have
sworn, it had been a barrel of Pitch on fire, if you had looked upon him,
for such a smoakie cloud (by reason of his own fattie hot steeme) compassed
him round, that but for his voice, he had quite been lost in that stinking
mist: hanged himself he had without all question (in this pitiful taking)
but that he feared the weight of his in tolerable paunch, would have burst
the Roape, and so he should be put to a double death. At length the Town was
raised, the Country came down upon him, and yet not upon him neither, for
after they understood the Tragedy, every man gave ground, knowing my pursie
Ale-cunner could not follow them: what is to be done in this strange Allarum?
The whole Uillage is in danger to lie at the mercy of God, and shall be bound
to curse none, but him for it: they should do well therefore, to set fire on
his house, before the Plague escape out of it, least it forage higher into the
Country, and knock them down, man, woman, and child, like Oxen, whose blood
(they all swear) shall be required at his hands. At these sp^eches my
tenderhearted Host, fell down on his maribones, meaning indeed to entreat
his audience to be good to him; but they fearing he had been pepperd too, as
well as the Londoner, tumbled one upon another, and were ready to break their
necks for haste to be gone: yet some of them (being more valiant then the
rest, because they heard him roar out for some help) very desp: rately stepped
back, and with rakes and pitch-forkes lifted the gulch from the ground:
Co^cluding (after they had laid their hogsheads together, to draw out some
holesom counsel) that whosoever would ve^ter upon the dead man and bury him,
should have forty shillings (out of the common towne-purse, though it would
be a great cut to it) with the love of the Churchwardens and Sidemen, during
the term of life. This was proclaimed, but none durst appear to undertake the
dread^ull execution: they loved money well, mary the plague hanging over any
man's head that should meddle with it in that sort, they all vowde to dye
beggars before it should be Chronicled they killed themselves for forty
shillings: and in that brave resolution, every one with bag and baggage
marched home, barricadoing their doors and windows with f^rbushes, ter^e, and
bundels of straw to keep out the pestilence at the staves end.

At last a Tinker came sounding through the Town, mine Hosts house being the
ancient w^^ring place where he did use to cast Anchor. You must understand he
was none of those base rascally Tinkers, that with a ban-dog and a drab at
their tails, and a pike-staffe on their necks, will take a purse sooner then
stop a kettle: No, this was a devout Tinker, he did honor ^od Pan: a Musical
Tinker, that upon his kettle-drum could play any Country dance you called for,
and upon Holly-dayes had earned money by it, when no Fiddler could be heard of.
He was only feared when he stalkt through some towns where Bees were, for he
struck so sweetly on the bottom of his Copper instrument, that he would
^mpie whole Hi^es, and lead the swarms after him only by the sound.

This excellent egregious Tinker calls for his draught (being a double Judge)
it was filled for him, but before it came to his nose, the lamentable tale of the
Londoner was told, the Chamber-doore (where he lay) being thrust open with a
long pole, because none durst touch it with their hands) and the Tinker bidden
(if he had the heart) to go in and see if he knew him. The Tinker being not
to learn what virtue the medicine had which he held at his lips, powered it
down his throat merrily, and crying trillill, he fea^es no plagues. In he
stepped, tossing the dead body too and fro, and was sorry he knew him not: Mine
Host that with grief began to fall away villanously, looking very ruthfully
on the Tinker, and thinking him a fit instrument to be played upon, offered a
crown out of his own purse, if he would bury the party. A crown was a
shrew^ temptation to a Tinker; many a hole might he stop, before he could
pick a crown of it, yet being a subtle Tinker (and to make all Sextons pray
for him, because he would raise their fees) an Angel he wanted to be his
guide, and under ten shillings (by his ten bones) he would not put his finger
into the fire. The whole parish had warning of this presently, thirty
shillings was saved by the bargain, and the Town like to be saved too,
therefore ten shillings was leuyed out of hand, put into a rag, which was tied
to the end of a long pole and delivered (in ^ight of all the Parish, who stood
aloo^e stopping their noses) by the Headboroughs own self in proper person,
to the Tinker, who with one hand received the money, and with the other struck
the board, crying hey, a fresh double pot. Which armor of proof being fitted
to his body, up he hoists the Londoner on his back (like a Shoole-boy) a
Shouell and Pick-axe standing ready for him: And thus furnished, into a field
some good distance from the Town he bears his deadly load, and there throws
it down, falling roundly to his tools, upon which the strong beer having set
an egde, they quickly cut out a lodging in the earth for the Citizen. But the
Tinker knowing that worms needed no apparel, saving only sheets, stripped him
stark naked, but first diu'de nimbly into his pocket, to see what livings they
had, assuring himself, that a Londoner would not wander so far without
silver: his hopes were of the right stamp, for from out of his pockets he drew
a leatherne bag with seven pounds in it: this music made the Tinkers heart
dance, he quickly tumbled his man into the grave, hid him over head and ears
in dust, bound up his clothes in a bundle, and carrying that at the end of his
staff on his shoulder, with the purse of seven pounds in his hand, back
again comes he through the town, crying aloud, Have ye any more Londoners to
bury, hey down a down dery, have ye any more Londoners to bury: the
Hobbinolls running away from him, as if he had been the dead Citizens ghost,
and he marching away from them in all the have he could, with that song still
in his mouth.

You see therefore how dreadful a fellow Death is, making fools even of
wisemen, and cowards of the most valiant; yea, in such a base flauerie has it
bound men's senses, that they have no power to look higher than their own
roofes, but seem by their turkish and barberous actions to believe that there
is no feliciti^ after this life, and that (like beasts) their souls shall
perish with their bodies. How many upon sight only of a Letter (sent from
London) have started back, and durst have laid their salvation upon it, that
the plague might be folded in that empty paper, believing verily, that the arm
of Omnipotence could never reach them, unless it were with some weapon drawn
out of the infected City: in so much that even the Western Pugs receiving
money there, have tied it in a bag at the end of their barge, and so trailed it
through the Tha^^es, least plague-sores sticking upon shillings, they should be
naild up for counterfeits when they were brought home.

More ventrous than these block-heads was a certain Justice of peace, to whose
gate being shut (for you must know that now there is no open house kept) a
company of wild fellows being lead for robbing an Orchyard, the stout^hearted
Constable rapt most courageously, and would have about with none, but the
Justice himself, who at last appeard in his likeness above at a window,
inquiring why they summond a parlee. It was delivered why: the case was opened
to his examining wisdom, and that the evil doers were only Londoners: at
the name of Londoners, the Justice clapping his hand on his breast (as who
should say, Lord have mercy upon us) started back, and being wise enough to
save one, held his nose hard between his forefinger and his thumb, and
speaking in that wise (like the fellow that described the villainous motion of
Julius Caesar and the Duke of Guize, who (as he gave it out) fought a combat
together) pulling the casement close to him, cried out in that quaile-pipe
voice, that if they were Londoners, away with them to Limbo: take only their
names: they were sore fellows, and he would deal with them when time should
serve: meaning, when the plague and they should not be so great together, and
so they departed: the very name of Londoners being worse then ten whetstones to
sharpen the sword of Justice against them.

I could fill a large volume, and call it the second part of the hundred merry
tales, only with such ridiculous stuff as this of the Justice, but Dij
meliora, I have better matters to set my wits about: neither shall you wring
out of my pen (though you lay it on the rack) the villainies of that damnd
Keeper, who killed all she keept; it had been good to have made her keeper of the
common Iayle, and the holes of both Counters, for a number lie there, that wish
to be rid out of this motley world, she would have tickled them, and turned
them over the thumbs. I will likewise let the Churchwarden in Thames street
sleep (for he is now pasi waking) who being requested by one of his neighbors
to suffer his wife or child (that was then dead) to lie in the Churchyard,
answered in a mocking sort, he keept that lodging for himself and his
household: and within three days after was driven to hide his head in a hole
himself. Neither will I speak a word of a poor boy (servant to a Chandler)
^welling thereabouts, who being struck to the heart by sickness, was first
carried away by water, to be left any where, but landing being denied by an army
of brown bill^men that kept the shore, back again was he brought, and left in
an out-celler, where lying groueling and groaning on his face (amongst fagots,
but not one of them set on fire to comfort him) there continued all night, and
dyed miserably for want of succor. Nor of another poor wretch in the Parish of
Saint Mary Oueryes, who being in the morning thrown, as the fashion is, into a
grave upon a heap of carcases, that kayd for their complement, was found in
the afternoon, gasping and gaping for life: but by these tricks, imagining
that many a thousand have been turned wrongfully off the ladder of life, and
praying that Derick or his executors may live to do those a good turn, that
have done so to others: Hic finis Priami, heeres an end of an old Song.

Et iam tempus Equum fumantia soluere colla.
FINIS.

