A true declaration of the state of the Manufacture of gold and silver Thread,
from the beginning of the making thereof here in England, until this present.
AFter many trials for the making of gold and silver Thread, time at last made
discovery thereof according to the manner of Millain in Italy, where it is
thought to be one of the most beneficial mysteries in that Nation, consisting
of so many parts, employing by computation 40000 persons, wherewith they have
heretofore served Christendom, and thereby enriched themselves.

Henry the 4. of France, a Prince as well provident in peace as war, had such
a sense thereof, that besides his princely patronage, he gave 60000. French
Crowns to help their proceedings, which by his untimely death came not to
perfection.

The laudable practice hereof, together with apparent hopes of benefit, both to
the undertakers and the State, (the commodity not being worth in the
Materials the one moitie it was usually sold for, leaving the rest behind
where it was made) was a just motive to undertake the same, whereby the profit
might rather accrue to our selves, then to foreign Nations, viz. that which
usually cost 5 s^. 6. d. is not worth above 2 s^. 8 d. or thereabouts the rest
being gained by the Manufacture, and therefore was set on foot the 8. year of
the King.

The labor was difficult, dangerous, and so chargeable to be effected, that
the adventure required a time of privilege, to recompense the Industry of
those that undertook the same; wherefore it pleased his Majesty at the suite
of the late Lord Io. Harrington the elder, and the Countess of Bedford, to
grant a Pattent for the sole exercise thereof for a time.

In the passing of which Pattent, 3. especial things presented themselves to
the consideration of the State, which were referred to the examination of the
Lord Treasurer Salisbury and others. First, whether it had been a former Trade
here or no. Secondly, the consumption of Bullion. And lastly, his Majesty's
Customs.

For the First, by report of Goldsmiths, Imbrotherers and Silkemen, it was not
found to be any former Trade.

For the consumption of Bullion, it was supposed that the benefit of the Trade
far oueruallued that consumption.

For the maintaining of his Majesty's Customs, the Pattentees gave securety,
and paid accordingly.

This Pattent continuing under these examinations and trials almost one whole
year past the 9. year of the King, with approbation, and so continued until
the 13. without opposition, by which time persons employed, who were many, and
of several quallities, coming to some reasonable perfection, by chargeable
experience to the Pattentees, were for a greater recompense enticed, and
employed by strangers and others in corners, having by this time found out
cauells against the Kings Grant, for want of words which being heard at a
Council Table, was over ruled, and a new Pattent granted with more ample
words, the better to express his Majesty's pleasure, and a Proclamation
published to this effect, which gave a present show of remedy, but fell out
otherwise: for that this Trade coming to a further veiw of perfection,
certain Gold-wierdrawers for purls, plates, oes, spangles, etc. being free of
the Goldsmiths Company, laid a title or claim thereto as a part of their
Trade, and although before the Lord Chancellor Ellesmere, and others of his
Majesty's Privy Council and Commissioners they were heard, and determined not
to intermedle, they ceased not to continue either to make the commodity, or to
prepare the Materials in drawn wire, to sell to poor people of a desperate
condition, who venting the same daily to Silke-men and Lace-makers for present
ready money, were forced to sell their labors so cheap, as urged their
necessities to seek for new several fraudulent devises for benefit, which
has since daily increased. So this mischief increasing, and the error in
believing in the valliditie of the Kings Grant, and not considering the great
benefit of the meanest subjects liberty, enforced us to seek new ways of
remedy, by executing of warrants and Commissions, wherein they either
exceeding, or not proceeding with that discretion and judgment as was
requisite, drew on many several complaints to the last Parliament, who
conceiving them just agrieuances both in matter and manner, the Pattent by his
Majesty (...) was condemned, but the Manifacture it self by reason of the
Parliaments sudden dissolution left vnregulated, by which means the abuses no
ways diminishing, but rather increasing, and the inconveniences of the great
wast of Bullion more plainly appearing: his Majesty with the Lords and others
of his Privy Council taking it into their consideration, upon mature
deliberation, thought the most present remedy was utterly to suppress the said
Trades, and all unlawful melting and fining of gold and silver, according to a
Statute in the reign of Henry the 7, and other Statutes both formerly and
since to that effect. But this prohibition by his Majesty and the Lords was so
far from taking any effect either in the Finers obedience, who are the maine
offenders, or in the inferior workers, by reason of continual buyers and
receivers of the commodity, as it grew up to a far higher inconvenience then
ever, and was impossible to reform by suppression, the multitude being so
great of inferior necessitated people: the consideration hereof moved his
Majesty and the Lords to compassionate the cause, and upon the humble petition
of diverse conformable persons then in exercise of the said Manufacture, a
Charter of Incorporation was granted upon these ensuing propositions.

For the regulating of the gold and silver thread business, and to give a
remedy to the inconveniences, (as well by consumption of Bullion thereby, as by
other uses of the like nature arising) besides the loss that may be of his
Majesty's Customs by that to be made here, your Lordships humble petitioners
undertaking the said Manufacture, humbly desire consideration and allowance of
the propositions following. viz.
1. To have a Corporation, and allowance of power convenient to examine, find
out, and punish the abuses as well in others, as those of the same Company,
practicing the unlawful melting and fining of gold or silver, for the making
of gold or silver thread, and drawing of wier for that or any other use
whatsoever, as for purles, plates, oes, spangles, for damasking and inlaying
wire, for wire for cloth of gold and silver, and such like: and to have power
to make laws and orders amongst themselves as in that case is usual, and to
suppress all others that are not allowed to be of the same Company.

2. That one place only be appointed and authorized, and that within the Tower
of London, or in the Hall of the said Company, whether all such silver ought to
be brought, to be prepared or made fit to be sold for the making of gold or
silver wire for all the aforesaid uses, that the quantety may appear what is
yearly expended.

3. That a Standard be appointed of the finesse of Sterling money, with the
remedy of two penny weight.

4. That his Majesty's sworn Officer or Officers keep a true account of all
such silver or gold brought in, and delivered out for any of these uses, and to
make and keep an Assay of the true finesse and goodness.

5. That in case of discovering any person making base or counterfeit silver for
thread, or any of the other uses, to the abuse of his Majesty's subjects, and
in contempt of his Majesty's Proclamation: they humbly desire punishment of the
offenders in the Starchamber for example to others.

And the better to effect this.
6. That his Majesty may be pleased to grant Proclamation against all other
Finers then in the Tower or Hall of the said Company, and to prohibit all the
making, venting, buying or selling of gold and silver thread made here
unsealed, and all such wire made here, for any of the aforesaid uses: and to
prohibit the preparing of all or any manner of materials, and things for the
making of gold and silver thread, other then such as is to serve to the end of
this Corporation.

Which propositions on his Majesty's behalf being performed, they shall be
enabled, and do on their behalfes promise the performance of these ensuing
Articles.
1. To give security to his Majesty, to be taken by the Lord Treasurer and
Chancellor, for the time being to make appear by substantial proof, the good
effect in the performance, that after one six months first allowed them for
provision and store, they will yearly bring in before hand so much Bullion
from foreign parts to the Tower of London, and convert the same into the
Current coin of the kingdom, as shall be expended on those uses, for which a
true and exact account is to be kept.

2. That each person of the Corporation will give bond to his Majesty's use,
and at his admittance into the Company shall take oath not to use or buy any
silver at all for any of the uses aforesaid, but that which he shall buy in the
Tower of London.

3. They do further offer to pay his Majesty, in consideration of the loss
of custom that may arise by the said Manufactures and otherwise, six pence
upon every ounce of gold and silver wire they shall have occsion to use for any
of the aforesaid uses, and to pay four pence for the Seal upon every Mark or
pound of thread.

4. They do not desire to prohibit any foreign commodity of that nature,
being brought in by way of trade, except it shall prove base or counterfit,
then the same to be forfeited.

5. And they farther humbly desire, that upon performance of the premises at
the expiration of the time limited, and giving new bonds, their old bonds may
be delivered unto them again.

These Letters Pattents of Incorporation had beginning in June last, with power
to make orders according to the usual course of that kind, wherein were
incorporated near to the number of 100. persons, as principalls to employ
others, who were thereby prescribed to enter bond of 100 l. a piece to his
Majesty, and besides to take oath.

All which whole number, (except one deceitful old woman, and one that was her
Servant) took the same oath accordingly, and three other by their example
refused to enter into bond, rather jesting with an oath, then aduenturing to be
bound to that they had already sworn to: these being obstinate in their own
ways, entending fraud from the beginning, and neither expecting duty to his
Majesty or the Laws, or conueniences of the weal public, practicing by
sinister ways and secret indiscernable courses by all possible means to bring
all back into confusion, that they might again return to the course of
unlawful melting and fining of gold and silver, to be converted to any of the
forbidden uses, by whose former and latter example all other irreguler persons
are encouraged presumptuously and confidently to follow their ways,
inconsiderately presuming of that liberty that neither the laws of the
Kingdom, nor conueniencie of State can any ways tolerate.

The effect of this, presents to consideration 4. principal points.
First, the unorderly consumption and waste of Bullion without account, to the
hinderance and prevention of the increase of the coin of this Kingdom: and
this comes first from unlawful finers, who melting down great quantities of
coin and bullion, to enrich themselves thereby, disperse and dispose it to all
persons, which may be as well transported as used here on these prohibited uses,
and these examples enuite and encourage all these disorderly persons.

And these secret finers, are ordinary receivers of stolen plate from any
person whatsoever.

2. The falsification of the commodity by these disordered persons, either by
imbasing the quallity thereof in several kinds, or in not giving the due
proportion of quantity thereunto, in the ouerflight working of the commodity.

3. Prejudice to his Majesty in those duties that are to him acknowledged by
way of recompense, for the loss of customs of that was usually brought from
foreign parts.

4. The inequallity of justice to such as have duly served in a lawful way of
trade, when as well forraigners and strangers expelled their own Country,
appropriate to themselves both the benefit of natural borne subjects, and of
free men, to the nursery of lewd idle and dishonest servants, who untimely
make themselves free men from their Masters service without consent. Whereas on
the contrary, true account being kept of the Bullion, it will be a great means
for the daily employment of his Majesty's Mint, prevent all falsities: gave
Caesar his due, and distribute equal Justice to such as either serve or
purchase their trades by redemption: and the Commodities better, and better
cheap then ever.


