THE BACHELORS Banquet: OR A Banquet for Bachelors: Wherein is prepared sundry
dainty Dishes to furnish their Tables, curiously dressed, and seriously seruedin.

Pleasantly discoursing the variable humors of Women, their quickness of
wits, and unsearchable deceits.

View them well, but taste not,
Regard them well, but waste not.
LONDON Printed by T. C. and are to be sold by T. Pauier, 1604.

The Batchelars Banquet, Or a Banquet for Batchelars: wherein is prepared sundry
dishes to furnish their Table: Curiously dresh, and seriously served in.
CHAP. I. The humor of a young wife new married.
IT is the natural inclination of a young gallant, in the pleasant prime, and
flower of his flourishing youth, being fresh, lusty, iocond, to take no other
care, but to employ his money to buy gay presents for pretty Lasses, to frame
his green wits in penning love ditties, his voice to sing them sweetly, his
wandering eyes to gaze one the fairest dames, and his wanton thoughts to plot
means for the speedy accomplishment of his wished desires, according to the
compass of his estate. And albeit his parents or some other of his kindred,
do perhaps furnish him with necessary maintenance, so that he wants nothing,
but lives in all ease and delight, yet cannot this content him, or satisfy his
unexperienced mind: for although he daily see many married men, first lapt in
lobbes pound, wanting former liberty, and compassed round in a cage of many
cares, yet notwithstanding being ouer-ruled by self will, and blinded by
folly: he suppose them therein to have the fulness of their delight, because
they have so near them the Image of content, Venus star gloriously blazing
upon them, I mean a dainty fair wife, bravely attired, whose apparel
perhaps is not yet paid for, (howsoever to draw their husbands into a fools
paradise) they make him believe, that their father or mother have of their cost
and bounty affoorded it. This lusty youth (as I erst said) seeing them
already in this maze of bitter sweetness, he goes round about, turmoyling
himself in seeking an entrance, and taking such pains to find his own
pain, that in the end, in he gets, when for the have he makes, to have a taste
of these supposed delicates, he has no leisure to think, or no care to
provide those things that are hereunto requisite. The jolly yonker being thus
gotten in, does for a time swim in delight, and has no desire at all to wind
him self out again, till time and use, which makes all things more familiar
and less pleasing, do qualify this humor, then glutted with satietie, or
pinched with penury, he may perhaps begin to see his folly, and repent as well
his fondnes, as his too much forwardnes, but all too late, he must have
patience perforce: his wife must be maintained according to her degree, and
withal (commonly it happes she carry the right stomach of a woman) slender
maintenance will not serve, for as their minds mount above their estates, so
commonly will they have their abillements. And if at a feast or some other
gosseps meeting whereunto she is invited, she see any of the company gaily
attyred for cost, or fashion, or both, and chiefly the latter, for generally
women do affect novelties, she forthwith moves a question in her self, why she
also should not be in like sort attyred, to have her garments cut after the new
fashion as well as the rest, and answers it with resolution, that she will, and
must have the like: Awaiting only fit time and place, for the moning and
winning of her husband thereunto, of both which she will make such choice, that
when she speaks she will be sure to speed: observing her opportunity when
she might take her husband at the most advantage, which is commonly in the bed,
the gardaine of love, the state of marriage delights, and the life wherein the
weaker sex has ever the better: when therefore this lusty gallant would
(...) his desired pleasures, for which cause he chiefly ran wilfully into the
peril of Lobs pound, then squeamishly she begins thus, saying; I pray you
husband let me alone, trouble me not, for I am not well at ease: which he
hearing presently makes this reply. Why my sweet heart what ailes you, are you
not well? I pray thee wife tell me, where lies thy grief? or what is the cause
of your discontent: whereupon the vile woman fetching a deep sigh, makes this
answer. O husband God help me, I have cause enough to grieve, and if you knew
all you would say so: but alas it is in vain to tell you any thing, seeing
that whatsoever I say, you make but light reckning of it: and therefore it is
best for me to bury my sorrows in silence, being out of hope to have any help
at your hands. Jesus wife (says he) why use you these words, is my unkindness
such that I may not know your griefs? tell me I say what is the matter? In
truth husband it were to no purpose, for I know your custom well enough; as
for my words, they are but wast wind in your ears, for how great soever my
grief is, I am assured you will but make light of it, and think that I speak
it for some other purpose.

Go too wife, says her husband, tell it me, for I will know it. Well husband,
if you will needs, you shall you know on Thursday last, I was sent for, and you
wi^led me to go to Mistress M. churching, and when I came thither I found
great cheer, and no small company of wives, but the meanest of them all was
not so ill attired as I, and surely I was never so ashamed of my self in my
life, yet I speak it not to praise my self: but it is well known, and I bare
boldly say, that the best woman there came of no better stock then I. But alas
I speak not this for my self, for God wot I pass not how meanly I am
apparelled, but I speak it for your credit and my friends. Why wife, says he,
of what calling and degree were those you speak of? Truly good husband (says
she) the meanest that was there, being but of my degree, was in her gown with
trunck sleeves, her vardingale, her turkey grograin kirtle; her taffety hat
with a gold band, and these with ye rest of her attire, made of ye newest
fashion, which is know the best: whereas I poor wretch had on my threadbare
gown, which was made me so long ago, against I was married, besides that it
was now too short for me, for it is I remember since it was made above three
years ago, since which time I am grown very much, and so changed with cares
and griefs, that I look far older then I am: Trust me I was so ashamed,
being amongst my neighbors, that I had not the heart to look up, but that
which grieved me most was, when mistress Luce. B and mistres T. say openly
that it was a shame both for you and me, that I had no better apparel. Tush
wise (quoth the good man) let them say what they list, we are never a whit the
worse for their words, we have enough to do with our money though we spend it
not in apparel: you know wife when we met together, we had no great store of
household stuff, but were fain to buy t^ afterward by some and some, as God
sent money, and yet you see we want many things that is necessary to be had:
besides the quarter day is near, and my Landlord you know will not forbear
his rent: moreover you see how much it costs me in law about the recovering of
the Tenement which I should have by you, God send me to get it quickly, or else
I shall have but a bad bargain of it, for it has already almost cost me as
much as it is worth. At these words his wives collar begins to rise, whereupon
she makes h^ this answer. Jesus God (says she) when you have nothing else to
hit me in the teeth withal, ye twit me with the Tenement: but it is my
fortune. Why how now wife says her husband, are you now angry for nothing* Nay
I am not angry, I must be content with that which God has ordained for me: but
I wis the time was, when I might have been better advised, there are some yet
living that would have been glad to have me in my smock, whom you know well
enough, to be propper young men, and therewithal wise and wealthy, but I
verily suppose I was bewitched to match with a man that loves me not, though I
purchased the ill will of all my friends for his sake, this is all the good
that I have gotten thereby: I may truly say I am the most vnhahpy woman in the
world: do you think that Law. Tom. and N. M. (who were both suitors to me) do
keep their wives so? no by cochs body, for I know the worst clothes that they
cast off, is better then my very best, which I wear on the chiefest days in
the year: I know not what the cause is that so many good women die, but I
would to God that I were dead too, that I might not troble you no more seeing I
am such an eye sore unto you. Now by my faith wife says he, you say not well,
there is nothing that I think too good for you, if my abillitie can compass
it. But you know our estate, we must do as we may, and not as we would, yet
be of good cheer, and turn to me, and I will strain my self to please you,
in this or any other thing. Nay for Gods sake let me alone, I have no mind on
such matters, and if you had no more desire thereto then I, I promise you, you
would never tuch me. No wife (says he) hoping so with a jest to make he merry,
by my honesty I swear, I verily think that if I were dead, you would not be
long without another husband. No marvel sure says she, I lead such a good
life with you now. By my christian soul I swear, there should never man kiss
my lips again. And if I thought I should live long with you, I would use
means to make my self away: herewithall she puts finger in the eye making
show as though she wept. Thus plays she with the silly sot her husband
(meaning nothing less then to do as she says) while he poor fool is in
mind both well and ill apaid, he thinks himself well, because he imagines he
of a cold constitution, and therefore exceeding chaste: he thinks himself ill,
to see her fained tears, for that he verily supposes she loves him, which does
not a little grieve him, being so kind and tender hearted. Therefore he uses
all means possible to make her quiet, neither will he give her over, till he
has effected it. But she prosecuting her former purpose, which she has
already set in so fair a forwardnes, makes as though she were nothing moved
with his gentle persuasions; Therefore to cross him, she gets her up betimes
in the morning, sooner a great deal then she was wont, pouting and lowering all
the day, and not giving him one good word. But when night comes, and they
again both in bed, laying her self sullenly down, and continuing still
silent, the good man harkens whether she sleep or no, feels if she be well
covered or not, he softly plucks up the clothes upon her, lapping her warm,
being dubble diligent to please her ying all this while winking, noting his
kindness and carefulnes toward her, seems on a sudden to awake from a sound
sleep, gruntling and ^ssing under the sheets, giving him occasion thereby thus
to begin. How now sweet heart, what are you a sleep? A sleep (says she) I
faith sir no: a troubled mind can never take good rest. Why woman are you not
quie yet? No doubt (says she) you care much whether The or no. By lady wife,
and so I do: and since yesternight I have bethought me (having well considered
your words) that it is very meet and requisite, that you should be better
furnished with apparel then heretofore you have been, for indeed I must
confess thy clothes are too simple. And therefore I mean against my cousin M.
wedding (which you know will be shortly) that you shall have a new gown, made
on the bell fashion, with all things suitable thereunto, in such sort that the
best woman in the parish shall not pass you. Nay (quoth she) God willing I
mean to go to no weddings this twelve months, for the goodly credit I got by
the last. By my faith (^aith he) but you shall: what? you must not be so
headstrong and selfe-wild. I tell you if I say the word, you shall go, and you
shall want nothing that you ask or require. That I ask? alas husband (quoth
she) I ask nothing, neither did I speak this for any desire Not she for
twenty pound good woman
that I have to go brave: trust me for mine o^ne part I care not if I never
stir abroad, save only to church: but what I said was upon the speeches
which were there vset, and such other like words, which my gossip N. told me
that she had also heard in company where she was. With these words ye good kind
fool her husband is netted, for on the one side he considers his sundry other
occasions to use meney, and his small store thereof, which is perhaps so
stender, that his single purse cannot extempery change a double pistolet. And
so ill bested is he of household stuff, that perhaps the third part is not a
sufficient pawn for so much money, as this new suite of his wives will stand
him in. But on the other side he waighes her discontent, the report of
neighbors speeches, and lastly, how good a wife he has of her: how chaste, how
loving, how religious, whereof the kind Ass has such an opinion, that he
thanks God with all his heart, for blessing him with such a Jewel: In this
thought he resolves that all other things set aside, he must and will content
her. And here with all he sets his brains a fresh on work, to consider how
best he may compass it: And in this humor he spends the whole night without
sleep, in continual thought. And it comes to pass that the wife perceiving
to what a point she has brought her purpose, does not a little rejoice and
smile in her sleeue to see it. The next morning by the break of day the poor
man gets up, who for care and thought could take no rest all night, and goes
presently to the Drapers, of (...) he takes, up cloth for three months time,
paying for it after an (...) rate, by reason of their forbearance, and in like
sort makes provision for the rest; or perhaps because he would buy it at a
better rate, he pawnes for ready money the lease of his house, or some fair
piece of plate (which his grandfather bought, and his father charily keeping)
left for him, which now he is enforced to part with, to furnish thereby his
wines pride: and having thus dispatched his business, he returns home with a
merry heart, and shows his wife what he had done: who being now sure of all,
begins to curse the first inuentors of pride, and excess in apparel: saying,
fie upon it, what pride is this? but I pray you husband, do not say hereafter,
that I made you lay out your money in this needles sort, for I professed that I
have no delight or desire to go thus garishly: If I have to cover my body and
keep me warm it contents me. The good man hearing his wife say so, does even
leap for joy, thinking all her words Gospel, and therefore presently he sets
the Tailor a work, willing him to dispatch out of hand, that his wife may be
brave so soon as may be. She having thus obtained her purpose, does inwardly
triumph for very joy, howsoever outwardly she does dissemble. And whereas
before she vaunted, that she could find in her heart to keep always within
doors, she will be sure now every good day to go abroad, and at each feast
and Gossips meeting to be a continual guest, that all may see her bravery,
and how well she does become it, for which cause she also comes every Sunday
daily to the Church, that there she may see and be seen, which her husband
thinke^ she does of mere devotion. But in the mean while the time runs on,
and the day comes, wherein the poor man must pay his creditors, which being
unable to do, he is at length arrested, and after due proceeding in law, he
has an execution served upon him, or else his pawn is forfaited, and by
either of both he is almost utterly undone. Then must his fine wife of force
veil her peacocks plumes, and full again to her old byas, keeping her house
against her will, because she could not be furnished with gay attire according
to her mind. But God knows in what misery the ^llie man does live, being
daily vered with her brawling and scolding, exclaiming against him, that all
the house does ring thereof, and in this sort she begins her fagaries. Now
cursed be the day that ever I saw thy face, and a shame take them that brought
me first acquainted with thee: I would to God I had either died in my cradle,
or gone to my grave when I went to be married with thee. Was ever woman of my
degree Alas poor soul.
and birth brought to this beggerie? Or any of my bringing up kept thus basely,
and brought to this shame (...) I which little knew what labor meant, must now
toil and tend the house as a drudge, having never a coat to my bac^e, or
scant hansome hose to my legs, and yet all little enough, whereas I wis I might
have had twenty good marriages, in the meanest of which I should have lived at
ease and pleasure, without being put to any pain, or suffering an^ penury.
Wretch that I am, why do I live? now would to God I were in my grave already,
for I am weary of the world, weary of my life, and weary of all. Thus does
she daily complain, and lay all the fault of her fall on him which least
deserved it, nothing remembering her own pride, in coveting things above her
estate or ability, her misgouernment, and daily gadding with her Gossips to
banquets and Brid^les, when she should have looked to the house, and followed
her own business at home. And his folly is also such, that being blinded with
Dotage, (through too much loving her,) cannot perceive that she is the cause
of all this evil, of all the cares, griefs, and thoughts, which perplere and
torture him, and yet nothing cuts him so much as this, to see her so f^ish and
unquiet, when if he can at any time somewhat pacify, then is his heart
somewhat at rest. Thus does the silly wretch toss and turmoyle himself in
Lobs pound, wrapped in a kind of pleasing woe, but of the which he has neither
power, nor will to wind himself; but therein does consume the remnant of his
Languishing life, and miserably ends his days.

CHAP. II. The humor of a Woman, pranked up in brave Apparel.
THe nature of a Woman inclined to another kind of humor, (which is this) when
the Wife seeing her self bravely Apparelled, and that she is therewith fair
and comely (or if she be not) yet thinking her self so (as Women are
naturally given to sooth themselves,) she does as I said before, hunt after
Feasts and Solemn meetings, wherewith her Husband perhaps is not very well
pleased; which she perceiving, the more to bleare his Eyes, she takes with
her some Kinswoman, or Gossip, or possible some lusty Gallant, of whom she
claims Kindred, though in very deed there be no such matter, but only a
smooth color to deceive her Husband: And perchance to induce him the sooner
to believe it, her Mother (which is privy to the match,) will not stiche to
say, and swear it is so; Yet sometime the Husband to prevent his Wives
gadding, will rain some let, as want of Horses, or other like hindrances;
Then presently the Gossip or Kinswoman (of whom before I spoke, will thus
solemnly assault him.

Believe me Gossip, I have as little pleasure, as who has least, in going
abroad, for I wi^e I had not so much business to do this Twelve months as I
have at this instant: yet should I not go to this Wedding, being so kindly
bidden, I know the young Bride would take it in very ill part: Yea, and (I may
say to you) so would our Neighbors, and others our Friends, which will be
there, who would verily imagine, we ^pe away for some other cause: and were it
not for this, I protest I would not stir out of doors, neither would my
Cosen your Wife have any desire to go thither: thus much I can truly
witness, that I never knew any woman take less delight in such things then
your Wife; or which being abroad, will make more haste to be at home again.

The silly man her Husband, being vanquished by these words, and no longer
able to deny their request, demands only what other Women do appoint to
go, and who shall man them? Marry Sir, (says she) that shall my Cosen H.
And besides your Wife and I, there goes my Kins-woman T. and her Mother,
mistress H. and her Aunte: my Uncle T. and his Brother be met with both
their Wives: Mistress C. my next Neighbor: and to conclude, all the Women of
account in this street: (I dare boldly say,) that honester company there
cannot be, though it were to conueye a Kings Daughter.

Now it often chances that this smooth tongued Oratri^ who pleades thus
quaintly with woman's Art, must have for her pains a Gowne-cloth, a Jewel, or
some other recompense, if she prevail with the good man, and cunningly play
her part. He after some pause (perhaps) will reply in this sort; Gossip, I
confess it is very good company, but my wife has now great business at home,
and besides she uses to go very much abroad, yet for this time I am content
she shall go; But I pray you, Dame (quoth he) be at home betimes. His wife
seeing that her gossip had gotten leave, makes as if she cares not for going
forth, saying: By my Faith man I have something else to do, then to go to a
Brideall at this present: what, we have a great Household, I rude servants (God
wot) whose idleness is such, that they will not do any thing, if a bodies back
be turnde: for it is an old Proverb: (When the ^atte is away, the Mouse will
play.) And therefore Gossip hold you content, we must not be altogether
careless, nor set so much by our pleasure, to negled out profit; And therefore
hold me excused, for I cannot now be spared, nor I will not go, that is flat.
Nay good Gossip (says the other) seeing your Husband has given you leave, let
us have your company this once, and if it be but for my sake, such a chance
as this comes not every day. With that the good man taking the old Gy^ aside,
whispers her thus in hereare: were it not Gossip for the confidence I repose in
you, I protest she should not stir out of doors at this time. Now as I am
an honest woman (quoth she) and of my credit Gossip you shall not need so
doubt any thing.

Thus to Horse they get, and away they spur, with a merry gallop, laughing
to themselves, mocking and flowting the silly man for his simplicity: the one
saying to the other, that he had a shreinde Jealous brain, but it should
avail him nothing. Tush (says the young woman) it is an old saying, He had
need of a long spoone that will ear with the Devil;) and she of a good
w^te, that would prevent the Forie of a jealous fool: and with this and the
like talk, they pass the (...) till they come to the place appointed, where
they meet with lusty Gallants, who (paraduenture) had at the former feast
made the match, and were come thither of purpose so strike up the bargain. But
howsoever it is, this lusty Less lackes no good cheer, nor any kindness
which they can show her.

Imagine now how forward she will be to shelue her best skill in Dancing and
singing, and how lightly she will afterward esteem her Husband: being thus
courted and commended by a crewe of lusty Gallants, who seeing her so bravely
attired, and graced with so sweet and smooth a tongue, so sharp a wit, so
amiable a countenance, will each strive to exceed other, in serving, loving,
and pleasing her: for the gallant carriage and wanton demeanor of so
beautiful a piece, cannot choose but encourage a mere Coward, and heat (if
not inflame) a Frozen heart: One assayes her with sugared terms, and some
pleasing discourse, painting forth his affection with Lovers eloquence:
Another gives her a privy Token, by straining her soft han^; or treading on
her pretty foot; Another Eyes her with a piercing and pitiful look, making
his countenance his faucies Herrold: and perhaps the third which is most likely
to speed) be^ows upon her a gold Ring, a Diamond, a Ruby, or some such like
costly toye: By all which aforesaid tokens, she may well conceive their
meanings, (if she have any conceit at all,) and sometimes it so falls out,
that they fall in where they should not; and she stepping somewhat aside, does
so shrewdly strain her honesty, that hardly or never the grief can be cured.
But to proceed, this ouergorgious wantonning of his Wife, brings the poor man
behind hand, and does withal cause a greater inconvenience; for in the end by
one means or other, either through her too much boldness, or her Lovers want of
wariness, the matter at length comes to light, whereof some Friend or Kinsman
gives him notice.

He being tickled by this bad report, thereupon searching further, finds it
true, or gathers more likelihood of suspicion, and that presently infects his
thoughts with Jealousy, into which mad tormenting humor, no wise man will ever
fall; for it is an evil both extreme and endless, especially (if it be justly
conceived, upon the wives known leaudres, for then there is no hope of curing.
She on the other side (seeing this, and receiving for her loose life, many
bitter speeches) does closely keep on her old course, but now more for spite
then pleasure; for it is in vain to think that she will reclaim her self.
And if he (hoping by constraint to make her honest) fall to beating her,
(though he use never so much severity,) he shall but kindle so much the more
the fire of that leaude Love, which she bears unto others: hereon follows a
heap of mischieses; He grows careless of his business, letting all things
run to ruin: She on the other side (becomes shameless,) converting into
deadly hate the Love that she should bear him. Judge now what a Purgatory of
perplerities the poor man does live in; and yet for all this, he is so
besotted, that he seems to take great pleasure in his pains, and to be so
far in love with Lo^s pound, that were he not already in, yet he would make
all haste possible to be possessed of the place, there to consume the residue
of his life, and miserably end his days.

CHAP. III. The humor of a woman lying in Childbed.
THere is another humor incident to a woman, when her husband sees her belly to
grow big (though peradventure by the help of some other friend) yet he
persuades himself, it is a work of his own framing: and this breeds him new
cares and troubles, for then must he trot up and down day and night, far and
near, to get with great cost that his wife longs for: if she let fall but a
pin, he is diligent to take it up, least she by stouping should hurt her self.
She on the other side is so hard to please, that it is a great hap when he fits
her humor, in bringing home that which likes her, though he spare no pains nor
cost to get it. And often times through ease and plenty she grows so queasie
stomackt, that she can brook no common meats, but longs for strange and rare
things, which whether they be to be had or no, yet she must have them there is
no remedy. She must have Cherries, though for a pound he pay ten shillings, or
green Pescods at four Nobles a pecke: yea, he must take a horse, and ride
into the Country, to get her green Codlings, when they are scarcely so big as
a scotch button. In this trouble and vexation of mind and body, lives the silly
man for fire or seven months, all which time his wife does nothing but
complain, and he poor soul takes all the care, rising early, going late to
bed, and to be short, is feign to play both the husband and huswife. But when
the time draws near of her lying down, then must he trudge to get Gossips,
such as she will appoint, or else all the fat is in the fire. Consider then
what cost and trouble it will be to him, to have all things fine against the
Christning day, what store of Sugar, Biskets, Comphets and Carawapes, Marmalet,
and marchpaue, with all kind of sweet suckets, and superstitious banqueting
stuff, with a hundred other odd and needless trifles, which at that time
must fill the pockets of dainty dames: Besides the charge of the midwife, she
must have her nurse to attend and keep her, who must make for her warm
broaths, and costly cawdels, enough both for her self and her mistress, being
of the mind to fare no worse then she: If her mistress be fed with
partridge, plouer, woodcocks, quails, or any such like, the nurse must be
partner with her in all these dainties: neither yet will that suffice, but
during the whole month, she privily pilfers away the sugar, the (...) and
ginger, with all other spices that comes under her keeping, putting the poor
man to such expense, that in a whole rear he can scarcely recover that one
months charges. Then every day after her lying down will sundry dames visit
her, which are her neighbors, her kinswomen, and other her special
acquaintance, whom the goodman must welcome with all cheerfulness, and be
sure there be some dainties in store to set before them: where they about some
three or four hours (or possible half a day) will sit chatting with the
Child-wife, and by that time the cups of wine have merrily trold about, and
half a dozen times moystned their lips with the sweet juice of the purple
grape: They begin thus one with another to discourse; Good Lord neighbor, I
marvel how our gossip Frees does, I have not seen the good soul this many a
day.

Ah God help her, quoth another, for she has her hands full of work, and her
heart full of heaviness: While she drudges all the week at home, her husband,
like an v^thrift, never leaves running abroad to the Tennis court, and Dicing
houses, spending all that ever he has in such leaud sort: yea, and if that
were the worst it is well: But hear you Gossip, there is another matter
spoils all, he cares no more for his wife then for a dog, but keeps queanes
even under her nose. Jesus! says another, who would think he were such a man,
he behaues himself so orderly and ciuilly, to all men's sights? Tush, hold your
peace Gossip (says the other) it is commonly seen, the still sow ^ates up
all the drasse, he carries a smooth countenance, but a corrupt conscience: That
I know F. well enough, I will not say he loves mistress G go too Gossip
(...) duke to you Yea and says another, there goes foul lies if G. himself
love not his maid N I can tell you their mouths will not be stopped with a
bushel of wheat that speak it. Then the third fetching a great sigh, saying,
by my truth such an other bold Bettresse have I at home: for never give me
credit Gossip, if I took her not the other day in close conference with her
master, but I think I beswaddeld my maid in such sort, that she will have
small list to do so again. Nay Gossip (says another) had it been to me, that
should not have served her turn, but I would have turned the queen out of
doors to pick a Sallet: for ^ot ye what Gossip? it is ill setting fire and
flare together: but I pray you tell me one thing, when saw you our friend
mistress O? now in good see the she is a kind creature, and a very gentle
Peat: I promise you I saw her not since you and I drank a pint of wine with
her in the fish market. (O Gossip says the other) there is a great change
since that time, for they have been feign to pawn all that ever they have, and
yet God knows her husband lies still in prison. O the passion of my heart
(says another) is all their great and glorious show come to nothing* good Lord
what a world is this? Why Gossip (says another) it was neuerlike to be
otherwise, for they loved ever to goe^ne; and fare daintily, and by my faith
Gossip, this is not a world for those matters, and thereupon I drink to you.
It Is is commonly their communication, where they find cheat according to their
choice. But if it happen contrary, that they find not things in such plenty,
and good order (...) they would wish, then one or other of them will talk to
this effect: Trust me Gossip I marvel much, and so does also our other
friends, that your husband is not ashamed to make such small account of you,
and this your sweet child. If he be such a ^iggard at the first, what will he
be by that time he has five or six* it does well appear he bears but little
love to you: whereas you vouchsaffng to match with him, has done him more
credit then ever had any of his kindred. Before God, says another, I had rather
see my husbands eyes out then he should serve me so: therefore if you be wise
use him not to it: neither in this sort let him tread you under fool: I tell
you it is a foul shame for him, and you may be well assured since he begins
thus, that hereafter he will use you in the same order, if not worse. In good
sooth says the third, it seems very strange to me, that a wise woman, and
one of such parentage as you are, who as all men knows is by blood far his
better, can endure to be thus used by a base companion: Blame us not to speak
good Gossip, for I protest the wrong that he does you, does likewise touch us,
and all other good women that are in yourcase.

The Child wife hearing all this, begins to weep, saying, Alas Gossip, I know
not what to do, or how to please him; he is so diverse and wayward a man, and
besides, he thinks all too much that is spent. (Gossip he is says one) a
band and a naughty man, and se it is well seen by your usage. (...) my
Gossips here present can tell, that when I was married to my husband, every one
said that he was so hasty and hard to please that he would kill me with
grief: And indeed I may say to you, I found him crabbed enough: for he began
to take upon him mightily, and thought to have wrought wonders, yet I have used
such means, that I have fained: my young master, and have at this present
brought him to that pass, that I dare swear he had rather looss one of his
joints, then Rangle with me: I will not deny but once or twice he beat me
shrewdly, which I God wot being young and tender took in grievous part, but
what he got by it, let my Gossip T. report, who is yet a woman living, and can
tell the whole story: to whom my good man within a while after said, that I
was past remedy, and that he might sooner kill me, then do any good by
beating me, (and by these ten bones so he should) but in the end I brought the
matter so about, that I got the bridle into my own hands, so that I may now
say, I do what I li^t: for be it right or wrong, if I say it, he will not
gainsay it, (for by this Gold on my finger, let him do what he can I will be
sure to have the last word: so that in very deed, if that Women he made
underlings by their Husbands, the fault is their own: For there is not any man
alive, (be he never so churlish) but his ^ife may make him quiet and gentle
enough, if she have any wit; And therefore your Good Man serves you but well
enough, since you will take it so.

Believe me Gossip (says another,) were I in your case, I would give him such
welcome, at his coming home, and ring such a peale of badde words in his
ears, that he should have small joy to stay the hearing.

Thus is the poor Man handled behind his back, whiles they make no spare to
help away with his good Wine and Sugar, (which he has prepared,) whom they
for his kindness thus ingratefully requite: Yea and now and then having their
brains well heated, they will not stick to taunt him to his face: Accusing
him of little Love, and great unkindness to his Wife.

Now it does many tunes so chance, that he having been forth to provide such
meats as she would have, he comes borne (perhaps at midnight,) and before
he sits down to rest himself, has a very earnest desire to know how his
Wife does, and perchance being loath to lie abroad, because of Erpences,
travails the later, that he may reach to his own house; where (when he is
once come,) he asks the Chamber-maide, or else the Nurse, how his Wife
does: they having their Errand before given them by their Mistress, answers,
she is very ill at ease, and that since his departure she tasted not one bit
of meat, but that toward the Evening she began to be a little better, all
which be mere Lies. But the Poore-man hearing these words, grieves not a
little, though he be all to bemoylde, weary and wet, having gone a long
journey, through a had and filthy way, upon some ill paced trotting ^de, and
it may be is fasting too, yet will he naither eat ^or drink, nor (so much as
once sit down) till he have seen his Wife. Then the prattling Idle Nurse,
which is not to learn to erpioyte such a piece of Service, begins to look
very heaheauily, and to sigh inwardly as though her Mistress had been that
day at the point of Death, which he seeing, was ^he more earnest to visit his
wife: whom at the entrance of the Chamber, he hears lie groaning to her self,
and coming to the Beds side, kindly sits down by her, saying how now my sweet
heart, how do thou? Ah Husband (says she) I am very ill, nor was I ever so
sick in my life as I have been this day. Alas good soul (says he) I am the
more sorry to hear it. I pray thee tell me where lies thy pain? Ah Husband
(quoth she) you know I have been weak a long time, and not able to eat any
thing. But Wife (quoth he) why did you not cause the Nurse to boil you a
Capon, and make a mess of good Broth for you? So she did (says his wife) as
well as she could, but it did not like me God wot, and by that means I have
eaten nothing, since the broth which your self made me: Oh me thought that
was excellent good.

Marie Wife (says he) I will presently make you some more of the same, and you
shall eat it for my sake. With all my heart good Husband (says she) and I
shall think my self highly beholding unto you. Then trudgeth he into the
Kitchen; there plays he the Cooks, burning and broyling himself over the
fire, having his eyes ready to be put out with smoke, while he is busy in
making the Broth: what time he chides with his Maids, calling them beasts
and baggages, that knows not how to do any thing; Not so much as make a
little broth for a ^cke body, but he must be feign to do it him self. Then
comes down Mistress Nurse as fine as a farthing Fiddle, in her petticoate and
Kirtle, having on a white wast-coate, with a Flaunting cambricke ruff about
her neck, who like a Doctris in Faculty, comes thus upon him. Good Lord Sir,
what pains you take, here is no body can please our Mistress but your self:
I will assure you (on my credit) that I do what I can, yet for my life, I
cannot I, any way content her. Moreover, here came in Mistress Cot. and
Mistress Con. who did both of them what they could to have your Wife eat
something; Nevertheless all that they did, could not make her taste one
spoonefull of any thing all this liue-long day: I know not what she ails, I
have kept many Women in my time, both of worship and (...), (simple though I
stand here,) but I never knew any so weak as she is; I, I (quoth he) you
are a company of cunning Cooks, that cannot make a little Broth as it should
be. And by this time the broth being ready, he brings it straight to his
Wife, comforting her with many kind words, praying her to eat for his sake, or
to ^ast a spoonefull or twain, which she does, commending it to the Heavens,
affirming also, that the Broth which the others made had no good taste in the
world, and was nothing worth. The good man hereof being not a little proud,
biddes them make a good ^e in his Wives chamber, charging them to tend her
well. And having given this direction, he gettes himself to Supper, with some
cold meat set before him, such as the Gossips left, or his Nurse could spare,
and having this short pittance he goes to Bed full of care.

The next morning he gets him up betimes, and comes very kindly to know how
his Wife does, who presently pops him in the mouth with a smooth Lie; saying,
that all night she could take no rest till it grew toward the morning, and
then she began to feel (...) little more ease, when God knows she never
slept more soundly in all her life. Well Wife, (said the good man,) you must
remember that this night is our Gossips Supper, and they will come hither with
many other of our Friends, therefore we must provide some good thing for them;
Especially because it is your Upsitting, and a fortnight at the least since you
were brought to Bed: but good Wife, let us go as near to the world as we
may; seeing that our great charge does every day increase, and money was never
so ill to come by.

She hearing him to say so, begins to po^t, saying; would for my part I had
dyed in Travel, and my poor Infant been strangled in the Birth, so should
you not be troubled with us at all, nor have cause to repine so much at our
spending: I am sure there is never a Woman in the world, that in my case has
worse keeping, or is less chargeable, yet let me pinch and spare, and do what
I can, all is thought too much that I have: Trust me I care not a straw
whether you provide me any thing or no, although the sorrow be mine, the
shame will be yours, as yesterday; for example: I am sure here came in above a
dozen of our Neighbors and Friends, of mere kindness to see me, and know
how I did, who by their countenance and coming did you greater credit then
you deserve: But God knows what entertainment they had, having nothing in the
house to set before them, which made me so much ashamed, that I knew not what
to say; I Will tell you what, before God I may boldly speak it, (for I have seen
it,) that when any one of them Lies in, their very Servants have better fare
then I my self have had at your hands, which they seeing (betwixt themselves
yesterday when they were here, did most cunningly flowte both you and me for
their entertainment. I have not (as you know) lain in above fifteen days, and
can yet scant stand on my legs, and you think the tin^e too long, till I be
^yling about the house (to catch my bane,) as I fear I have done already.
Believe me Wife (quoth. he) you mistake me greatly, for no man in the world can
be morekinde to his Wise, then I have been to you. Kind to me (quoth she) by
the mass that you have with a murren; No doubt but I have had a sweet mess of
cherishing at your hands, but I see yourdrifte well enough, you gape every day
for my death, and I would to God it were so for me: The month indeed is half
expirde, and I fear the rest will come, before we be ready for it: My Sister
S. was here no longer ago then to day, and asked if I had ever a new Gown to
be Churched in, but God wot I am far enough from it, neither do I desire
it, though it be a thing which ought both by reason and custom to be observed.

And because it is your pleasure, I will rise to morrow, what chance soever
befall, for the worst is, I can but loose my life: full well may I gather by
this, how you will use me hereafter, and what account you would make of me, if
I had nine or ten children, but God forbid it should ever come so to pass, I
desire rather to be rid of my life, and so to shun the shame of the world,
then long to live with such an unkind churl. Now verily wise (says the Good
man) I must needs blame your impatience, for growing so chollericke without
cause. Without cause (quoth she?) Do you think I have no just cause to
complain? I will assure you there is never a woman of my degree, that would
put up the intolerable injuries that I have done, and daily do, by means of
your hoggish conditions. Well wife says the good man, lie as long as you list,
and rise when you will, but I pray you tell me how this new gown may be had,
which you so earnestly ask for? By my faith (quoth The Fox will cate no grapes
she) you say not well, for I ask nothing at your hands, neither would I have
it though I might: I thank God I have gowns enough already, and sufficient
to serve my turn, and you know I take no delight in garish attire, for I am
past a girl, but it makes me smile to see what a show of kindness you would
feign make (...) thee dissembler, you can cog and flatter as well as any man in
this town, and full little think they that see you abroad, what a devil you
are at home: for what with your crooked qualities, with toyling, moyling,
carking and caring, and being beside broken with Child beating, my countenance
is quite changed, so that I look already as withered, as the bark of an
Elder bough: There is my Cosen T. T. who No more like the woman I was, then an
apple is like an oyster.
when I was a little girl, was at woman's estate; and in the end married
Master II with whom she leads a Ladies life, looking so young and lusty,
that I may seem to be her mother: I, I, such is the difference twixt a kind,
and an discourteous husband, and who knows not but he was a suter to me, and
made many a journey to my fathers house for my sake, and would so saine have
had me, that while I was to marry, he would not match himself with any: but
so much was I bewitched, that after I had once seen you, I would not have
changed for the best Lord in the land, and this I have in recompense of my love
and loyalty. Go too wife (says he) I pray you leave these lavish speeches,
and let us call to mind where we may best take up cloth for your gown: for
you see, such is our weak estate, that if we should rashly lay out that little
money which is in the house, we might possibly be unprovided of all other
necessaries: Therefore whatsoever should chance hereafter, it is best to keep
something against a rainyday: And again you know within these eight or nine
days, I have five pound to pay to Master P. which must be done there is no
shift, otherwise I am like to sustain trebble damage. Tush (quoth she) what
talk you to me of those matters: Alas I ask you nothing: I would to God I
were once rid of this trouble: I pray you let me take some rest, for my head
aches (God help me as it would go in pieces) Iwis you feel not my pain, and
you take little care for my grief: Therefore I pray you send my Gossips word
that they may not come, for I feel my self very ill at ease. Not so (quoth
he) I will neither break custom, nor so much as gainesay their courteous
offer, they shall come sure, and be entertained in tho best manner I may. Well
(quoth she) I would to God you would leave me, that I might take a little rest,
and then do as you list. Upon these speeches the Nurse straight steps in,
and roundes her master in the ear, I pray you Sir do not force her to many
words, for it makes her head light, and does great harm to a woman in her
case, especially her brains being so light for want of sleep: and besides,
she is God knows, a woman of a tender and choyre complexion, and with that she
draws the Curtains about the bed. Thus is the poor man held in suspense till
the next day that the Gossips come, who will play their parts so kindly, and
gaul him so to the quick with their ^uibs and taunts, that his courage will
be wholly quailde, and he ready (if they should bid him, like the prodigal
child, even to eat dr^ffe with the hogs) rather then he would displease
them. But to proceed, he in the mean while is double diligence, to provide
all things against their coming, according to his ability, and by reason of
his wives words, he buys more meat, and prepares a great deal better cheer
then he thought to have done. At their coming he is ready to welcome them
with his Cap in hand, and all the kindness that may be showed. Then does he
trudge bare-headed up and down the house, with a cheerful countenance, like
a good Ass, fit to bear the burden, he brings the Gossips up to his wife,
and coming first to her himself, he tells her of their coming. Iwis (quoth
she) I had rather they had kept at home, and so they would too, if they knew
how little pleasure I took in their coming. Nay I pray you wife (says he)
give them good countenance, seeing they be come for good will: with this they
enter, and after mutual greetings, with much gossips ceremonies, down they
sit and there spend the whole day, in breaking their fastes, dining, and in
making an after noones repast: besides their petty suppings at her beds side,
and at the cradle, where they discharge their parts so well, in helping him
away with his good Wine and Sugar, that the poor man coming often to cheer
them, does well perceive it, and greeues inwardly thereat, howsoever he couers
his discontent with a merry countenance. But they not caring how the game
goes, take their peniworths of that cheer which is before them, never asking
how it comes there, and so they merrily pass the time away, prattling and
tatling of many good matters. Afterward the poor man tr^ts up and down anew,
to get his wife the foresaid gown and all other things theretoo suitable,
whereby he sets himself soundly in debt: sometimes he is troubled with the
child's brawling: sometimes he is brawld at by the nurse: then his wife
complains, that she was never well since she was brought to bed, then must he
cast his cares anew, devising by what means to discharge his debts and lesson
his expenses: then resolves he to diminish his own port, and augment his wives
bravery, he will go all the year in one suit, and make two pair of shoes
serve him a twelve month, keeping one pair for holy days, another for
working days, and one hat in three or four years. Thus according to his own
rash desire, he is up to the ears in Lobs p^wnd, and for all the woe and
wretchedness that he has felt, he would not yet be out again, but does then
willingly consume his self in continual care, sorrow and trouble, till death
does set him free.

CHAP. IIII. The Humor of a woman that has a charge of children.
THe next Humor that is by nature incident to a woman, is, when the husband
has bin married nine or or ten years, Being tired with scolding, as a hackney
Jade with travel.
has five or six children, has passed many evil days, unquiet nights, and
troubles aforesaid, has his lusty youthfulnes spent, so that it is now high
time for him to repent: But such is his gross folly that he cannot, and such
his dullness, through the continual vexations, which have tamed and we ^ried
him, that he cares not whatsoever his wife says or does, but is hardened like
an old Ass, which being used to the whip will not once mend his pace be he
lashed never so much: The poor man sees two or three of his daughters
mariage-able, which is soon known by their wanton tricks, their playing,
dancing, and other youthful toys, but he keeps them back, having perhaps
small commings in, to keep, maintain, and furnish them as they look for,
with gowns, kertles, linen, and other ornaments, as they should be for three
causes. First, that they may be the sooner sued unto by lusty gallants:
Secondly, because his denying hereof, should nothing avail: for his wife which
knows his daughters humors by her own, when she was of the like years, will
see that they shall want nothing: Thirdly, they peradventure, bearing right
women's minds, if their father keep them short, will find some other friends
that shall afford it them. The poor man being thus perplexed on all sides, by
reason of the excessive charges which he must be at, will (as it is likely) be
but honestly attired himself, not caring how he goes so he may rub out, be
i^ never so barely, and would be glad to escape so: But as the Fish in the
Ponde, which would also think himself well, though wanting former liberty,
if he might be suffered to continue, is cut off before his time: So is likewise
this poor man seruet, being once plunged in the perplexing Ponde, or rather
(Pound of Wedlock and House-keeing: for howsoever, when he considers the
aforesaid charges and troubles, he begins to have no joy of himself, and is
no more moved then a tired Jade, which forces not for the spur: Yet for the
furnishing of his Wife and Daughters, so that he may have peace at home, and
enjoy an easy bondage, he must trudge up and down early and late about his
business, in that course of life which he professes;

Sometimes he iourneys thirty or forty miles off, about his affairs: Another
time, twice so far to the Term of Assizes, concerning some old matter in
Law, which was begun by his Graund father, and not yet toward an end, he
pulles on a pair of Boots of seven years old, which have been cobled so
often, that they are now a foot too short for him, so that the top of the
Boot reaches no further then the calfe of his leg, he has a pair of
Spurs of the old making, whereof the one wants a Rowell, and the other for
want of Leathers, is fastened to his foot with a point: He puttes a laced
Coat on his back, which he has had six or seven years, which he never
wore but upon High-dayes, whose fashion is grown clean out of request, by
reason of new invented Garments; whatsoever sports or pleasures he lights on
(by the way on his journey, he takes no joy in them, because his mind is
altogether on his troubles at home, he fares hard by the way, as also his
poor Horse, (if he have any) his man follows him in a'turnde suit, with a
sword by his side, which was found under a hedge at the siege of Bull^^; he
has a coat on his back, which every man may know was never made for him, or
he not present when it was cut out; for the wings on his shoulders comes down
half way his arm, and the skyrtes as much below his waste: To be short, the
poor man goes every way as near as may be, for he remembers at what charges
he is at home, and knows not what it will cost him, in Feeing his Counselors,
Attourneys, and Petty-foggers, which will do nothing without present pay; he
dispatcheth his business speedily, and hies him home with such have, to avoid
greater charges, that he rests no where by the way. And hereby it chaunteth
that many times he comes home at such an hour, as is as near morning as to
night, and finds nothing to eat, for his Wife and Servants are in bed, all
which he takes patiently, being now well used to such entertainment: Surely
for my part, that God sends such adversity and distress to those only whose
good and mild nature, he knows to be such, that they will take all things in
good part.

But to proceed, it is very likely that the poor man is very weary, his heart
heavy, by reason of the care and thought which he has of his business; and it
may be (he looks to be welcome to his own house, and there to refresh
himself) howsoever he forgets not his former usage. But it falls out
otherwise, for his wife begins to chide; whose words carries such a sway with
the Servants, that whatsoever their Master says, they make small account of
it; but if their Mistress command any thing it is presently done, and her
humor followed in all things, else must they pack out of service: so that it
boots not him to bid them do any thing, or rebuke them for not doing it: And
his poor man that has been with him, dares not likewise open his mouth to
call for any Uictualls to comfort himself, or for the Horses, least they
should suspect him to be of his Masters faction, (who being wise, and of a
quiet and mild nature) is loath to make any stir, or breed any disquietnes
in the house, and therefore takes all in good part, and sits him down far
from the Fire, though he be very cold: But his wife and children stand round
about it, but all their eyes are cast on her, who looks on her Husband with an
angry countenance, not caring to provide ought for his supper; but
contrariwise taunts him with sharp and shrewish speeches, whereto for the most
part, he answers not a word, but sometimes (perhaps being urged, through hunger
or wearines, or the unkindness of his wife) he does thus utter his mind. Well
Wife, you can look well enough to your self, but as for me, I am both weary
and hungry, having neither eaten nor drunk all this day, and being beside wet
to the very skin, yet you make no reckoning to provide any thing for my
supper.

Ah (quoth she) you do well to begin first, least I should, which have most
cause to speak: Have you not done very well (think ye) to take your man with
you, and leave me no body to white the Clothes? Now before God, I have had
more loss in my Linen, then you will get this Twelue-month. Moreover, you
shut the Henne-roost door very well, did you not? when the Fore got in, and
eat up four of my best broode-Hennes, as you (to your cost will soon find)
by the mass: if you live long, you will be the poorest of your Kin. Well
wife (says the Good Man) use no such words I pray you, God be thanked I have
enough, and more shall have when it pleases him: and I tell ye, I have good
men of my Kin. But quoth she, I know not where they be, nor what they are
worth. Well (says he) they are of credit and ability too. But for all that
(quoth she) they do you small good. As much good (says he) as any of yours.
As any of mine (says she,) and that she spoke with such a high Note, that the
house rung withal, saying: By Cocks-soule, were it not for my Friends, you
would do but sorily.

Well good wife (says he,) Let us leave this talk; Nay, (says she) if they
heard what you said, they would answer you well enough. The good man holds
his peace, fearing least she should tell them, being of greater ability then
he was, and besides, because he was loath that they should be offended with
him. Then one of the Children falls a crying, and he perhaps, which his Father
loved best, whereupon the Mother presently took a rod, turned up the Childs
tail, and whipped him well fauoredly; and the more to despite and anger her
Husband, then for ought else. The good man being herewith somewhat moved, wills
her to leave beating the Child, showing by his bended brows that he was not a
little angry at her doings. Now gyp with a murren (quoth she) you are not
troubled with them, they cost you nothing, but it is I that have all the pains
with them night and day. Then comes in the Nurs^ with her verdite, and thus she
begins, saying: O Sir, you know not what a hand she has with them, and we
also that tend them. Then comes in the Chamber-maide with her five Eggs: In
good faith Sir, it is a shame for you, that at your coming home, when all the
whole house should be glad thereof, that you should contrari wise put it thus
out of quiet; Says he, (is it I that make this stir?)

Then is the whole Household against him, when he seeing himself thus baited
on all sides, (and the match so unequal,) gets tim to Bed quietly without his
Supper, all wette and durtie; or if he do suppe he has but thin fare: and
being in Bed, where he should take his rest, he is so disquieted with the
Children, whom the Nurse and his Wife (does on purpose set on crying,) to anger
him the more, that for his life he cannot sleep one wink.

Thus is he vexed with continual troubles, wherewith he seems to be well
pleased, and would not though he might be free from them, but does therein
spend his miserable and unhappy life.

CHAP. V. The humor of a Woman that marries her inferior by Birth.
A Woman inclined to another kind of humor, which is, when the Husband has
been married, and has passed so many troubles, that he is wearyed therewith,
his lusty youthful blood grown cold, is matched with a Wife of better birth
then himself, and perhaps younger, both which things are very dangerous, and no
wise man should seek his own spoil, by wrapping himself in either of those
bonds, because they are so repugnant, that it is both against reason and nature
to accord them. Sometimes they have Children, sometimes they have none; yet
this notwithstanding, the Wife can take no pains, yet must be maintained
according to her degree, to the Husbands exceeding charges: for the furnishing
whereof, the poor Man is forted to take extreme toil and pains, and yet for
all this, thanks God, for vouchsafing him so great a grace, as to be matched
with her: If now and then they grow to ^ot words together (as often it happens)
then presently in vpbraiding and menacing sort she tells him, that herfriends
did not match her to him to be his drudge, and that she knows well enough of
what lineage she is come, and will brag withal, that when she list to write to
her friends and kinsmen they will presently fetch her away. Thus does she keep
him in awe, and in a kind of servitude, by telling him of them, who would
perhaps have matched her better, and not with him, but for some privy escape
that she has had before, whereof the poor soul knows nothing, or if perhaps
he has heard some inkling thereof, yet because he is simple, the credit that
he might give thereunto is quickly dashed, by a contrary tale of others
subbornd by them, who perchance will not stick to swear that this is a
slander raised by evil tongues, and forged maliciously against her, as the
like is done against many other good women, whose good names are wronged, and
brought in question by bad persons on their tippling bench, because themselves
cannot obtain their purpose of them: notwithstanding, if her husband be not
able to maintain her according to her mind, then will she be sure to have a
friend in store, that shall afford it her: if her husband deny it, and in the
end she remembers that such a Gentleman at such a feast proffered her a
diamond, or sent her by a messenger some 20, or thirty crowns, which she as
then refused, but now purposes to give him a kind glance, to renew his
affection, who conceiving some better hope, and meeting soon after with her
chamber maid, as she is going about some business, calls to her, saying; Sister,
I would feign speak with you. Sir quoth she, say what you please. You know
(quoth he) that I have long loved your mistress, without obtaining any favor:
but tell me I pray you, did she never speak of me in your hearing? In faith
sit (says she) never but well: I dare swear she wishes you no harm. Before
God sister says the Gentleman, if you will show me some kindness herein, and
do my commendations to your mistress, assuring her of my love and loyalty,
it shall be worth a new gown unto you, mean while take this in earnest, with
that he offers her a piece of gold: She then making a low cursie, says: Sir,
I thank you for your good will, but I will not take it. By my faith says he
but you shall, and with that he forces it on her, adding these words: I pray
you let me hear from you to morrow morning. She being glad of such a booty,
hyes her home, and tells her mistres how she met with a Gentleman that was in a
passing good vain: and to be short, after some questions used by her mistres,
it appears to be the very same man whom she would feign entrap. I tell thee
says she to her maid, if he be as kind as he is proper, he were worthy to
be any woman's love. Believe me mistres (says the maid) A maid sit for such a
mistres.
his very countenance shows that he is kind, it seems that he was only made
for love, and withal he is wealthy, and thereby able to maintain her
beauty, and her person in bravery whom he affects. By this light (says the
mistres) I can get nothing of my husband. The more unwise you (says the maid)
to be so used. Alas quoth she what should I do, I have had him so long, that I
cannot now set my heart on any other. Tush (quoth the maid) it is a folly for
any woman to set her heart so on any man, for you know they care not how they
use us when they are once Lords over us. Beside your husband though he would,
yet cannot maintain and keep you according to your degree: but he of whom I
speak will furnish and maintain you gallantly what garments soever you will
have: and what color and fashion soever you like best, you shall presently
have it, so that there wants nothing else, save only a quaint excuse to my
Master, making him believe you had it by some other means. By my troth quoth
her mistres, I know not what to say. Well mistres (says the maid) advise you
well, I have promised to give him an answer to morrow morning. Alas (says the
other) how shall we do? Tush mistres (answers the maid) let me alone: As I
go to morrow to the market I am sure he will watch to meet with me, that he
may know what news, then I will tell him that you will not agree to his desire
for fear of discredit, this will give him a little hope, and so we shall fall
into further talk, and I doubt not but to handle the matter well enough.
According to promise next morning to market she hies, somewhat more early then
she was wont, and by the way she meets with this lusty gallant, who has
waited for her at least three hours, he has no sooner spyed her, but he
presently makes toward her, and at her coming, thus salutes her: Sister, good
morrow, what news I pray, and how does your fair mistress? In Faith sir (says
she) she is at home very pensive, and out of patience, I think that never any
woman had such a froward husband. Ah villain (says he) the devil take him.
Amen (says the maid) for both my mistress and all the servants are weary
with tarrying with him. Out on him slave (says he) but I pray you tell me what
answer gave your mistress touching my suit? In faith (quoth she) I spoke unto
her, but she would not agree thereunto, for she is wonderfully afraid to
purchase her self discredit, and is beside plagued with such a froward and
suspicious husband, that although she were never so willing, yet could she not,
being continually watched by him, his mother and brethren: I think on my
conscience unless that it were that she spoke to you the other day, the poor
woman talked not with any man these four months, yet she speaks very often of
you, and I am well assured that if she would bend her mind to love; she would
choose you before all men in the world. He being ravished with these words,
r^lies thus: Sweet sister, I pray you be my friend herein, and I will always
rest at your command. In good faith (says she) I have done more for you
already then ever I did for any man in my life. And think not (says he) that
I will be unmindful of your kindness, but what would you counsel me to do?
In Faith sir (says she) I think it best that you should speak with her your
self, and now you have an excellent opportunity, for my master has refused
to give her a gown, whereat she storms not a little, you shall do well
therefore to be to morrow at the Church, and there salute her, telling her
boldly your desire: you may also offer her what you think good* but I know she
will take nothing: marry she will think the better of you, knowing thereby
your frank and bountiful nature. Oh (says he) I would she would gladly take
that, which I would gladly bestow on her. Nay, answers the maid, I know she
will not, for you never knew a more honest woman: but I Will tell ye, how ye may
do it afterward: Look what ye purpose to bestow on her, you shall deliver
unto me, I will do my best to persuade her to take it, but I cannot assure you
that I shall prevail. Surely sister (says he) this is very good counsel:
herewithall they part, and she returns home, laughing to her self, which ^er
mistress seeing, demands of her the cause thereof. Marry (says the maid)
this lusty Gentleman is all on fire, to morrow he will be at Church, purposing
there to speak with you: now must you demean your self wisely, and make very
strange of it, but stand not off too much least you dismay him clean: as you
will not wholly grant, so must you feed him with some hope. She, having her
lesson thus taught her by her maid, gets her up betimes the next morning, and
to the Church she goes, where this amorous gallant has awaited for her
coming ever since four a clock. She being set in her pew, makes show as if
she were devoutly at her prayers, when (God wot) her devotion is bent to the
service of another Saint: it were worth the noting to see how like an image she
sits: and yet for all her demurenes, she applies all her five senses, and that
full zealously in this new humor of religion. To be short, he steals unto her,
sneaking unto her, from the belfrey unto her pew, and being come, greetes her
after the amorous order, and from greeting, he falls to courting, whereto she
does in no wise yield consent, neither will she take ought that he offers, yet
answers him after such a sort, that he does thereby assuredly gather that she
loves him, and sticks only for fear of discredit: whereat he is not a little
ioco^, and having spent his time to so good a purpose, he takes his leave, and
she hasting home to her counselor, acquaints her what has passed between
them, who thereupon takes occasion to say thus: Mistress, I know well that now
he longs to speak with me, but at our meeting I will tell him that you will
yield to nothing, for which I will feign my self very sorry: and I will add
withal, that my master is gone out of town, and will appoint him to come
hither toward the Evening, with promise that I will let him in, and convey him
so secretly into your Chamber, that you sh^l know nothing thereof: At what time
you must seem to b^e highly offended, and if you be wise, you will make him
buy his pleasure with some Cost, which will cause him to esteem the more of
you; tell him that you will cry out, and then do you call me: By handling
him thus, I can assure you, that you shall get more of him, then if you had
yielded at the first. All this while I will have in my keeping that which he
will give you, for he has appointed to deliver it me to morrow, and I will
make him believe, that you would by no means take it. But when the matter is
brought to this pass, then will I make show to offer you his gift before him,
telling you, that he is willing to bestow it on you, to buy you a Gowne-cloth
withal; Then must you chide, and seem to be angry with me for receiving it,
charging me to deliver it back again to him, but be sure I will lay it up
safe enough. Well devised wench (says the Mistres) I am content it shall be
so. This plot being thus laid, the crafty w^nch goes presently to find out
this jolly Gallant, whose first word is: What news?

Now in good faith Sir (says she,) the matter is no further forwards, then if
it were yet to to begin; yet because I have meddled so far in it, I would be
loath I should not bring it about, for I fear that she will complain of me
to her Husband and Friends: but if I could persuade her by any means to
receive your gifts, then out of question the matter were dispatched: and in good
faith I Will try once more: I have one good help, and that is this: my Master
(as I told you before) will not give her a new^ Gown, at which unkindness,
she storms mightily.

The hot Lover hearing this, gives her presently twenty Crowns for her good
will, whereupon she speaks thus: In Better then two years wages, and soon
got.
good faith Sir, I know not how it comes to pass, but sure I am, I never did
so much for any man before, as I have done herein for you: Ye see Sir, what
danger I have put my self in for your sake; For if my Master should have any
inckling of it, I were utterly undone: yet for you I will hazard a little
further: I know she loves you well, and as good hap is my Master is not now
in town, if you therefore will be about the doors toward six of the Clock
at night I will let you in, and so conney you secretly into my Mistres chamber,
who does sleep very soundly; for you know she is but young, being there I
could with you go to bed so her, and for the rest you need not (I trust) any
tutor: I protest that I know no other means for Just as Jarmans lips.
the compassing of this matter, perhaps it will fadge: For it is a great
matter, when a Lover and his Mistres are both together naked and in the dark,
which does help forward a Woman's conceit, to that which in the day time
perhaps she would hardly grant. O my sweet friend (quoth. he) for this kindness my
Purse shall be at thy command. To be short, night comes, he is there according
to promise, whom she straight conueyes into her Mistress chamber; then he
presently vnclothes himself, and steps softly into her Bed, and being once
in, he begins to embrace her: hereat (she that seems till then asleep)
starts up on a sudden, and with a fearful voice asks who is there? It is I
sweet Mistres (says he) fear nothing. Ah (quoth. she) think you to prevail
thus? No, no, and with that she makes as though she would rise, and call her
maid, who answers not a word; but alas for pity, like an undutiful servant
leaves her at her greatest need. She therefore (good woman) seeing that she is
forsaken; says with a sigh, Ah me, I am betrayed: then begin they a stout
battle, He urging his advantage, she faintly resisting, but alas what can a
naked woman do against a resolute Lover? there is therefore no other remedy,
but that at length (poor soul,) being ont of breath with striving, she must
needs yield to the stronger; she would feign have cried out (God wot) had it
not been for fear of discredit; for thereby her name might have bin brought
in question, therefore all things considered, she does unwillingly God knows,
let him supply her husbands place, garnishing his temple, for pure good will,
with (...) badge. Thus has she got a new Gown, which her good man refused to
give her, to bleare whose eyes, and keep him from suspicion, she gets her
mother in her Husbands sight, to bring home the cloch and give it her, as
though it were her cost; and least also she should suspect any thing, she makes
her believe she bought it with the money which she got by selling odd
commodities which her Husband knew not of; But it may be (and often happens so)
that the Mother is privy to the whole matter, and a furtherer thereof: After
this Gown she must have another, and two or three silken embrothered gyrdles,
and other such costly knacks, which the Husband seeing, will in the end suspect
somewhat, and begin to doubt of his wives honesty, or shall perhaps receive
some advertisement hereof from some Friend or Kinsman; for no such matter can
be long kept close, but in the end will by some means or other be made known
and discovered: Then falls he into a f^antick vain of Jealousy, watching his
Wives close packing; and for the better finding of it out, he comes home on a
sudden about midnight, thinking then to discover all, and yet perhaps may
miss his purpose. Another time coming in at unawares he sees some thing that
he likes not, and then in a Fury falls on railing, but be sure that she
answers him home* not yielding an inch unto him; for besides the advantage of
the fight which is waged by her own trusty weapon (her Tongue I mean) she
knowing withal that she is of better birth, hits him in the teeth therewith,
and threatens him to tell her Friends how hardly he does use her. To be short,
the poor man shall never have good day with her, but either with thought of
her incontinencie, or if he speak to her, he is borne (...) with scolding
lies, and despised of his own Servants; his state tons to ruin, his wealth
decays, his body dries up, and wears away with grief; He grows desperate
and c^elesse. Thus is he plunged in Lobs pound, wearied in a world of
discontents, wherein notwithstanding he takes delight, having no desire to
change his state, but rather if he were out, and knew what would follow, yet
would he never rest till he had gotten in again, there to spend and end (as
now he must) his life in grief and misery.

CHAP. VI. The Humor of a Woman that strives to master her Husband
THe next humor whereunto a Woman is addicted, is, when the Husband has got a
fair young Wife, who is proper and fine, in whom he takes great delight; yet
perhaps she is bent altogether to cross, and thwart: the man being of a kind
and mild nature, loving her entierly, and maintains her as well as he can,
notwithstanding her frowardness: It may be also that she has care of his
credit and honesty, and does abhor such lewdness, as she of whom we
spoke before did use, yet has she nevertheless an extreme desire of
Sovereignty, (which is known a common fault amongst Women) and to be her
Husbands commander, and a busy medler in his matters; be he a Judge, a
Nobleman, or Gentleman, she will take upon her to give sentence, and answer
Suitors, and whatsoever she does he must stand to it.

This is, (I say) a general imperfection of Women, be they never so honestly,
never so kindly used, and have never so much wealth and ease, to strive for the
Breeches, and be in odd contrary humors, of purpose to keep her Husband in
continual thought and care how to please her.

He gets him up betimes in the morning, leaving her in Bed, to take her ease,
while he stirs about the house and dispatcheth his business, looks to the
servants that they loyter not, ^auseth Dinner to be made ready, the Cloth to
be laid, and when all things are ready, he sends one to desire her to come
down, who brings back answer that she is not disposed to Dine. No (says he)
I will neither sit down, nor eat a bit till she be here; So receiving his
second message by his Maid, or perhaps by one of his children, replies thus; Go
tell him again that I will not dine to day. He hearing this, is not yet
satisfied, but ^ends likewise the third time, and in the end goes himself,
and thus begins. How now, what ails you Wise, that you will eat no meat?
hereto she answers not a word. The poor man maruels to see her in this
melancholy dumpe, (although perhaps she has played this pageant many times
before) and uses a^ entreatie he may, to know of her the cause thereof: but
in vain, for indeed there is no cause at all, but only a mere mockery:
Sometimes she will persist so obstinately in this humor, that for all the
persuasions and kindness that he can use, she will not come. Sometimes it may
be she will, and then he must lead her by the hand like a bride, and set her
chair ready for her, mean while it is so long before he can get ^er down,
that the meat is cold when it comes to the table. Being set, she will not eat
one bit, and he seeing that (like a kind Ass) will ^ast likewise: whereat she
smiles inwardly, having brought him so to her bow, first in crossing him, then
in making him to fast from dinner: wherein (to say the truth) she has reason,
for what needs a woman to seek his favor, who does already love her, and
show her all the kindness that he can. Sometimes the good man ryding abroad
about his business, meets with two or three of his friends, with whom perhaps
he has some dealings, and has been long acquainted with them: It may be also
that he inuites them home to his house, as one friend will do to another, and
sends his man before to his wife to make all things ready in the best sort
that she can for their entertainment: the poor seruingman gallops in such
have, that both himself and his horse is all on a sweat, when he comes home
he does his ar^and to his mistress, telling her withal that the guests which
his master brings are men of good account. Now by my faith (says she) I will
not meddle in it, he thinks belike that I have nothing else to do, but drudge
about to prepare banquets for his companions, he should have come himself with
a vengeance, and why did he not? Forsooth (says the servant) I know not, but
thus he bad me tell you. Go too (says she) you are a knave that meddles in
more matters then you have thank for. The poor fellow hearing this holds his
peace, she in a fume stings up into her chamber, and which is worse, sends out
her servants, some one way, some another: as for her maids, they have their
lesson taught them well enough, knowing by custom how to behave themselves to
weary their master: well, he comes home to his aforesaid friends, calls
presently for some of his servants: but one of the maids make answer, of whom
he demands whether all things be ready: In good faith sit my mistress is
very sick, and here is no body else can do Oh fetch the aqua vitae bottle
quickly.
any thing: with that he being angry, ^des his friends into the hall, or some
other place according to his estate, where he finds neither fire made, nor
cloth laid. Judge then in what a taking he is, although it may be that his
friends perceived by the sending of his man, that his commandments were not
of such force as an act of parliament. The good man being ashamed, calls and
gapes, first for one man then for an other, and yet for all this there comes
none, except it be the scullion or some chare woman, that both use his house,
whom his wife has left there of purpose, because she knew they could serve to
do nothing. Being herewith not a little moved, up he goes into his wives
chamber, and thus speaks unto her: Gods precious woman, why have ye not done
as I wild ye? Why (says she) you appoint so many things to be done that I know
not what to do. Before God (says he) and with that scratches his head, you
have done me a greater displeasure then you think: these are the dearest
friends that I have, and now here is nothing to set before them. Why (quoth
she) what would you have me to do? I wis if you cast your cards well, you
shall find that we have no need to make banquets: I would to God you were
wiser, but since you will needs be so lusty, even go through with it your
self on Gods name, for I Will not meddle with it. But what the diuellment ye
(says he) to send all the servants abroad? Why (quoth she) what did I know
that you should need them now: yet did she kn^w it will enough, and had of
purpose sent them forth on ^eeuelesse arrands, the more to anger and despite
him: who seeing that he can prevail nothing, gives over talking to her, and
gets him down in a bitter chafe: for it may be that his guestes be of such
account, and he so much beholding unto them, that he had rather have spent a
hundred crowns then it should so have fallen out. But she cares not a whit,
being well assured, that howsoever she thwarts him, he will hold his hands, and
in scolding she knows her self to be the better. To be short, the poor man
being vexed, with shame and anger, runs up and down the house, gets as many
of his servants together as he can: If his provision be but slender at ho^, he
sendes presently abroad, in the mean while he calls for a clean towell, the
best table cloth, and wrought napkins. But the maid answers him that he can
have none. Then up to his wife goes he again, and tells her that his friends
do entreat her to come down and bare them company, showing her what a shame
it is, and how discourteously they will take it if she come not: And finally,
he uses all the fairest speeches that he can to have her come, and to welcome
and entertain them for his credites sake. Nay in faith (quoth she) I will not
come, they are too great states for my company, and no doubt they would scorn
a poor woman as I am: It may be she will go, but in such sort, and with such
a countenance, that it had been better for him she had not come at all, for his
friends will somewhat perceive by her looks, and gesture, that howsoever they
be welcome to the good man, she had rather have their room then their company.
But if she refuse to come (as it is the more likely) then will he ask her for
the best to well, table-cloth and napkins. Napkins (quoth she) as though those
that be abroad already be not good enough for greater and better men then they
are: when my brother or any of my kinsmen come, which are I wis their equals in
every respect, they can be content to be served with them: but were these your
guestes never so great, yet could I not now fulfill your request, though my
life should lie on it: for since morning I have lost my keys of the great
chest where all the linen Oh liar, liar.
lies: I pray you bid the maid look for them, for in good truth I know not
what I have done with them, and no marvel, for I have so much to do, that I
know not how to bestir my self: well I wotte, I have spoiled my self with
continual care and trouble. Now in good faith (quoth he) you have dressed me
fairly, but it is no matter: Before God ^le break open the chest. Now surely
then (quoth she) you shall do a great act, I would feign see you do it, I
would for my part you would break all the chestes in the house. The poor man
hearing her in these terms, knows not well what to do, but takes that which
he next lights on, and therefore shifts as well as he can: he causes his
guestes to sit down at the table, and because the beer then a broach is on
tilt, and therefore not very good, he bids one of the servants broach a new
barrel and fill some fresh drink, but then there is neither tap nor spigget
to be found, for his wife of purpose has hidden them out of the way. Toward
the end of the dinner he calls for cheese, and fruit, but there is none in the
house, so that he is feign to send to the neighbors for the same, or else be
utterly destitute: mean while his boy being at the table with the guestes, at
last tells them how his mistress faines her self sick, because she is not
pleased with their masters coming. Well when bed time comes, he can get no
clean sheets nor pillowbeeres, because forsooth the keys are lost, so that
they must be content to lie in those that be foul, and have been long lain
in. The next morning they get them gone betimes, seeing by the good wives
countenance that they are nothing welcome. By the way their Lackies tell them
what the Gentleman's boy reported, whereat they laughed heartily, yet find
themselves agreeued, vowing never to be his guest any more. The husband also,
getting him up betimes in the morning, goes presently to his wife, and thus
begins: By Jesus wife, I muse what you mean to use me thus. I know not how to
live with you. Then she replies saying: Now God for his mercy, am I so trouble,
some? God wot I am every day (poor soul) troubled with keeping your hogs,
your geese, your chickens, I must card, I must spin, and continually keep the
house, look to the servants, and never sit still, but toyling up and down to
shorten my days, and make me die before my time, and yet I cannot have one
hours rest, or quietness with you, but you are always brawling, and do
nothing your self, but spend and wast your goods and mine with odd
Companions. What odd Companions (satch he) as though you know not that these
are such men, as can either much further, or much hinder me: It is a sign that
you deal very well, that you must stand in distrust of such persons. ^erevpon,
she takes occasion to rail and scolde all the day long; the man being wearied
with her waiwardnesse, and Age (being hasted with grief and sorrow) does
unawares overtake him. Briefly, he is in every respect wretched: but such is
his folly, that he reckons his pains pleasure, and would not though he might
be again at liberty, out of Lobs Pound, or if he would it is now too late;
for he must of force continue there, in Care, Thought, and Misery, till Death
make an end of him and them together.

CHAP. VII. The humor of a covetous minded Woman.
THe next humor belonging to a Woman is, when the Husband is matched to a
modest civil woman, who is nothing given to that thwarting and crossing humor
whereof I spoke before. But be she good or bad, this is a general rule many
wives hold and steadfastly believe, that their own Husbands are worst of all
others. It often happens that when they match together they are both young, and
entertain each other with mutual delights, so much as may be, for a year or
two, or longer; till the vigor of youth grow cold. But the woman droopes not
so soon as the man; the reason whereof is, because she takes no care, thought,
nor grief, breaks not hor sleep, and troubles not her head as he does, but
does wholly addict her thoughts to pleasure and solace. I deny not, that when
a Woman is with Child, she bides many times great pains, and is often very
ill at ease, and at the time of her deliverance, she is for the most part, not
only in exceeding pain, but also in no less danger of death: But all this
is nothing to the Husbands troubles, on whose hands alone restes the
wholecharge, and weight of maintaining the house, and dispatching all matters,
which is oftentimes entangled so with controversies, and so thwarted with
cross fortune, that the Poor man is tormented with all veration of mind.

Being thus wearied, and as it were worn away with continual grief,
troublous cogitations, toil and travel, have no mind on any other pleasure;
whereas she on the other (...): is as lusty as ever she was: means while his
storke d^ayes, and his state grows worse and worse: and as that diminishes,
so must he perforce, shorten her alowance, and maintenance, which is almost as
great a Corosiue to her, as the former. You may be well assured, that this
change in him, makes her also change her countenance; from Mirth and
cheerefulnes, to lowering Melanthalie, seeking occasions of disagreements, and
use them in such sort, that their former love and kindness was not so great, as
are now their brawles, iarres, and discords. It does also oftentimes happen,
that the Woman by this means wastes and consumes all, giving leaudly away her
Husbands goods, which he with great pains and cares has gotten. The
Good Man, he goes every way as near as he can, and warily contains himself
within his bounds, casting up what his yearly Revenues are, or what his gain
is by his profession, be it Merchandise or other, and then what his expenses
be; which he finding greater then his commings in, begins to bite the lip, and
becomes very pensive: his Wife and he being afterward private together in
their chamber, he speaks thereof unto her in this manner. In faith Wife, I
much marvel how it comes to pass that our goods go away thus, I know not how?
I am sure I am as rarefull as a man can be, I can not find in my heart to
bestow a new coat on my self; and all to save money. By my troth Husband
(says she) I do as much marvel at it as you: I am sure for mine own part,
that I go as near in Housekeeping every way as I can.

To be short, the poore-man not doubting his wife, nor suspecting her ill
carriage, after long care and thought, concludes, that the cause thereof is his
own ill Fortune, which keeps him down, and crosses all his actions with
contrary success, but it may be that in process of time, some Friend of his
(being more clear sighted in the matter, perceiving all goes not well, ^oeth
privily inform him thereof, who being astonished at his report, gets him home
with a heavy countenance, which the Wife seeing, and knowing herself guilty,
begins presently to doubt the worst, and perhaps gesseth shrewdly at the
authors thereof: b^t howsoever, she will take such an order, that she will be
sure to escape the brunt well enough.

The Good Man will not presently make any words hereof unto her, but defer
it a while, and try in the mean time, whether he can (of himself gather any
further likelihood; for which purpose he will tell her, that he must needs
ride some ten or twelve miles out of Town, about some earnest business. Good
faith husband (says the) I had rather you should send your man, and stay at
home your self. Not so wise (says he) but I will be at home again my self
within these three or four days. Having told her this tale, he makes as
though he took his tourney, but does privily lie in Ambush in such a place,
where he may know whatsoever is done in the house: But she smelling his
drift, sends word to her sweetheart, that he do not come in any case, and all
the time of his dissembled absence, she carries her self, that it gives no
likelihood of suspicion: which the silly man seeing, comes out of his Ambush,
enters his house, making as if then he were returned from his journey: and
whereas before he lowred, now he shows a cheerful countenance, being verily
persuaded that his Friends report is a mere lie, and that he thinks so much
the rather, because she does at his coming run to meet him, with such a show
of love, and does so embrace and kiss him, that it seems impossible so kind
a Creature should play false: But long after (being in Bed together,) he thus
speaks to her;

Wife, I have heard reported certain words that like me not. Good faith
Husband (says she) I know not what is the cause thereof: I have noted this
great while, that you have bin very pensive, and was afraid that you had had
some great loss, or that some of your Friends had bin killed, or taken by the
Spaniards. No (says he) that is not the matter, but a thing which grieves me
more then any such matter can do. Now God for his mercy (quoth she) I pray
you Husband let me know what it is. Mary wife (says he) a friend of mine told
me that you kept company with R R. the veriest Ruffian in all the Tol^e, and a
many other matters be told me of you. ^ere at she c^ssing her self in token of
admiration (though smiling in wardly) replies thus: Dear Husband if this be
all, then I pray you give over your pensiuenes: I would to God I were as free
from all other sins as I am from that: Then laying one hand on her head, she
thus proceeds: I will not swear any thing touching him, but I would the
Devil had all that is under my hand, if I ever touched any man's mouth saving
yours, or some of our Friends and Kins^en, or such at least as you have
commanded me. Ha, ha, is this the matter? In troth I am glad that you have
told me; I had verily thought it had been some greater matter, but I know well
enogh whereupon these speeches grew, and I would that you did likewise know,
what moved him to speak them, I know you would not a little marvel, because
he has always Oh brave dissembler.
professed such frienship toward you. In good faith I am nothing sorry that he
has awaked the sleeping Dog. What mean you by that word (quoth. he?) Nay (quoth
she) be not desirous to know it, you shall know it soon enough some other
time. Birlady says he) I Will know it now. By my troth Husband (says she (I was
often wonderfully angry when you brought him in hither, yet I forbear to speak
of it, because I saw you loved him so well. But speak now says he) and tell
me what the matter is? Nay nay (quoth she) it skills not greatly. Go too wife
says the good man) tell me, for I will know it. Then takes she him about the
neck, and sweetly kissing him, says thus; Ah my dear Husband, what Uillaines
are these that would seem to abuse you, whom I honor and love above all men
in the work. Well Almost as bad as Judas kisses.
Wife (says he) I pray thee tell me the man that so misuseth us. In troth
(quoth she that vile dissembling Traitor, that flattering The Devil take the
Liar.
tell tale, that put this badde report in your ears, whom you esteem so
much: reposing such great confidence in him, he is the only man and none but
he, that has earnestly urged me any time this two years to commit folly
with him, but God (I praise him) has given me grace, both to refuse him, and
his offers, although I were continually troubled and importuned by him: ^is
when you thought he came hither so often for your sake, it was for this cause,
for never a time that he ^me, but he was in hand with me to obtain his filthy
desire, till in the end I threatened to tell you of it, but I was Thus is he
board through the nose with a cush^n.
loath to do it, fearing to breed a quarrel between you, so long as I was
sure to keep him from doing you herein any ^cie: beside, I had still a good
hope, that he would at length give over, ^is it was no fault of his that he
sped not. Gods for my life (says the good man) being in a great rage, what a
treacherous villain is this? I would never have suspected any such matter in
him, for I durst have put my life in his hands. By this light, husband (says
she) if ever he come more within the doors, or if ever I may know that you
ha^ any talk with him, i will keep house no longer with you. Ah dear husband,
and with that she As kind as a S^a-crab seazing on a dead ca^on,
clips and c^ls him again about the neck, should I be so di^oyall as to abuse
you in this sort? so sweet, so amiable, and so kind a man, who lets me have
my will in all things? God forbid I should live so long to become a strumpet
now. But for Gods sake husband forbid him your house, with whom this knave has
flaundred me withal, yet I would the devil had me if ever he made such motion
Amen.
to me, nevertheless by Gods grate he shall not come henceforth in any place
where I am, and with that she begins to weep, and he (kind fool) does
appease and comfort her, gromising and swearing, that he will do as ^he will
have him, save only that he will not forbid him his house, with whose company
the other had charged her, and withal he vows never to believe any more of
these reports, nor so much as to harken to any such tales again,
notwithstanding he still seeles a scruple of suspicion in his conscience:
Within a while he begings to fall at defiance with his honest friend, who
informed him of his wives wantonness, and he seems to be so deeply
besotted with her love, that you would say he were transformed without
inchauntment, into Ac^ons shape: his charge of household still increases, he
has many children, and is perplered on every side: but his wife follows her
pleasure far more then before, for though it be never so openly known, yet
will no man tell him thereof, because they know reason.
that he will not believe them (and which is more ridiculous) he that abuses
him most, shall be best wlecome unto him of any. To be short, age will overtake
him, and perhaps poverty, from the which he shall never be able to raise
himself. Lo here the great good and pleasure, that he has gotten by entering
into Lobs pound, every man mockes him, some says it is pity because he is an
honest man: others say it is not a matter to be sorrowed for, since it is the
common rule of such. They of the better sort will scorn his company: thus
lives he in pain, grief and disgrace, which he takes for great pleasure, and
therein will continue till death cut him off.

CHAP. VIII. The humor of a woman that still desires to be gadding abroad.
THe next humor of a woman, is, when the husband has been in Lobs pound some
five or six years, part whereof he has spent in such pleasures as wedlock
does at the first afford, but now the date of these delights is out, he has
perhaps some three or four children, but his wife is now big again, and a
great deal worse of this child then she was of any other. Whereat the poor
man greeues not a little, who takes great pains to get her that which she
longes for: well; the time of her lying down draws near, and she is
wonderfully out of temper, so that it is greatly feared that she will hardly
escape. Then falls he on his kneees and prays devoutly for his wi^e, who soon
after is brought to bed, wherefore he is not a little ^ocond, making sure
account that God has hard his p^aiers. The Gossips, kinswoman, and neighbors,
come in troops to visit and rejoice for her safe delivery. She for her part
wants no good cherishing, whereby she recouers her strength, and is as fresh
and lusty as ever she was.

After her Churching, she invited by some of her Neighbors, who also inuites
five or six others of her Neighbors and friends, who is received and feasted
with all kindness; which Banquet does perhaps cost her Husband more then would
have kept the house a whole fortnight: Amongst other, she propounds a question,
and makes a match to go all together to a certain Fair, which will be within
ten days at such a place, to the which place they shall have a most brave and
pleasant journey by reason of the fair weather, for they will always conclude
such an agreement in some of the best seasons of the year, and she takes upon
her to make this motion, chiefly in regard of her Gossip, which was lately
brought abed, that she may after her long pain and travail somewhat recreate
and refresh her self. But she answers her with thanks for her good will,
saying she knows not how to get leave of her Husband. What (says the other)
that is the least matter of a thousand. Tush Gossip (says another) stand not
upon that, we will all go and be merry, and we will have with us my Gossip G.
T. my Cousin H. S. though perhaps he be nothing kind to her: But this is their
ordinary phrase, and they undertake this Journey, because they cann^ so well
obtain their purposes at home, being too near their Husbands noses. After
this agreement, home she comes with a heavy countenance; the Good man asks
what she aileth. Marry (quoth she) the Child is very ill at ease, (though he
were in never better health since he was borne) his flesh burns as though it
were fire, and as the Nurse tells me, he has refused the Dugge these two
days, although she durst not say so much till now. He hearing this, and
thinking it true, is not a little sorry; goes presentto see his Child, and
weeps for pity.

Well, Night comes, to bed they go, and then she fetching a sigh, begins thus:
Husband, I see you have forgotten me. How mean you that (says he?) Mary
(quoth she) do you not remember that when I was in Childbed, you said, that
if it pleased God that I escaped, I should go to such a Fair, with my Gossips
and Neighbors to make merry, and cheer up my self, but now I hear you not
talk of it. In troth Wife (says he) my head is troubled with so many
matters, and such a deal or business, that I have no leisure to think on any
thing else: but there is no time past yet, the Fair will not be this
fortnight. By my troth (quoth. she) I shall not be well unless I go. Well wife
(says he) content your self; for if I can by any means get so much money ye
shall go: You know it is not little that we shall spend there: yea, more I wis
then will be my ease to lay out. Good Christ (quoth. she) is it now come to that?
You promisde me absolutely, without either ifs or ands: before God I will go,
whether you will or no: for there goes my Mother, my Gossip T. my Cosen B. and
my Cosen R. and his wife. If you will not let me go with them, I know not
with whom you will let me go. He, hearing her thus wilful, thinks it best
for his own quietness to let her go, though he strain his Purse somewhat the
more. The time comes, he hires Horses, buys her a new riding Gown, and does
furnish her according to her mind, peradventure there goes in their company a
lusty Gallant, that will frollicke it by the way on her Husbands cost, for his
Purse must pay for all. It may be he will go himself, because he has never a
man, or else cannot spare him from his work. But then is the poor man notably
perplered, for she will of purpose trouble him for every trifle, more then
she would do to another; because it does her good to make a Drudge of him
(and so much the rather) that he may not afterward have any desire to go
abroad with her again.

Sometimes her stirrup is too long; sometimes too short; and he must still
alight to make it fit: Sometimes she will wear her Cloak, sometimes not, and
then he must carry it: Then finds she fault with her Hor^es trotting which
makes her sick, and then she will alight and walk on foot, leaving him to
lead the horses: Within a while after they come to a water, then must he be
troubled to help her up again. Sometimes she can eat nothing that is in the
Inn, then must he (being weary all day with Riding; trudge up and down all
the Town, to find ^omething that will fit her stomach; All which
notwithstanding, she will not be quiet: and not she only, but her Gossips
also, will be bobbing and quibbing him, saying, that he is not worthy to be a
womans man. But he is so inured to these ^anglings, that he cares not for all
their (...) words.

Well, at length to the Fair they come; and then must he^ play the Squier in
going before her; making so much room for them as he can: when there is any
throng or press of people, being (very ch^y of his wife, least she should be
hurt or annoyed by thrusting.) There moyles he like a Horse, and sweates like
a Bull, yet cannot all this please her. Some Dames of the company, which are
more flush in Crowns then her good man; bestows money on gold Kings, Hats,
silk Gyrdles, Jewels, or some such toys, yea, costly toys; which she no
sooner sees; but presently she is on fire, until she have the like: Then must
he herein content her (if he love his own ease; and have he money or not,
some shift must be made to satisfy her humor. Well now imagine them going
homewards, and think his pain and trouble no less then it was coming
forth, her Horse perhaps does ^ounder much, or trots too hard; which is
peradventure by reason of a nail in his foot, or some other mischaunce. Then
must he perforce buy, or hyre another horse; and if he have not money enough to
do so, then must he let her tide on his, and he trot by her side, like a
Lackey. By the way she will ask for twenty things, for milk, because she
cannot away with their drink; for Pears, Plums, and Cherries: When they come
near a Town, he must run before to choose out the best Time; eue^ and anon as
she rides, she will of purpose let fall her wa^d, her Mask, her Gloves, or
some thing else for him to take up, because she will not have him idle; When
they are come home, she will for a sortnight together do nothing else but gad
up and down amongst her Gossips, to tell them how many gay and strange things
she has seen, all that has passed by the way, in going and coming, but
especially of her good man, whom she will be sure to blame: sayin^, that he did
her no pleasure in the world, and that (she poor soul) being sick and
weary, could not get him to help her, or to provide any thing for her that
she liked: And finally, that he has had no more care of her, then if she
had been a mere stranger.

But he (poor sot,) finding at his return, all things out of order, is not a
little troubled to set them in due frame again, and toils exceedingly at his
labor, that he may recover his charges which he has been at in this Journey.
But she, what for Gossipping, for Pride, and Idleness, will not set he^ hands to
any thing; and yet if ought go well, she will say it was through her
heedfulnes, and good Huswiferie: If otherwise, then will she scold, and lay the
fault thereof on him, although it be her own doings. To be short, having thus
gotten a vain of Gadding, she will never leave it, and hereby the poor man
will be utterly spoiled: for both his substance shall be wasted, his limbe^
through labor, filled with Aches, his feet with the Gowt, and Age comes on him
before his time; yet as though this were not eut^ enough, she will be continually
brawling, scolding, and complaining, how she is broken through Childbearing.
Thus is the silly man up to the ears in Lobs-Pound, being on each side beset
with care and trouble; which he takes for pleasure, and therein languish
whiles he lives.

CHAP. IX. The humor of a cursed Queen, married to a froward Husband.
THe next humor that is incident to a Woman, is, when the Husband having entered
very young into Lobs-pound, and there fettered himself by his too much folly,
for a vain hope of ticklish delights, which lasted but for a year or two,
has matched himself with a very froward and perverse woman (of which sort
there are too many) whose whole desire is to be Mistresseand to wear the
Breeches; or at least to bear as great a sway as himself. But he being
crafty, and with all crabbed, will in no wise suffer this usurped
sovereignty, but in sundry manners withstands it. And there has bin great
stir and arguing about this matter between themselves, and now and then some
battles: but do she what she can, either with her tongue or hands,
notwithstanding their long controversy; which has perhaps lasted at the least
these twenty years, he is still victorious, and holds his right: but you must
think that his striving for it all this while, has been no small trouble and
veration unto him; besi^ all other aforesaid evils; All which, or part thereof
he has likewise endured: Well, to be short, he has perchance three or four
Children all married, and by reason of the great pains and travel that he
has taken in bringing them up, providing them portions, maintaining his Wife,
enc^sing his stock, or atleast keeping it from being diminished, and living
with credit amongst his Neighbors: At last it may be he has gotten the Gowt,
or some other dangerous disease, and withal is grown old, and thereby
feeble; so that being set he can hardly rise, through an Ache that he has got
in his Arms or legs: Then is their long war come to an end, and the case
(as Ployden says) clean altered; For his wife being younger then he, and as
Frolic as ever she was, will now be sure to have her own will in despite
of his beard: Hereby the Poor man, which has maintained the Combat so long,
is now utterly put down: his own Children, which before he kept in awe well
enough, will now take heed to themselves, and if he reprove them for their
leaudnes and disobedience, she will maintain them against him to his teeth,
which must needs be a great grief unto him.

But besides all this, he is in doubt of his Servants; for they likewise
neglect their former duty, and lean altogether to their Mistress; so that
he Poor man, which now by reason of his sickness, and feeblenes of body, has
more need of attendance then ever he had, shall have but very little or none
at all; For though he be as wise and as careful as ever he was, yet since he
cannot bestirre himself to follow them as he was wont, they contemn, and
make no more reckoning of him, then if he were a mere Fool.

Then peradventure his eldest Son, thinking that his Father lives too long:
will take upon him to guide the house, and disposing all things at his
pleasure, as (if his Father were become an Innocent, and could no longer look
to things as he was wont;) Judge you whether the Good man seeing himself
thus abused by his Wife, Children, and Servants, be grieved or not. If he
purpose to make his Will, they will seek all means to keep him from doing
it, because they hear an Inkling, that he will bestow somewhat on the
Parish, or will not bequeath his Wife so much as she would have.

To be short, that they may make an end of him the sooner, they will many
times leave him in his Chamber half a day and more without meat, fire, or
ought else, not one of them coming to see what he wants, or to do him any
service: his Wife is weary of him by reason of his spitting, c^ughing, and
groaning.

All the love and kindness, which he had in former times showed unto her, is
quite forgotten: but his strife for superiority, and his crabbednes toward
her, (when she had justly moved him,) this she can still as well remember,
as when it was first done: Neither will she spare to prate thereof to her
Neighbors: telling them that he has been a bad man, and that she has led
such a life with him, that if she had not been a woman of great patience, she
could never have endured to keep house with so crabbed a Churl.

She will likewise boldly reproach, and twit him in the teeth with those former
matters, for it does yet shrewdly stick in her stomach, that the could not
till now be Mistress. But he that was wont to charm her tongue, and keep
her under; who, seeing him now in his distress and weakness, takes advantage,
and continues his bad usage: seeing also his Children, which should fear and
reverence him, taking part with their Mother, being taught and set on by her:
seeing this (I say, and being n^ less angry then grieved, he calls four of
them in a rage, and when they are come before him, thus begins he to his wife.

Wife, you are she, whom by the Laws of God and Man, I should love and ^eeme
m^re then any thing else in the world; and you on the other side, should bear
the like affection to me: but whether you do so or not, I refer it to your
own conscience, I tell you I am not well pleased with your using of me thus:
I think you take nice still for the Maisser of the house as before you have
done, but whether you think so or not, be sure I will be Maistar while I
live, yet (you I thank you) do use me, and account o^ me in very slight
manner: I have always loved you well, never suffered you to lack that which
was meet: I have in like sort loved, and also maintained your Children and
mine, according to my degree, and now both you and they do very unkindly
requite me.

Why (says she) what would you have us to do: We do the best we can, but
you cannot tell your self what you would have? The better we use you, and the
more we tend you, the worse you are: But you were never other; always
brawling, and never quiet, never pleased full nor fasting: I think never woman
was so long troubled with a crooked Postle as I have been.

Ah Dame (says he) leave these words, I pray you; then turning him to his
eldest son, he said: Son, I have marueld at your vehauiour of late toward
me, and I tell you I am not well pleasad therewith: You are my eldest, and
shall be mine heir, if you behave your self as a child ought to do; But you
begin already to take state upon you, and to dispose of my goods at your
pleasure: I would not wish you to be so forward, but rather while I live, to
serve and obey me, as it becomes you to do: I have been no bad Father unto
you, I have nothing impaired or diminished, but increast that which was left me
by my Father, which i^ you do your duty to me (as I did mine to him) I will
leave to you after my decease as he left to me: but if you continue in your
stubbornness and disobedience, before God (I swe^re,) I will not bestow one
penny or cross upon thee.

Here his Wife begins again to thwart him; Why, what would you have him do?
It is impossible for any one to please you; h^e shall have enough to do that
shall alwa^es tend you: I wis it is high time that you and I were both in
Heaven, you know not your self: what would you have? I ^maruell what you ayle.
Well, well, (says he) I pray you be quiet, do not maintain him thus
against me, but it is always your order.

After this, the Mother and Son departing, consult together, and conclude,
that he is become a Child again, and because he has threatened to
disinherite them, they resolve that no man shall be suffered to come and
speak with him:

His Son takes upon him more then before, being borne out by his Mother; who
together with him, makes every one believe that the Poor man is become
childish, and that he has lost both his sense and memory.

If any of his honest Friends and former acquaintance, which were wont to
resort unto him, come now to a^e for him, his Wife will thus answer them. Alas
he is not to be spoken with: and when he demands the cause thereof, doubting
he is dangerously sick, Ah good Neighbor (quoth she) he is become an
Innocent, even a Child again; so that I poor soul, must guide all the
House, and take the whole charge of all things upon me, having none to help
me, but God be praised for all.

In good (faith the other) I am very sorry to hear this, and do much marvel
at it; for it is not long since I saw him, and spoke with him, and then he was
in as good memory, and spoke with as good sense and reason as ever he did
before. In truth (says she) he is now as I tell ye.

Thus does she wrong and slander the Poor man, which has always lived in
good credits, and kept his Household in very good order: but you may be well
assured, that he seeing himself in his Age thus despised and iniuried, and
being not able to remedy himself, nor stir without help from the place
where he is, thereby to acquaint his Friends therewith, which might in his
behalf redress it; is not a little grieue^, vexed, and tormented in his
mind, with sorrow and anger: So that it is a great marvel he falls not into
despair; For it is enough to make a Saint become impatient to be used thus,
by those which should obey, serve, and honor him. And in my opinion this is
one of the greatest Corosiues that any man can feel: such is the issue of this
great haste and extreme desire to be in Lobs-Pound, where he must now remain
perforce, till Death do end (at once) both his life and languishing.

CHAP. XIIII. The humor of a Woman given to all kind of pleasures.
AN other Humor incident to a Woman by nature is, wh^ the Husband (thinking
that Wedlock was of all estates the happiest, and altogether replenished with
delight and pleasure) because he saw same of his Friends, who for a while
after they were married, were very cheerful and iocond, never cease toyling
and turmoyling himself till he have gotten into Lobs-Pound, wherein he is
presently caught fast like a Bird in a Net: for this comparison, if we do
examine the particulars thereof, does very fitly resemble his estate. The
silly Birds which fly from tree to tree, and from field to field to seek
meat, when they see a great deal of Corn spilt on the ground, think
themselves well apaide, and without any fear come thither to feed thereon,
picking up the grains of Corn, but alas they are deceived, for on a sudden
the net is drawn, and they are all fast tide by the legs, and thence carried
in a sack or Panier one upon another to the Fowlers house, then coopt up in a
Cage. Oh how happy would they think themselves, if they were again at their
former liberty to fly whither they list, but they wish too late: yet were
this all the evil that they should endure, it were well, but (which is (...))
they shall soon after have their necks wrung off, and their little bodies
spitted, to be made meat for men to eat.

But they are herein far more simple then the Birds, for they being fast in
Lobs-Pound, are so besotted with their own sorrows, that they have no power
to free themselves; So likewise they have no will to do it. But to ^roceede,
the Wife not loving her Husband, for so^e defect which is in him, that she may
have some color for that (...) does, makes her Mother and other Friends which
blame her for it, believe, that her Husband is bewitched, and by reason of some
Sorcery, made for the most part impotent; Here upon she complains of her ill
Fortune, resembling it to those, which having the Cup at their noses, cannot
drink: mean while she has a sweet heart in a corner, who is not bewitched,
who uses her company so long, and with so little heed, that in the end her
Husband perceiues it, and falling into the vain of Jealousy, beats (...)
fauouredly, and keeps a foul stir both with blows and words, so that she
not liking his usage, gives him the slip, but then is he clean out of
patience; and so Husbands in this taking are so mad, that they neuerlin seeking
them, and would give half they are worth to find her again: who having thus
plaide her pageant, and seeing her Husbands humor, compa^s with her Mother,
whose good will she will be sure to get by one means or other, (whereas at the
first she will perhaps think hardly of her departure from her Husband) she
does I say, so handle the matter with her, that she will make the Good Man
believe her Daughter has been all this while at home with her, and that ^he
came to shun his bad usage, who (had she tarried with him till then, had been
lamed forever.

Before God (quoth she) I had rather you should restore her again to me, then
beat her thus without cause, for I know that you suspect her wrongfully, and
that she has never offended you: I wis I have straightly examined her about it,
but if s^ would have been naught, you did enough to provoke her: By Gods
passion I think few women could have born^ it; Well (it may be) that upon
these or the like terms he takes her again: it may be also, that they are both
desi^ous to be divorced, each accusing other, and seeking to wind themselves
again out of Lobs-Pound, but in vain: For, either the causes that they
allege are not thought sufficient by the Judge, how hard so ever they plead,
but must of force continue still together, are laughed to scorn of all that
hears the cause: or if they be separated, yet will not all this set them free,
but rather plunge them in deeper then before, but neither of them can marry
whiles the other lives: and their Chastity so brittle (especially hers,) that
^olde it cannot, nor long endure.

She who was wont to be so frollicke, must needs continue so still; Nay
peradventure, being now without controlment, follows her evil and leaud life,
more freely then before: and whereas she was but ear^ a private Queen, she is
now common in the way of Good-fellowshippe; or else some lusty Gallant takes
her into his house, and shelters her by his nose, which must needs be unto him
an exceeding inward grief, and an open disgrace and shame in the eyes of the
world: and which is worse, he knows not how in the world to remedy it, but
must perforce endure both, while this miserable life does last.

CHAP. IX. The humor of a Woman to gether Daughter a Husband, having made a
little Wanton escape.
THe next humor that a Woman is addicted unto, is, when a lusty young Gallant
Riding at pleasure up and down the Country, but especially to those places of
sportes and pleasure where the finest Dames and dainty Gyrles meet, who can
finely mince their Measures, having their Tongues trained up to all kind of
Amorous chat; in which delightful exercises, this Yonker both by reason of his
youth, his loose bringing up, and natural Inclination, takes a great felicity
in such vain company: and so much the rather, because he finds himself
(always welcomed, and kindly entertained to such places) and the reason is,
the comeliness of his person, his amiable countenance, and quainte behavior:
for who so ever has these good helps, shall want no favor at Women's hands:
It may be also, that his Parents are still living, and he their only joy,
they having perhaps no Child but him, so that all their most delight is in
maintaining him bravely. It may be also, that he is newly come to his Lands,
and loves to see fashions, though it cost his purse never so largely. If any
Gentlewoman offer any kindness, he is ready to requite it: and at length
through long prauncing to many places, h^ lights on one that both exceedingly
please his eye, and (...) his heart, she is perhaps Daughter to some
Gentleman, some Citizen, or some worthy Farmer. She has a clean comple^ion,
a ^e proportion, and wanton eye, a dainty ^oong, and a sharp wit, by reason of
all which good gifts, she is gr^ very famous. She has been wooed, sued, and
courted by the brauest Galla^is in that country; of whom pehaps some one
being more forward and courageous then the rest, has offered her such
kindenes, as sticks by her Ribs a good while after, and would needs enforce
this courtesy with such importunity, that she had not the power to resist
it: for a woman that has her five wits, if she be withal of a cheerful
Sanguine complexion, cannot be so unkind, or so hard-harted, as to deny, or
repulse the petition of an amorous Friend, if he do any thing earnestly
prosecute the same. And (to be plain) be she of what Complexion soever, she
will be nothing slack to grant such a suit.

But to return to our purpose, by reason of her tender compassion, and kind
acceptance of this proffered service, it so falls out she has plaide false,
then is there no other shift but to keep it both secret and close, and to take
such order as they best can, for smoothing up of the matter; he that has done
the deed being a poor young man, though proper of body, and perhaps can
dance very well, by which good quality he won her favor, and within a
while after, croyt the flower of her Maidenhead: he (I say) after a check or
two, and no farther matter, (least this privy escape should be openly known) is
warned from coming any more to the house, or frequenting her company
whatsoever.

But now you must note, that she being but a simple Gyrle, between fourteen
and fifteen years of Age, nothing expert, but rather a nouice in such
matters, and having been but lately deceived, knows not her self how it is
with her: But her mother which by long experience has gotten great Judgment,
does by her color, her complaining of pain at her heart and stomach, with
other like tokens perceiues it well enough, and having (as before I said)
eassierde the author of the action; Then takes she her Daughter aside, and
schools her so, that in the end she con^esseth that he has been dallying
with her, but she knows not whether to any purpose or not. Yes (says her
Met^er,) it is to such purpose (as by these signs I know very well) t^t you
have thereby both shamed yourselfe and all our friends, and spoiled your
Marriage quite and clean.

To be short, ha^ng somewhat chid her after the common order, for having no
more respect nor care of her honesty, (yet not chiding very extremely,
because she knows the frailty of Youth by her own former experience) she
concludes thus comfortably: since it is done, and cannot be altogether remedied,
she will seek (both to hide and salve the matter as well as she can) charging
her Daughter to set a good countenance on it, least it should be suspected, and
to follow her counsel and commandment in all things: whereunto the poor
Wench willingly consents, then the Mother proceeds thus:

You know Master T. A that comes hither so often, he is you see a proper
Gentleman, and a rich Heir, to morrow he has appointed to be here again;
Look that you give him good entertainment, and show him good countenance.
When you see me and the rest of our Guests talking and discoursing together,
ever and anon cast your Eye on him, in the kindest and louingest manner that
you can: If he seem desirous to speak with you, be not coy, but hear him
willingly, answer him courteously. If he entreat Love of you, tell him that
you know not what it means, and that you have no desire at all to know it; yet
thank him for his good will: for that woman is too discourteous and uncivil,
which will not vouchsafe the hearing or gently answering to those that love
her, and wish her well.

If he offer you Money, take none in any case; if a Ring, or a Gyrdle, or any
such thing, at the first refuse it, yet kindly and with great thanks: but if
he urge it on you twice or thrice, take it; telling him, since that he will
needs bestow it on you, you will wear it for his sake. Lastly, when he
takes his leave, ask him when he will come again? These Instructions being
thus given, and the Plot laid for the fetching

in of this kind fool into L^ Pound.

The next day he comes, and is on all hands more kindly welcome and
entertained: after dinner, having had great cheer, the Mother falls in talk
with the other Guests, and this frollicke Nouice gets him as near to her
Daughter as he can, and while the others are hard in that, he takes her by the
hand, and thus begins to co^rt her.

Gentlewoman, I would to God you knew my thoughts. Your thoughts Sir (says
she) how should I know them, except you tell them me: If may be you think
some thing that you are loath to tell. Not so (says he) yet I would you knew it
without telling. But that (says she smiling) is impossible. Then (quoth. he) if I
might do it without offense, I would adventure to tell you them. Sir (says
she) you may freely speak your pleasure* for I do so much assure me of your
honesty, that I know you will speak nothing that may procure offense.

Then thus (says he) I acknowledge without faining, that I am far unworthy
of so great a favor, as to be accepted for your Servant, Friend, and Lover,
which art so fai^, so gentle, and every way so gracious, that I may truly say,
you are replenished with all the good gifts that Nature can plant in any
mortal creature: But if you would vouchsafe me this undeserved grace, my good
will, diligence, and continual forwardness to serve and please you should
never fail: but I would therein equal the most loyal Lover that ever lived,
I would est^me you more then any thing else, and tender more your good name and
credit then mine own.

God Sir (quoth she) I heartily thank you for your kind offer, but I pray
you speak no more of such matters; for I neither know what Love is, nor yet
care for knowing it: This is not the lesson that my Mother teaches me now
adays. Why (says he) if it please you she shall know nothing of it; yet the
other day I heard her talk of preferring you in marriage to one Master G. R.
How say you to that (quoth she?) Marie (thus answers the Gentleman,) If you
would vouchsafe to entertain me for your Servant, I would ^uer marry, but
only rely upon your favor.

But that (says she) should be no profit to either of us both, and beside it
would be to my reproach, which I had not thought you would seek. Nay (quoth. he) I
had rather die then seek your discredit. Well sir (says she) speak no more
hereof, for if my Mother should perceive it, I were utterly vndono. And it may
be her Mother makes her a sign to give over, fearing that she does not play
her part well.

At the breaking up of their amorous Parley, he conueyes into her hand a gold
Ring, or some such toy, desiring her to take it and keep it for his sake:
which at the (...), (according to her Mothers precepts) she does refuse; but
upon his more earnest urging of it, she is content to take it in the way of
honesty, and not on any promise or condition of any farther matter; when it
was brought to this pass, the mother makes motion of a journey to be made the
next morning, some ten or twelve miles off, to visit, or feast with some
Friend, or to some Fair, or whatsoever other occasion presents it self: To
this motion they all agree, and afterward sit down to supper, where he is
placed next the Daughter, who caries her self so toward him with her piercing
glaunces, that the young Heir is set on fire therewith: Well, morning comes,
they mount on Horseback, and by the opinion of them all, there is never a
Horse in the company that can carry double but his; So the Gull is appointed to
have the Maiden ride behind him, whereof he is not a little proud: and when
he feels her hold fast by the middle, (which she does to stay her self the
better) he is even ravished with joy.

After their returning home, which perhaps will be the same night, the Mother
taking her Daughter aside, questions with her, touching all that had passed
betm^ne the amorous gallant and her; which when her Daughter has rehearsed,
then proceeds the wily Gran-dame thus. If he Court thee any more (as I know
he will,) then make him answer that thou have heard thy Father and me talk
of matching thee with Master G. R. but that thou have no desire as yet to be
married: If he then offers to make thee his Wife, and use any comparisons of
his worth and wealth, as though he were every way as good as he, thank him
for his good will and kindness, and tell him that thou will speak with me
about it, and that for thy own part thou could find in thy heart to have him
to thy Husband rather then any man else: upon this lesson the Daughter sleeps,
reuoluing it all night in her mind.

The next morning she walks into the Garden, and this lusty Yonker follows;
when having given her the time of the day, he falls to his former suit. She
wills him to give over such talk, or she will leave his company: Is this the
Love you bear me (quoth. she) to seek my dishonestie? You know well enough
that my Father and Mother are minded to bestow me otherwise.

Ah my sweet Mistress (says he) I would they did so far favor me herein,
as they do him; I dare boldly say and swear it, and without vain glory utter
it, that I am every way his equal. Oh sir, (answers thee) I would he were
like you. Ah sweet Mi^tres (says he) you deigne to think better of me then
I deserve but if you would farther vouchsafe me the other favor, I should
esteem my self most happy. In troth Sir, (says she) it is a thing that I
may not do of my self, without the counsel and consent of my Parents, to
whom I would gladly move it, if I thought they would not be offended: But it
would be so much the better if you break the matter unto them; and be sure, if
they refer the matter to me, you shall speed so soon as any. He being
ravished with these words, and yielding her infinite thanks, trots presently to
the Mother, to get her good will.

To be short, (with some little adoo) the matter is brought about, even in such
sort as he would desire: they are straight way Contracted, and immediately
Wedded, both because that her Friends fear that the least delay will prevent
all, and because he is so hot on the spur, that he thinks every hour a year,
till it be done. Well, the Wedding night comes, wherein she behaues her self
so (by her Mothers counsel) that he dares swear on the Bible that he had her
Maidenhead.

Within a while after, it comes to his Friends ears, without whose knowledge
he has married himself, who are exce^ding sorry, knowing she was no meet
match for him, and it may be they have heard; withal of his Wives hum^r: but
now there is no reme^y, the knot is knit, and cannot be undone, they m^st
therefore have patience perforce.

Well, he brings his fair Bride home to his own house, where (God wo^e) he
has but a small time of pleasure, for within three or four months after
their Marriage, she is brought to Bed; Judge then in what taking the poor man
is? If he put her away, his shame will be public, she grows common, and he
not be permitted to marry again while he lives, and if he keep her still,
love her he cannot, suspect her he will, and she both hate him, and perhaps
seek his end; Finally, all the joys, pleasures and delights which before
time they had, are all turned to brawles, banning, cursing, and fighting. Thus
is he hampered in Lobs-Pound, where he must (...) force remain, till death
end his lives miseries.

CHAP. XII. The humor of a Woman being matched with an oucrkinde Husband.
THere is another humor incident to a Woman, which is, when a Young man has
turmoyled and tossed himself so long, that w much ad^ he has gotten into
Lobs-pound, and has perhaps met with a Wife according to his own desire, and
perchance such a one, that it had been better for him to have lighted on an
other; yet he likes her so well, that he would not have mist her for any
gold, for in his opinion there is no Woman alive like unto her, he has a
great delight to hear her speak, is proud of his match, and peradventure is
withal of so sheepish a nature, that he has purposed wholly to govern
himself by her counsel and direction; So that if any one speak to him about
a bargain, or whatsoeu^ other business, he tells them that he will have his
Wives opinion in it, and if she he content, he will go through with it; if
not, then will he give it over. Thus is he as same and pliable, as a Jack
an-Apes to his keeper. If the Prince set forth an Arn^e, and she be unwilling
that he should go, who (you may think) will ask her leave, then must he stay
at home, fight who will for the Country: But if she be at any time desirous
to have his room (which many times she likes better then his company) she
wants no iourneyes to employ him in, and he is as ready as a Page to undertake
them: If she chide, he answers not a word, generally, whatsoever she does, or
how souer, he thinks it it well done.

Judge now in what a case this silly Calfe is in; (Is not he think you,
finely dressed) that is in such subiecion? The honestest Woman, and most modest
of that Sere, if she wear the Breeches, she is so out of reason in taunting
and controlling her Husband; for this is their common fault, and be she never
so wise, yet, because a Woman, scarceable to govern her self, much less her
Husband, and all his affairs; for were it not so, doubtless GOD would have made
her the head: which since it is otherwise, what can be more preposterous, then
that the Head should be governed by the Foot? If then a wise and honest Woman's
superiority be unseemly, and breed great inconveniences, etc: how is he
dressed (think you) if he light on a fond, wanton, and malicious Dame? Then
(doubtless) he is soundly sped; she will not stick to keep a sweet heart under
his nose, yet is he so blind that he can perceive nothing, but for more
security, she will many times send him packing Beyond Sea, about some odd
errand, which she will buzze in his ears, and he will perform it at her
pleasure, albeit she send him forth at midnight, in Rain, Hail, or snow,
for he must be a man fit for all weathers: Their Children (if they have any)
must needs be brought up, apparelled, fed, and taught, only according to her
pleasure: and one special point of their learning, is always to make no
account of their Father. If any of their Children be Daughters, she will marry
them according to her mind, to whom she list, when she list, and give with
them what dowry she list, without acquainting him therewith, till she have
concluded the match, and then she tells him, (not to have his consent) but as
a Master may tell his Servant, to give him di^ien how to behave himself to
deal therein: Finally, thee orders all things as she thinks best her self,
making no more account of him, (especially if he be in years,) then men do
of an old Horse which is past labor.

Thus is he mewed up in Lobs-Pound, plunged in a Sea of cares, and Cor^slues,
yet he (kind Fool) deemes himself most happy in his unhappiness, where he
must now perforce remain while his life does last, and great pitti^ it were
he should want it, since he likes it so well.

CHAP. XIII. The humor of a Woman whose Husband is gone beyond the Seas upon
some business.
ANother humor of a Woman is, when the Husband has been married some seven or
eight years, more or less, a^ as he thinks he has met with a good Wife as
any man can have, with whom he has continued all the aforesaid time, with
great delights and pleasures: But ad^t he be a Gentleman, and that he is
desirous to purchase honor by following Arms, and in this humor be is
resolved to make a step abroad, and not to tarry always like a cowardly
Drone, by the smoke of his own chimney: but when he is ready to depart, she
having her cheeks blubbered with tears, falls about his neck, colles,
kisseth, and embraces him, then weeping, sighing, and sobbing, she thus begins
to him.

Ah sweet Husband, will you now leave me? Will you thus depart from me, and
from your loving Children, which knows not when we shall see you again; or
whether you shall ever come home again or no? Alas sweet Husband go not;
Tarry with us still, if you leave us, we are utterly undone.

Ah sweet Wife (says he) dissuade me not from this enterprise: which
concerns my credit and allegiance; for it is our Princes commandment, and
I must obey: but be you well assured, I will not be long from you (if it
please God.)

Thus does he co^rt and quiet her in the best so it that he can, and be she
never so importunate, be her tears ^uer so many, her entreaty never so
forcible, yet go he will, essoeming his renown and duty to his Prince and
country, more then wife and Children, though next to it, he estee^ and love
the chiefest of all other. And at his departure, he recommends them to the care
and courtesy of his chiefest Friends; Yet some there be, whose tender hearts
melt so easily with kind compassion, that one of their Wives tears, and the
lea^ of their entreats, will tie them so fast by the Leg at home, that they
will not stir one foot from her sweet side, neither for King nor Ke^, wealth
nor honor. These ate Crauens, and unworthy to be ^lled Gentlemen.

But to return to this vallorous and brave minded Gentleman, of whom we
spoke before, it may be, that either by the long continuance of the (...); or
by his (...), in ^eing taken Prisoner; or some other l^, he comes not home in
four or five years, and all that while there is no ^es of him, you may be
sure that his Wife is a sorrowful woman, and wholly surcharged with grief,
being thus deprined of her loving Mate, and hearing nothing of his estate. But
all things have an end, and she seeing that in so long time, she can hear
no tidings of him, does peremptorily conclude that he is dead. Then considering
to live comfortles in Widows estate, were an vncoath life, she determines to
marry her self to some one, so soon as conuentently she may, which will be
soon enough; for a fair Woman, if willing, can want no choice. Thus her
former sorrow is somewhat alaide, and within a while after, clean extinguished,
by the fresh delights, pleasures, contents, and sollace, which this new choice
does yield. So that now her other Husband is wholly forgotten, her Children
which she had by him little regarded, and the Goods which belong to them, are
spent on others, while the poor wretches, want things needful, but not blows
and hard usage. To be short, the tears which she be^owed on her other husband
at his departure is dry^d up, her embraces vanished. And whosoever should see
her with this second Husband, and what kindness she shows unto him, would
verily think that she loves him far better then she did the first, who in the
mean while is either taken prisoner, or else fighting in extreme hazard of
his life.

But in the end it chances so, that by paying his Ransom, (if he have been
Prisoner,) home he comes, clean changed through the many troubles he has
had: And being come somewhat ^eere, fails not to enquire of his Wife and
Children, for he is in great fear, that they are either dead, or in some
great distress. And doubtless in the time of his Imprison^ent or other dangers,
he have often thought, often dreamed or them, and often sorrowed for them, often
besought God to preserve and bless them. And that perhaps sometimes, at the
very instant when she was in the others arms, toying and dallying, and in the
midst of her delights.

Well, enquiring (as ^eforesaid) hears that thee is married again, then judge
you with what grief he hears it. But his grief is bootelesse, for now the
matter is past remedy, if he have any care of his credit, any regard of his
estimation, he will never take her more, though perhaps the other, having had
his pleasure of her, could be well content either to restore her to him, or to
leave her to any one else.

Shoe on the otherside is utterly shamed, and her name stained with perpetual
reproach, and neither he nor she can marry whiles they live. Their poor
Children are likewise grieved and shamed at their Mothers infamy, Sometimes
likewise (...) happens, that for the Wives cause, the Husband being (...), does
quarrel, and perhaps combat with him, who being better then himself, does
either wound or kill him, and the occasion hereof, sprung from their Wives
pride; because (forsooth) she will take the wall of the others wife, or sit
above her, whom she (...) no wise suffer, nor loose an inch of her estate,
and here upon the Husbands must together by the ears.

Thus the supposed blessedness which he expected by plunging himself in
Lobs-Paund, is turned into sorrow, trouble, danger, and continual discontent
while life does last.

CHAP. XIIII. The humor of a Woman that has been twice married.
THere is another humor belonging to a Woman, which is, when a Young man
(having found the way into Lobbes Pound,) meets with a Wife of like years,
fresh, lusty, Fair, kind, and gracious; with whom she has lived two or
three years, in all delights, iores, and pleasure, that any married couple
could have, never did the one displease the other; never soul word past
betwixt them, but they are almost still colling and billing each other, like a
couple of Dones. And Nature has framed such Simpathy between them, that if
the one be ill at ^ase or discontented, the other is so likewiss. But in the
midst of this their mutual love and sollace, it chances that she dies,
whereat he grieves so extremely, that he is almost beside himself with
sorrow: he mournes, not only in his Apparel, for an obtward show, but
unfeignedly, in his very heart; and that so much, that he shunnes all places of
pleasure, and all company, lives solitarily, and spends the time in daily
complaints and mones, and bitterly bewailing the loss of so good a wife,
wherein no man can justly bl^me him, for it is a loss worthy to be lamented,
and a Jewel, which whosoever has, is happy (but this happiness is very rare.

To be short, his thoughts are all on her, and she so firmly printe^ in his
mind, that whether he sleep or wake, she seems always to be in sight, but
as all things has an end, so here had sorrow^. After a while, some of his
Friends ha^ing spyed out a second match, which as they think is very fit
for him, do prevail so much with him, through her persuasions, that he
accepts it, and marries himself again, but not as before, with a young Maid,
but with a lusty Widow, of a middle age, and much experience, who by the fryall
which she had of her first Husband, knows how to handle the second: but that
she may do it the better, she does not presentiy discover her humor, till she
have thoroughly marked how he is inclined, what his conditions are, and what his
nature is which finding it mild, and kind, and very flexible (the fittest mould
to cast a Fool in) having now the full length of his fool, then shows she
her self what she is, unmasking her dissembling malice; her first attempt is
to usurp Superiority, and so become his head, and this she obtaines without
any great difficulty, for there is nothing so lavish as a simple and
well-natured young man, being in subjection, that is married to a Widow,
especially if she be, (as the most of them are) of a peruerss and crabbed
nature. I may very well compare him to an unfortunate wretch, whose ill hap
is to be cast into some strong Prison, under the keeping of a most cruel and
pitiless Iaylor, that is not moved to compassion, but rather to great rigor,
in beholding the miseries of this pore wretch, whose only refuge in this
distress, is to pray unto God, to give him (...) to endure this cross, for i^
he complain of his hard usage, it will afterward prove worse.

But to proceed: This jolly Widow will within a while grow Jealous, fear
and suspect that some other Dame has part of that which she so earnestly
^reth, and wherewith she could neuerbe satis^ed, so that if he glut not her
insatiable humor, straightway she conceiueth this opinion: If he do but only
talk, nay, (which is worse) look on any other Woman, for she by her good will
would be always in his arms, or at the least in his company: For as to the
Fish which having been in water, that through the heat of the Summer is half
dried up, begins to stick full of mudde, seeks for fresh water, and having
found it, does willingly remain therein, and will in no wise return to his
former place: Even so an old Woman, having gotten a young man, will cling to
him like Iuy to an Elm.

But on the other side, a Young man cannot love an old Woman, howsoever he
does dissemble, neither is there any, that more endaungers his death: for it is
with him, as with one that drinks mu^y wine, who if he b^ thirsty, seeles
nothing whiles he is drinking, but at the end of his draught, he feels such
a displeasing take, that it does almost fume his stomach.

But if Young Men in no wise can fancy old Women, what love think you
young-women can bear to old men, when besides the suudry imperfections of
their Age, which are so loathsome, that it is impossible for a fresh young
tender Damsel, (be she never so virtuous) to endure their company, much less
the kisses and embraces of the person which has them; All the lusty Gallants
thereabouts will not fail to use whatsoever denises and means possible for
the horning of the old Dotard; hoping that she will be easily won to
wantonness: and surely they ground this hope on great likelihood; For since it is
no difficult exploite to grafte the like kindness on a Young-mans forhead, who
is able in far better measure to feed his Wives appetite, and she has
therefore more cause to be true to him, it may surely seem no great matter to
perform the likepiece of service with this other unfortunate Dame.

But now to return to our Young Man, yoakt (as before I said) to this old
Widow, I thus conclude, that his estate is most miserable: For besides the
danger of his health, an^ besides the subjection, Nay, rather servitude which
he lives in, this third evil, (I mean his wives Jealousy) is alone an
intolerable torment unto him; So that be he never so quiet, never so desirous
to content her, never so searefull to displease her, yet cannot he avoid her
brawles, objections, and false accusations of leaudnes and disloyalty; for an
old Woman infected with Jealousy, is like a hellish Fury.

If he go to any of her Friends about business, yea, to the Church to serve
God, yet will she always think the worst, and assure her self, that he
plays false, though indeed he be never so continent; who whatsoever he
pleads in his own defense; yea, though he prove himself blameless, by
such reasons as she can by no reason confute, yet will not all this satisfy
her: such is the perverseness of her stubborn, crabbed, and malicious nature,
made worse by Dotage and raging Jealousy: for being priuse to her own
de^ectes, and knowing that he by reason of his youth and hansomnes may
perchance fall in fa^our with a young dame, thinking withal that a young man,
when he may have such a match, will be loath to leave it for a worse, or
prefer sower verince before sweet wine. She concludes peremptorily in these
suggestions as before. Lo here the issues of this asses turning into Lobs
pound, and intangling of himself again, when he had once gotten out to his
former liberty, which if he once more look for, he is mad; for he must now
perfor^e continue there while life does last, which by this means will be
far shorter, and he look far older, having been but two years married
with this old crib, then if he had lived ten years with a young wife.

CHAP. XV. The humor of a young woman given over to all kind of wantonness.
THere is yet another humor that a woman is subject too, which is, when an
unfortunate young man having long labored to get into Lobs pound, and having in
the end obtained his desires, does match himself with a lusty wanto^ young
wench, which without fear of him, or care of her own credit, takes her
pleasure freely, and withal so ouerboldly, and unadvisedly, that within a
while her husban^ perceiues it, who thereupon being not a little enraged, does
in the heat of his impatience, after much brawling on both sides, roughly and
desperately threaten her, thinking thereby to terrify her, and make her honest
by compulsion: But that makes her worse, for whereas before she did it for
wantonness, now will she do it for despite: and what with the one and the
other, be so inflamed, that were she sure to be killed for it, yet would she
not leave it: Which he perceiving, watching her ^oings so narrowly, that in the
end he sees her sweet heart come closely to his house, then being on fire with
fury, runs hastily to surprise him, and enters his wives chamber with full
purpose to kill him, though he had ten thousand lives: But judge you in what a
ta^ing the poor young man is in, seeing himself thus surprised, and looking
for nothing else but present death, because he has nothing to defend himself.
But she for whose sake he has incurred this danger, ^oth kindly free him by
this stratagem, for as her husband is ready to strike or stab him, she
catches him hastily about the middle, crying out, Alas man what do you mean?
While she thus stays her husband, the younger betakes him to his heels,
running down the stairs amain, and out of the doors, as if the Devil were
at his tail, and after him the good man as fast as he can drive. But when he
sees that he cannot overtake him, he turns back in a like rage, to wreake
his anger on his wife. But she dreading as much, gets her hastily (before his
return) to her mother, to whom she complains of his causeless suspicion,
and devilish fury, justifying her self, as if she were not the woman, that
would commit so leaud a part: But her mother sifting the matter narrowly, her
daughter cousesseth her fault, but to make it seem the less, she tells her a
large Tale of the young man's unportunitie, who for so long time together, did
continually trouble her, and whether soever she went, he would be sure to
follow her, begging pitifully her love and favor, that she had often sharply
answered him, and flatly denied his suit, yet could she not for all that be rid
of him: so that in the end, she was inforst for her own quietness to grant his
request. She repeates withal, how kindly and entirely he loves her, how much
he has bestowed on her, how many soul iournies he has had for her sake, in
rain and snow, as well by night as day, in danger of thieves, in perrill of
his life, and how narrowly he escaped her husband the last time, so that for
very pity and compassion, she was moved to favor him, and no woman could be
so hard hearted, as to suffer so true and kind a young man to languish for her
love, and die unregarded: for on my life mother (says she) if I had not
yielded, he would have dyed for thought.

The Mother hearing her Daughter to say thus, accepts her answer for current,
and thinks that she has sufficiently justified her self; but to prevent
further scandale, and to appease her angry son in Law, and reconcile her
Daughter unto him, by casting a mist before his eyes, she takes this course,
she sends for her s^eciall Gossips and Companions, whose counsels in like
cases, she does use: They coming at the first call, and being all assembled,
either before a good fire (if it be Winter) or in a green Arbor (if it be
Summer) one of them noting her daughters heavy countenance, demands the cause
thereof: Marie, (says she) she has had a mischaunce, about which, I have made
bold to trouble you, and crave your advice: With that she recounts the whole
matter unto them, but showing the true cause of her Husbands anger: To be
short, she has ready two or three pottles of Wine, and a few Iunkets, which
they prosently fall aboard on, that they may the better give their several
verdit^ afterward; mean while they comfort the young woman, bidding her assure
her self, that her Husband is more perplexed then she; and that I know by mine
own experience, for my husband and I were once at variance, but he could never
be quiet til we were made friends. In good faith Gossip (says another) and so
served I mine. Another makes a motion to send for the young Gallant that is so
true a lover to her Gossips daughter, that his presence may cheer her, and rid
away her melancholy.

This motion does her Mother faintly contradict, but in the end most voices
preuailes, he is sent for, and comes with a trice; then there is much good
chat, many a reproach and kind scoff given the poor Husband: And to mend
the matter comes in the Chamber-maide; who was privy to all the former close
packing between her Mistress and her sweet heart, and for her ^lence and
employment, in furthering both their contents, she has gotten a good new
Gown, and somewhat else.

It may be her Master has sent her abroad about some business, or perhaps
she coins an excuse of her self, thereby only to make a step ab^oade to
see her Mistress, and to bring her some news how all things goes at home:
She has no sooner set her foot within the room where they are, then one of
them asks how her master does? My master (says she) I never saw a man in
that taking: I dare say that since yesterday morning when this misfortune
happened, he has not eaten one crum, drank one drop, or slept one wink all
yesternight. To day he sat down to dinner, and put one bit in his mouth, but
could not swallow it, for he spit it out presently, and sat a good while after
in a dumpe: In the end striking his knife on the table, he rose hastily, and
went into the garden, and immediately came in again: To be short, he is
altogether out of temper, and can rest no where: he does nothing but sigh and
sob, and he looks like a dead man: hereat they laugh apace, and to be short,
they determine that two of the chief of them, shall go and speak with him
the next morning, and that when they are in the midst of their talk the rest
shall come in afterward. The mother with her two Gossips, according to this
plot do proceed in the matter. And next morning finding him in his dumpes,
one of them gentilly asks him what he ails: hereto he answers only with a
sigh: whereupon she takes occasion thus to speak. In good faith gossip I must
chide you, my gossip your wives mother told me I know not what of a
disagreement between your wife and you, and a certain fond humor that you are
fallen into: I wis I am sorry to hear it: And before God you are not so wise
as I had thought you had been, to wrong your wife thus without a cause, for I
durst lay my life there is no such matter. By this good day (says another) I
have known her ever since she was a little one, both maid and wife, and I
never saw but well by the woman: And in good sooth it greeues me to the very
heart, that her name should now come in question without caus^: Before God, you
have done the poor woman that disgrace, and so stained her good name, that you
will never be able to make her amends. Then ^teppes in the chambermaid with
her five eggs. In good faith (says she) I know not what my master has
seen, or whereon he does ground his suspicion, but I take God to my witness,
that I never saw any such matter by my mistress, and yet I am sure that if
there were any such thing, I should see it assoon^ as an other. Gods body D^b
(says he, all enraged) wilt the face me down of that which my self saw? Oh
Gossip, (quoth one of the Dames) God forbid that every man and woman which is
alone together should do evil. I deny not (says the Chambermaide,) that the
villainous Knave has long sued unto my Mistress for such a matter; but by my
honesty Master, I know that there is never a man alive whom she hates most:
and rather then she would commit any such folly with him, she would see him
hanged, and be burned her self: I marvel how the Diuill he got into the house?

Here the other Gossips come in, one after another, and each gives her verdit:
In good faith (Gossip says one) I think, that next your wife, there is never
a woman in the world that loves you better then I do: and if I knew or thought
any such matter, I would not let to tell you of it. Surely (says another) this
is but the Devils work to set them at variance; for he cannot abide that
Husband and Wife should live well together. In good faith says the third, the
poor woman does nothing but weep. By Christ, (quoth the fourth) I fear it will
cost her her life, she grieves and takes on in such sort. Then comes the Mother
weeping and crying out, making as though she would scratch out his eyes with
her nails; exclaiming in this sort.

Ah cursed Caitiffe, woe worth the hour that ever my Daughter matched with
thee, to be thus shamed and slandered, and have her name spotted without cause.
But she is well enough served, that would take such a base Churl, when she
might have had sundry good Gentlemen. Ah good Gossip (says another) be not out
of patience.

Ah Gossip (says she) if my Daughter were in fault, by our good Lord I would
kill her my self. But think ye I have no cause to be moved, when I see my
child, being guiltles thus used? With that she flings out of doors in a
rage, and all the Gossips come upon him thick and threefolde, who is so full
of sundry thoughts, and so grieved and troubled, that he knows not whereon
to resolve, nor what to say.

In the end they growing somewhat calmer, promise, if he will, to undertake
the reconciling of him and his Was, which he most earnestly desires them to
do.

They accordingly perform it, so that all controuerties are ended, all strife
ceased, the matter hushed up, and his Wife taken home again, who taking
greater courage by the success hereof, and being now clean past shame, will
grow far bolder in her villainy then before. And he poor Meacocke, on the
other side, having his courage thus quailed, will never afterward fall at
odds with her, for fear of the like storm, but will suffer her to have her
own saying in all things, and be in a manner subject to her, spending the
remnant of his life, in care, fear, discontent and grief, his Goods wasting
he knows not how, and himself become a laughing stock to all that knows
him.

FINIS.

