THAT THE POPE IS THAT ANTICHRIST: AND An answer to the Objections of
Sectaries, which condemn this Church of England. Two notably learned and
profitable Treatises or Sermons upon the 19. verse of the 19. chapter of the
Revelation: the first whereof was preached at Paul's Cross in Easter Term
last, the other purposed also to have been there preached. By LAWRENCE DEIOS
Bachelor in Divinity, and Minister of Gods holy word.

REVEL. c. 19. v. 19. And I saw the Beast, and the Kings of the earth, and
their armies gathered together, to make battle against him that sat on the
horse, and against his army.

Imprinted at London by George Bishop and Ralph Newberie. An. Dom. 1590.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND MOST REVEREND FAther in Christ, my Lord the
Archbishop of Canturbury his Grace, Primate of all England, and Metropolitan,
one of her Majesty's most honorable privy Counsel.
THE impugnations which the enemy of the whole Church so strangely and
diversely makes against this Church of England, are not so much to be marueiled
at, as of every true Christian heart to be lamented. They of the Church of Rome
condemn us, for falling away so far from them: such as are sprung up
amongst our selves, and are gone out from us, because we approach so near
unto them. The first hold us as Antichristian, for shaking off the Popes
government, whom they make Christ's vicar: the others, for that we retain
(they say) his government still, and are in bondage to it. The first say, we
are out of the true Church: the others say no less, and that we have not Gods
Church amongst us. The first affirm, that we have no Ministers, no sacraments,
no lawful service of God amongst us: the others, that we have no Ministers
rightly called, no sacraments duly administered, no worship of God, and that we
worship a false Christ. The first hold, that the service of God in our
Churches is so wicked, as it is not to be frequented: the others, that it is
idolatrous, and to be avoided. The first are of opinion, that the Sovereign
Christian Magistrate ought not to have government in causes Ecclesiastical,
otherwise then to defend the Church, and to see the laws thereof executed,
because making of Church laws and government Ecclesiastical, is soly in the
Pope, and in his Clergy: the others hold the like position against the Princes
Ecclesiastical supremacy, for that this government belongs to Elderships
and Synodes of Ministers and Elders, (for else Christ does not govern in his
Church) as they teach. Thus both sorts push at the peace of this Church, with
the horns of the beast, and albeit upon diverse grounds, yet to one and the
self same end, which is, the utter overthrow of the Church, if their courses
be not carefully and speedily prevented. Which (me thinks) may best be
effected by doctrine and by discipline. The first by instructing the simple
seduced, and by confuting mightily the froward and insolent: the second, by
sharper corrosiues against the wilful and obstinate sect-masters on both
sides, being (...), men condemned even of their own consciences. This teaching
and confutation in sundry weighty points is (in mine opinion) very soundly
and iudiciously (though in brief sort as best fitting sermons) here
performed, both against the Romanistes and Catharites. The copy whereof
happily falling into my hands, I have made so bold with the Author as to
prefixe a title thereunto (implying not all, but the most principal matters
treated of) and thus to publish it, for common instruction and comfort:
Dedicating the same to your Grace, as to him to whom the Author has dedicated
himself in all duetiful service, and who daily seeks by the said two means
(mixed with mildnes and gravity) to reform the fancie-full, nay sinful
conceits of both the factions, and to settle this Church in the unity of the
spirit, and bond of peace. Which that your L. and others in authority may
effectually bring to pass, under the long and blessed government of our dread
Sovereign, to Gods glory, the propagation of the Gospel, (exceedingly
impeached by them) and to the comfort of all godly and peaceably affected
English, The Lord of Lords in mercy grant for Christ's sake. Amen.

17. Nouemb. 1590. Anno 33. D. Elizabethae Reginae.
The first Sermon upon Apoc. cap. 19. verse 19.
TWO things especially are set forth in this whole book of the Revelation.
First, the persecutions and the rewards of those that with true faith cleave
only to Christ: secondly, the assaults and wicked attempts of the enemies of
the truth against the Church, together with their punishments and overthrow.
Because it is a prophecy of things to come, therefore is the book hard to be
understood: for prophesies sooner are fulfilled in the world, then the world
can perceive the true exposition and interpretation of them. This verse does
minister occasion to speak both of the wicked, which do persecute, and of the
godly which are persecuted; and it has some things in it easy, and some
hard to be understood. Who the beast is, and who be these kings, and what be
their armies, and what is the manner of their fight, we know: and who it is
that rides on the horse, and what is his army, we may with small searching
easily find out, for time has reueiled these things. But the time wherein
this last fight of the beast shall be, and the manner how he shall be
overthrown, has some doubt. I will speak of these things in order, as they
lie in the text.

The beast here spoken of, is the Pope of Rome: the Kings of the earth meant in
this place, are the princes that submit themselves to the obedience of him:
their armies are both the captains and warlike soldiers, and also the
manifold and sundry sorts of Ecclefiasticall and spiritual persons, as they
call them, which either by force of arms, or by wit and eloquence, by
strength or policy fight for him. He that rides on the horse is Christ: his
army are they that believe in him only for salvation, and obey his Gospel.
In speaking of Antichrist and his armies, and their fighting, I must strive to
be the more brief, not only because the matter of it self is large, and
such as whereof a man can find no end, if he would go about to speak all that
may be said, but also because (I fear) it would be somewhat tedious unto you,
to hear me speak of that whereof you have heard others speak very often, and
largely already. Of the other part, that is, of Christ, and his army, it is
comfortable and profitable for us to hear, because we do account our selves
which do profess the Gospel in this land, to be as it were a wing, or an
old trained band of that army. I thought it necessary to speak of these two
points at this time. First, because Antichrist either now renews or
continues still his war against us, or at least is suspected, and of some
reported so to do. Secondly, because among our selves, there are that
blaspheme the host of the living God, and say that we are not the army of
Christ. And albeit that it were out of question that we are Christ's army, yet
we see in all places, that there is a mutiny in this army, and it is
necessary if we will obtain the victory, that we must be an united army.
Thus I have set before you, the matter that I must speak of, and the causes
that moved me to it. Now therefore I will first entreat of the beast.

The beast in this place is set for one of the greatest enemies of Jesus Christ
upon earth, which is the general and chief captain over kings and their
armies in the field against Christ. The devil is doubtless the chief leader
of all that fight against our Savior. But he in the Revelation is not called
the beast, but by other names: for he is named the Dragon, the old serpent,
and satan. The devil is not the beast, but gives his power to the beast: the
beast is not the dragon, but speaks like the dragon. The beast is a visible
earthly power raised up by the devil, that has authority over kings. To know
him is almost to overcome him: for few are hurt by him, but such as know him
not. This beast (as I said) is the Pope of Rome. The Papists, as they resist
other positions that we hold against them, so above all others, they must
needs stand against this. They will not have the Pope to be the beast, for
they know that this beast is Antichrist. And what is Antichrist, but the
capital enemy to Jesus Christ? Wherefore they see, that if the Pope be the
beast, then all reverence and obedience to him, must of necessity be forsaken.
Now therefore I will show, that all things which are spoken in Scripture of
this beast and Antichrist, agree most fitly to the popedom, and not to any
other earthly power.

This Beast that is spoken of here, is the same that is mentioned, Apoc.
13.11. which was the second beast that John saw, which came up out of the
earth, and had two horns like the Lamb, but spoke like the Dragon: and it is
the same beast, which whosoever worshippeth, or his image, or receives his
mark, he must drink of the wine of the wrath of God, Apoc. 14.9. and it is
that beast which sends out of his mouth, three unclean spirits like frogs,
to gather the kings to the battle here spoken of, Apoc. 16.13. It is that
scarlet colored beast full of names of blasphemy, which has seven heads and
ten horns. Apoc. 17.3. of the same beast mentioned so before, it is said here:
I saw the beast and the kings of the earth and their armies, gathered together
to fight against him that sat upon the horse, and against his army. This
beast both in the Revelation, and in other parts of Scripture has diverse
other names: for it is named the great whore that sits upon many waters,
Apoc. 17.1. The woman araied in purple and scarlet, and gilded with gold and
precious stones and pearls, Apoc. 17.4. and it is called Babylon the great
city, Apoc. 18.2. That which Paul speaks of the Apostasy, and of the man of
sin, and the son of perdition, whom he calls an adversary, 2. These. 2.3.
is understood of this beast. But the most usual and familiar name, that all
ecclesiastical writers do give to this most famous enemy of Christ and his
Church, is that which John uses when he says: Babes, it is the last time,
and as ye have heard that Antichrist shall come, even now are there many
Antichrists: whereby we know that it is the last time, 1. John 2.18. And
again, Every spirit which confesses not, that Jesus Christ is come in the
flesh, is not of God: but this is the spirit of Antichrist, of whom ye have
heard how that he should come, and now already he is in the world. This
principal enemy of Christ that makes war here against him, named an
adversary, the man of sin, the son of perdition, called Babylon, the great
whore Antichrist, and the second beast, is the Pope of Rome with his popish
government.

The devil as he labored that Christ should not be known when he was in
the world, and wrought man's salvation by his death: so likewise he does what
he may to hide Antichrist, that he may work destruction of souls, and yet not
be suspected to do it. That the Papacy may not be called the kingdom of
Antichrist, the papists obtrude to the world a certain imagined Antichrist,
such a beast as never was, nor ever shall be: for they say Antichrist must be
one particular man, borne of the tribe of Dan, which shall have his seat in
Jerusalem, in the temple there, and shall subdue three kings first, namely, of
Egypt, Ethiopia, and Libya, and then other seven, and shall reign three years
and a half, neither more nor less, and shall be honored of the Jews as
their Christ and Messiah, and shall be circumcised, and shall abolish baptism
and the Mass, and shall set up his own image in the temple, and cause the
world to worship it, and he will deny Jesus to be Christ, and cause himself to
be honored as God, and so be called, and that he shall give a mark and set
it on men's foreheads, or on their right hands, the print of it shall be his
name, and the letters of his name shall make the number of 666. And that he
may move men to worship him the rather, he shall do many miracles, and
especially shall feign himself to die and rise again from the dead, and cause
fire to come down from heaven in the sight of men: that Enoch and Elias shall
come in their own persons and prophecy against him, that Christ at the end
of three years and a half, shall overcome him and put him down, and that at
the end of forty days after shall be the general judgment. And before this
Antichrist can come, they say that the gospel must be received publicly of all
kingdoms and people in the world: and that the empire of Rome which now the
Germans hold, must clean both in name and substance be abolished, for that is
a great let unto him: for while that stands, he cannot come at Jerusalem.

This is the papists worshipful Antichrist, a perilous beast that shall reign
but three years and a half. By this notion of Antichrist deeply printed in
their heads, their minds are turned away from seeing the Pope to be the very
beastly Antichrist as he is. They nourish the beast in their own bosom, and
let him suck of their breasts, or rather suck themselves poison out of that
Whores breasts, while they imagine that he shall come, they know not when, to
Jerusalem in another shape.

What should make them think that Antichrist is one singular person? The first
beast, they and all men confess, is the state and succession of the empire of
Rome, as it was heathen, and persecuted the Gospel openly: that was not one
person, but many persons, one after another, holding up the same estate. The
second beast reuiueth the image of the first, in the same city: therefore the
second is not one person, but a succession of many, which renew, as it were,
the old honor and state of Rome. This does the order of Popes succeeding one
another. And although (as Bellarmine answers) one beast in Daniel is set for
one man, as the Leopard for Alexander magnus, yet there also the Lion
represents the Assyrians, and the Bear the Persians empire: so here in the
Apocalypse, as the first beast is set for the heathen empire, so the second
beast is set for the Antichristian papacy of Rome. Augustine thinks that
this beast must not be understood for one man, but for one city. Quae sit porro
ista bestia, etc. What this beast is, it is not repugnant to right faith, that
the very wicked city be understood, as the people of unbelievers, contrary to
the believing people and city of God. The beast then, by Augustines opinion,
is a city, a multitude, not one singular person. If we shall mark that which
Paul says concerning the beginning and end of Antichrist, the mystery of
iniquity already works, and that the Lord shall abolish him with the
brightness of his coming: and that which John says, Ye have heard that
Antichrist should come, and now already he is in the world, we shall see that
the Antichrist can not be one man, the foundation of whose kingdom was laid so
long before, and the end whereof shall not come till the end of all: for is it
not absurd, that there should be so ancient a preparation for so late and so
short a reign of one man? This also is most evident, that those things which
must be done of Antichrist, can not be performed of one man, no not in his
whole life, much less in three years and a half. He must restore the glory
of the Roman empire, he must do all that the other beast did before him, he
must work many signs and miracles, he must cause the former beast to be
worshipped, he must send forth lying spirits to seduce them that dwell on the
earth, he must kill them that worship not the image of the beast, and receive
not his mark: nay those things that they grant Antichrist shall do, can not be
done in that space. He must win Jerusalem, and build the Temple, and overcome
all the world, and propound himself to be worshipped through the world, and
take away baptism in all the world, and do many other things. Can these
things be done in three years and a half? or while he does these things,
shall he not be their Antichrist? But they say Paul calls him the man of
sin, and John, the Antichrist, adding the Greek article. That is done for
difference, and not for singularity of person. No marvel if a common name of
the man of the Antichrist signify many, seeing a proper name shall signify a
multitude. Israel first a proper name of Jacob, and yet signifies all Gods
people: Sion the proper name of a hill, and yet signifies all the church of
God. The beast is the man of sin, and the Antichrist, because of all
Antichrists (for there are many, even so many as there are heresies against
Christ) he is the greatest, and cruellest, and mightiest Antichrist, and the
man of sin, because of all sinful men he is cause, by his power and laws,
of greatest and most sin committed in Gods church. Last of all (they say)
that as Christ is one person, so Antichrist, his chief enemy, must be one
person: as he that sits on the horse, that is Christ, is one person, so the
beast, that is captain of those against him, must be one person. The
comparison holds not: first, because Christ abides for ever, therefore on
that side there is one person captain: but on the other side, to fight against
him, for the short continuance of the persons, and the long continuance of the
fight, there must be many persons, in succession, captains. Secondly, because
the fight is not against Christ in his person, but in his doctrine, and in his
members, both which are continued by succession, and so are the captains and
the war against them. I need not fight so long with a shadow, to destroy this
opinion of theirs, that the beast and the Antichrist spoken of in scripture, is
not one singular person, but a line and succession of many that hold and
maintain a government that destroys the faith and benefits of Jesus
Christ. Thus we see how vain one especial ground of their fained Antichrist
is, namely, that he must be one singular person.

Another ground of their error is, that this beast and Antichrist must be an
open enemy of Christ, both in deed and word, in truth and in show. for they
say he must deny Jesus to be Christ in plain terms, and in like manner deny
that he is come: that he must take away the sacraments of Christ, and
substitute others himself: that he must make himself Christ, and so be
received of the Jews, and that he must by all means be without the Church.
The Pope (they say) is not such a one. He acknowledges Christ to be come, and
himself his substitute and servant, and by our own confession is after a sort
in the Church. But we hold, and the truth is, that this beast and Antichrist,
is a secret enemy cloked with the name of a friend: an ass that has put on
a Lions skin, and that in this enemy especially; Satan changes himself
into an Angel of light. If Antichrist should come like an open professed
enemy, all Christians would easily detest him, the elect should never be in
danger by him: but he shall come so cunningly, that he shall seduce, if it
were possible, even the elect. And the name of a mystery, Revel. 17. declares
that his working is secret. and the same has Paul, the mystery of iniquity
already works. Wherefore if the kingdom and rule of the beast and Antichrist
be a mystery, then is he a secret and not an open professed enemy. And
whether do these names of seducing, of coming with all deceiueablenesse of
unrighteousness, and of strong delusion to believe lies, (all which are spoken
of Antichrist) agree rather to a counterfeit or an open enemy? The enemy that
Christ would have his people take heed of in the last time, is especially the
counterfeit friend. They shall say, Lo, here is Christ, or there is Christ,
there shall arise false Christ's and false prophets. And to the Jews he says,
If another shall come in my name, him will ye receive. Upon these words they
ground that opinion of theirs, that the Jews shall receive Antichrist when he
comes, which shall deny the first and true Christ, and set himself to be
their Christ. But that saying of our Savior was fulfilled after his ascension,
in diverse that came unto the^ as deliuerers, whom they followed to their
destruction. But as for the Jews toward the end of the world, when the
Papists say their Antichrist shall be, the Jews before that shall be
converted unto Jesus Christ, as Paul shows Romans 11. and the popish imagined
Antichrist, of all others, can never be received of the Jews: for they look
for a Christ to come of the tribe of Judah and not of the tribe of Dan: and they
so detest an image, that they can never acknowledge him their Christ, that
contrary to their law shall set up an image to be worshipped. But as I said,
Antichrist shall put upon him the vizard and face of a friend, and shall have
the heart and works of an enemy: for as he is and has joined to him as his
assistant the false prophet, so likewise he will tread in the path of false
prophets. Beware of false prophets (says our Savior) for they come in sheep
clothing, but inwardly they are ravening wolves. If that be true that some do
say, that in Ezechiel and Revel. 20. Gog is set for Antichrist and Magog for
the Turk, which both should succeed and divide the Roman empire, then not
only this is manifest, that Antichrist is a secret enemy, but that he should
have the West part of the Empire, and the Turk the East: and that we need
not fear the Turk in these quarters of the world, nor favor the Spaniards
(as some do seem to wish in that behalf) because they think they be a wall
between the Turk and Christendom. But God has set the bounds. To the Turk,
that is, to Magog and Mesek, which is Arabia, where Mahomets tomb is, the East
is allotted. To Gog, that is, the Pope, and Tubal with him, which some say is
Italy, and others say is Spain, to this Gog the West part of the empire,
which has hitherto retained the name of Christian religion, is assigned. All
the world deserved to be in bondage under enemies of the truth: but the East
is under the bodily bondage of the Turk, and the West under the spiritual
servitude of the Pope. Now Magog which is set for the Turk, signifies
uncovered, open, and manifest: but Gog set for the Pope, signifies covered,
secret, and hidden: wherefore as the one is an open enemy, so the other is
secret, and therefore more dangerous. If by Gog and Magog be meant these two,
then the names do show the difference: but I know some take those names
otherwise: and some confess they know not what they mean. But if that Gog do
not declare Antichrist to be a secret enemy, yet by this it shall most easily
appear, for that Paul says of him, he shall sit in the Temple of God, that is
to say, he shall rule and govern in the church of God, as he himself will
call it, and as it has commonly been reputed: wherefore if he shall govern
in the church of Christ, he must show himself to be a friend to Christ and to
the church, or else he can by no means deceive the church of Christ. To the
woman, Revel. 17. there is given a cup of gold, which is understood to be the
show of religion, and yet it is full of abominations. But what need we more
proofs to show that this beast is a fained and a counterfeit friend? John
says, The beast has two horns like the lamb, and yet speaks like the
dragon: he shall make a show of Christian religion, shall have spiritual and
temporal government, and shall feign himself to be like Christ, but his laws
and doctrine shall be the doctrine of devils. All these things prove that
Antichrist, which is this beast, is a secret enemy, making show and countenance
of a friend.

If I should say no more, by this that I have spoken it may sufficiently be
gathered, that this beast, this Antichrist, is the Pope of Rome. For who is
there in the Church of Christ, of long continuance and great authority, that
seems more a friend to Christ, and is in truth so sore an enemy to all that
truly believe in Christ, as is the Pope? But if we search further, we shall
see that whatsoever the Scripture speaks of this Enemy, agrees fitly to the
Pope, and to none other, neither to him, who they imagine shall come of the
tribe of Dan, nor to the Turk, which is by all means out of the church. This
title of eternal ignominy and shame, falls upon no estate in the world, but
only on the popedom. All things agree to it.

The forerunner of Antichrist was the fall of the Roman empire, and
destruction of Rome in the West: that is it (in the opinion of many ancient
fathers) which Paul means, when he says, Ye know what withholdeth that he
might be reueiled in his time. And again, Only he which now withholdeth,
shall let till he be taken out of the way. The seat of the empire abiding at
Rome, withheld the Pope from his reign and dominion there. But how was that
removed, that the Pope might come into it empty? First by Constantinus magnus
departing thence, and making the seat of his empire at Constantinople.
Secondly, because it was not yet empty enough, Alaricus king of Goths takes it
anno 414. Gensericus Vandalus takes it and spoils it again an. 459. And last
of all, Totilas takes it thrice, overthrows the walls, and sets Rome on
fire, and lets it burn 40 days, an. 549. Thus was (...) made (...): Rome
was made empty of the emperor, that the Pope might step into it. This is the
head that S. John saw wounded to death. Here the heathen Romans that had killed
with the sword, were killed by the sword. Although this be so, yet the Papists
contend, that this is not yet fulfilled. The Roman empire (say they) is not
yet displaced. These be notable cunning men: that which was done 1000 years
since, is not yet done with them. By this we may judge of their religion. For
as the Roman empire remains yet, so the true Christian religion remains with
the^ unto this time, and no otherwise: but that empire remains only in name
and not in truth: so does the religion. For is that the emperor of Rome, whom
the Pope by a law has bound not to dwell in Rome, nor in all Italy, at any
time? Is he emperor of Rome that has no tribute, no homage, nor lands of the
empire, and unless he have somewhat to live by of his own, shall be nothing
enriched by the empire? But (says Bellarmine) he is emperor of Rome, although
he have not Rome. How can he be emperor of it, that has it neither in
possession, nor by right of title? if he have right to it, then the Pope is an
usurper, that keeps him from it: for there is no officer in Rome, but the
Popes deputy by his appointment. Wherefore the first note of Antichrist agrees
to the Pope, which is, that Rome should be made a ruin before he should come to
build upon it: for that was fulfilled five hundred and fifty years after
Christ, and six hundred years were expired before the papacy did show it
self in his antichristian colors.

The second note of the beast agrees also to the Pope: for John says: He
comes out of the earth, and has two horns like the lamb, and speaks like
the dragon. Antichrist should in show make himself like Christ, and perform
the works of the devil. He will write himself Seruus seruorum: and in some
sense, so he is: for he serves the lust of those that are servants and slaves,
to enrich them and bring them to honor. He has not the horns of the lamb,
but like them: for he challenges to himself power in temporal and in
spiritual matters: he makes himself not only a priest, but a king also: he
will rule in heaven and in earth. If these be not the two horns of the lamb,
what are they? howsoever it is, he will be like the lamb, especially in the
horns. He would resemble Christ in his power, but not in his holiness. And to
express his power, he delights much with the number of two, for he has on
his head a miter which has two tops, two sharp points, one before, and
another behind: two keys also he has set a cross. And in the year 1300,
Boniface the eight, in the first Iubile, the first day went in his bishops
robes, the second day in the habit of the emperor, having two swords borne
before him, and this being proclaimed, Ecce duo gladij hic. How can he declare
more plainly, that he bears two horns like the lamb? whose title in the
world comes so near the title of Christ? for he will be called Christ's
vicar. Of the two horns, he had the spiritual jurisdiction first, and then
the temporal: for first he ruled over bishops and ministers only, and in
process of time he ruled over kings and emperors: but although he have horns
like the lamb, yet his speech is like the dragons. The crying of the dragon is
fierce and terrible: and the spiritual dragon, the devil, speaks contrary
to God. For the religion of the Pope, is in name Christ's religion, but in truth
contrary to it. Christ says to the people, Search the Scriptures: the Pope
says they shall not read them. Christ says, Thou shall serve God only: the
Pope says, Thou shall serve saints. Christ says, Thou shall not make nor
worship images: the Pope says, thou shall do both: and in many points besides
( Hesshusius reckons up six hundred) the Pope speaks contrary to Christ,
and altogether like the dragon. The Papists say this note can not agree to the
Pope. Why? not because he has not two horns like the lamb, nor because he
speaks not like the dragon: but because it is said here of the beast, that he
comes out of the earth: for they think their Pope has not a base, but a
noble beginning. In deed their first bishops were from heaven, and went to
heaven: but they that took the horns like the lamb, and presumed to
challenge spiritual and temporal jurisdiction over all the church, were from
the earth: for this was an earthly devise: and what persons in the world come
to so high authority from so base beginnings, as the Popes of later times?
bastards, and friars, and magicians: are not these base? are not these from the
earth? To this description of John, agrees that of Paul: for as John says, he
should speak like the dragon, so Paul says, he shall be an adversary: and as
here it is said, he should have two horns like the lamb, so there it is said,
that he should sit in the Temple of God as God, showing himself that he is
God: for he takes the office and name of God upon him.

The third mark is proper also to the Pope. For thus John speaks of him. He
did all that the first beast could do before him, and caused the earth, and
them that dwell therein, to worship the first beast, whose deadly wound was
healed. The first beast was old Rome, and the state of the empire: therefore
when this second beast had gotten horns like the lamb, that is spiritual and
temporal jurisdiction, he pusheth so long with these horns, that he makes
the Roman name to flourish, as much or more then it did before: which was a
thing much to be woondered at through the world. Who knows not that Rome has
been these later hundred years in more estimation then any city in the world
besides, or then it self had been in former times? and how came it to that
wealth and honor, but only by the two horned beast? Nothing else had it to
commend it now in comparison, but the false title of the seat of Christ's vicar.
And herein stands all the endeavor of Antichrist, not that Christ may be
worshipped, but that the first beast may be had in honor. For the name, and
religion, and credit of Rome he fights. The Pope is as it were, the first
beast: for in him the ancient state seems to be restored.

The fourth note of the second beast is as fit as any of the rest for the pope.
For John says: He did great woonders, so that he made fire to come down from
heaven on the earth in the sight of men: and deceived them that dwell on the
earth, by the signs which were permitted to him to do in the sight of the
beast. To this agrees that which Paul says of Antichrist, whose coming is by
the working of Satan, with all power and signs, and lying woonders. And our
Savior says, There shall arise false Christ's, and false prophets, and shall
show great signs and woonders, so that if it were possible, they should
deceive the very elect. Signs and miracles are so common with the papists, as
they have not been among any since the Apostles times. They have miracles to
commend every thing to the world, miracles to confirm purgatory, and praying
for the dead, and the mass, and the force of relics, and whatsoever
superstition there is besides in popery. But their miracles are lying signs
and miracles, both because many of them are but done in show and not in truth,
and many are fained, and all tend to confirm and establish lies. The truth
needs no new miracles, it persuadeth and confirms it self in the heart of
him that has it. John names one especial miracle, The calling of fire down
from heaven in the sight of men. Some imagine that as Elias did it to consume
the fifties that came to take him, so the Pope at some time or other should do:
or as he did to commend his sacrifice against the sacrifice of the priests of
Baal, so the pope should cause the like for the confirmation of his mass and
other idolatry. It is time for him now to do it, if ever he will do it, for
he is near taking, and his mass almost every where is out of credit. There be
that refer it to Pope Hildebrand, which by the art of Magike danced in fire,
raised up round about him, without hurt, thereby to win the more authority to
himself. Others rather take this of the fire to be spoken allegorically: for
what is excommunication, but as it were an heavenly fire, by which he has
revenged himself on many emperors and kings, and whereby he goes about still
to consume his enemies? This fire he flingeth about him like a mad man. He
has cast it against our most gracious Queen, and this whole land: but it is
quenched in the sea. I hope it will not set any on fire here, as it has done.
Fox takes this fire fetched from heaven, to be the Scriptures interpreted in a
wrong sense. Christ says he came to cast fire on the earth, and that his
desire was it should be kindled: speaking of his word. This fire the Pope
fetches out of heaven: for he wringeth and wresteth it out of his natural
place, and applies it to prove his authority and all superstition which he
has brought into the world: This is my body, and Thou art Peter, and upon this
rock will I build my church: and many such bright shining stars he has
plucked from heaven down to the earth. The Pope therefore is that new kind of
Alchymist that is said to fetch fire from heaven.

The fifth mark poynteth out the Pope also. For partly by his two horns, and
partly by fire from heaven, and by the means of his lying signs and miracles,
he is grown to such credit and power, that at his commandment they that dwell
on the earth are content to make the image of the beast, which had the wound of
a sword and did live, and also he did give a spirit to the image of the beast,
so that the image of the beast did speak. This making of an image, and the
causing of it to speak, has diverse interpretations. The Papists expound the
head wounded and revived to be, Antichrist himself, fayning himself to die
and to rise again: and that of the image speaking, they understand of an image
which Antichrist should make to represent himself, which should give
answers to those that sought unto it. These are vain devises and shifts to
put it from the Pope. But the head wounded and healed, is the state of the
empire fallen and raised again in the Pope: for Rome was wounded with a sword,
and revived in the Papacy. The image made by the people, and caused to speak
by the Pope, some have thought to be the emperor, which in deed is but the
Popes creature, whom he has put down and set up, commanded to speak or
hold his peace at his pleasure. But it seems rather to be the authority of
his Legates and Cardinals, and their Courts and Consistories in all
kingdoms: for all people were persuaded to entertain them, and the Pope did,
as it were, breathe life into them, and they spoke by the spirit of his Canon
law or absolute pleasure.

The sixth mark is agreeable in like manner. He caused that as many as would not
worship the image of the beast, should be killed. The rejecting of the Popish
Legates, and courts, and laws, the refusing of the Spanish inquisition, is
death. For hence proceed all the wars and rebellions among all people that
profess the name of Christ. It pertains also to their bloodshedding and
cruelty, that he says: None could be suffered to buy or sell, except he
received the beasts mark. For there was no place nor being for any, except he
did swear subjection. And when the patience of Gods people is commended for
enduring such things as they lay upon them, it is a token of their bloody
cruelty. Here is the patience of saints: here are they that keep the
commandments of God, and the faith of Jesus. And in the justifying of their
punishment, which daily now falls upon them, the cause is given: for they
shed the blood of the saints and prophets, and therefore have thou given them
blood to drink, for they are worthy. Her attire and ornaments also do
witness this thirst and shedding of blood that has been, and is in them. I
saw a woman sit upon a scarlet colored beast: and the woman was arrayed in
purple and scarlet. What color so fit for a bloody beast? and what kind of
people either used or esteemed it so much as they? To these things agrees that
which our Savior says, having relation to the latter times. The time will
come when they that kill you shall think they do God good service. But to
remove this note from themselves, the Papists say, that the killing which they
have exercised, is not answerable to those speeches: for they say the latter
beast must kill mo of Gods scruants then the first beast, and with more
cruelty. I find not yet where it is so said, but that is true in them
although they deny it. For who can reckon up the number, that iudicially for
the cause of popery have bin put to death in England, Scotland France, Spain,
and all the countries of Christendom within these two or three hundred years?
And as for inue^ting of torments, if burning by fire be not cruel enough, yet
they have devised more exquisite torments in their Spanish Inquisition, and
used much more cruelty the^ ever the Heathen did. And one thing they have
committed whereby they have shed infinite men's blood, which ye heathen did not
against the Christians. They make war upon us only for religion, and in those
wars in France and Germany and the low countries, and in all places where by
invasion or rebellion they can prevail, have made infinite slaughters. Wherefore
numbers slain by them exceed the number slain by Paganes. But there is not so
precisely any thing spoken of the number. They kill all, and would do, that
will not be subject to them. This they have practiced, and this they do
practice: this is the drift of their wars and Counsels, and endeavors, and
this is the mark of the beast. I saw the woman (says John) drunken with the
blood of Saints, and with the blood of the Martyrs of Jesus. Although we kill
many in these wars, yet the whole is to be imputed unto them: for they are
the cause of the slaughter, not only of others, but also of themselves.

The seventh note is, that the beast made all both small and great, rich and
poor, free and bond, to receive a mark in their right hand, or in their
foreheads, and that no man might buy or sell, but he that had the mark, or the
name of the beast, or the number of his name. Here is wisdom: let him that
has wit, count the number of the beast: for it is the number of a man, and his
number is 666. There is no Religion that ever was, that has so many marks and
characters, and so gloryeth in them, as the Popish Religion. And all that are
under them, are signed with some token or other, as their sheep. Their little
infants, with their oil, and cream, and other matters. Their Emperors and
kings, and all men that take degrees in schools, with their corporal oath, for
their fidelity to that See. Their Bishops and whole Clergy, with their
shaven crowns, and oil, and oaths. All the people by open professing of
themselves to be of the Latin and Romish Church, for to this end tend al their
characters. This they would have all come unto, and they obtained it, that they
should profess themselves to be of the Latin and Romish Religion. Therefore
Master Fox takes this name to be Romanus. Which both in the Greek, and
also in the Hebrewe letters makes 666. He tries it in both tongues: because
he thinks the Revelation was made to John in the Hebrewe, as being his mother
tongue, and therefore in the Hebrewe name the number should be answerable: and
because he wrote it in Greek, it should agree in that tongue also, which it
does in Romanus. For both the letters in Hebrewe, and the letters in Greek
make that number. Irenaens coniectured (...) to be the name: and many learned
men do rest in that, and it fitly agrees. For all things with the^ were in
Latin: the scripture, their public service, their private prayers, their
laws, all were Latin. But this devise of the letters in a name to make up the
number, seems to be Magical, and Cabalistical, and not used in the scriptures
(as some learned men's opinion is,) and therefore they think the number should
show the time when he should be brought forth into the world. And about that
time they account that the Pope obtained his title of universal bishop by a
Council: he had it given him by the emperor Phocas about 60. years before.
So that which way soever it be taken, it falls out right, and agrees still
to them. And herein stands the note of Gods people to withstand and reject
this mark and character, and by no means to be counted of that religion, for
they are threatened that do receive it: If any man worship the beast and his
image, and receive his mark in his forehead or in his hand, the same shall
drink of the wine of the wrath of God, yea of the pure wine which is powered
into the cup of his wrath, and he shall be tormented in fire and brimstone
before the holy Angels, and before the Lamb, and the smoke of their torment
shall ascend evermore, and they shall have no rest day nor night, which worship
the beast and his image, and whosoever receives the print of his name. But if
any withstand it and get the victory, they are highly commended. Thus John
speaks of them: And I saw as it were a glassie sea, mingled with fire, and
them that had gotten victory of the beast and of his image, and of his mark,
standing at the glassie sea, having the harpes of God, and they did sing the
song of Moses the servant of God, and the song of the Lamb. Afterward he
shows how there fell a noisome and grievous sore upon the men which had the
mark of the beast, and upon them which worshipped his image. This sore of many
is thought to be the French disease, which began among them in the war at
Naples between the French and Spaniard, in the year 1494. it came by the
company of harlots in the camp, and from thence was spread to most countries.
Other writers expound it of the plague, which in the time of popery
flourishing, was more fierce and more general in all these quarters then
almost at any time before or since: all chronicles are full of examples. Thus
much of the receiving the character and mark of the beast, which is the
seventh note.

It were long to describe the other notes of this beast, for there are yet many
things whereby it may be known. The seventeenth chapter has a full
description of it. That chapter has much that pertains to Rome under the
Emperors, and much also belonging to it, as it is governed by the Pope. Nay,
both are as it were knit together, for that they are so like: for this that is
now, is but the old revived, and therefore he that knows one, knows both.
The first and especial mark is their whorish and idolatrous Religion. For he
calls her the whore that sits upon many waters: the government over many
people that maintains idolatry, which is spiritual fornication in the sight
of God. Then he says: With her have committed fornication the kings of the
earth, and the inhabitants of the earth are drunken with the wine of her
fornication. For what Idol did the Romans set up, which kings and people did
not by and by embrace? And they received them so gladly, and maintained all
their will worship, their Saints, their Images, their Relics, their Masses,
their ceremonies in such sort, as if they were druncke with the love of them.
Yet touching their Religion, he says, that this woman was full of names of
blasphemy. Blasphemy is that which hurts the name of God. They were full then
of blasphemies, that hurt the name of God, and the name of his people. Himself
to be called the vicar of Christ upon earth, the head of the Church, the
universal bishop, is a blasphemy against Christ, and against all other
Bishops and Pastors.

To say that Saints are intercessors and mediators for us, is blasphemy
against the Saints, and Christ. To affirm that Christ by his death put away
original sin only, and satisfied for the fault of other sins, and not for
the punishment, is blasphemy against Christ's passion. So is that which they
affirm of the Mass, that it is a sacrifice for the quick and the dead. These
and infinite things more in that Religion, are vile and horrible blasphemies.
John is not yet satisfied with speaking thus much only of their idolatry: but
he says afterward, that she had a cup of gould in her hand, full of
abominations and filthiness of her fornications. She had a goulden cup, not
only for her riches and wealth, but also for a show of Christian religion and
holiness. But this golden cup was full of poison, full of abomination and filthy
fornication. For what number, or measure, or end was there of their Idols? not
only every city as in Judah, but every house, every corner, every man had his
Idol. Neither that alone, but there was for every action, for every
occupation, for every disease, a several Idol. Last of all, for the
fertility of her idolatry, Saint John calls her the mother of whoredoms
and abominations of the earth. For where was the shop where these Idols were
devised? Whence were they authorized but only from Rome? These things that
John writes of the idolatry of the beast, will not agree to the Antichrist
that the Papists imagine: for they say he shall abolish all other images, and
make his own image only be worshipped: for the beast is the mother of all
abominations and fornications of the earth: neither will it so well agree to
ancient Rome, for that received rather Idols from other people, and
worshipped the gods of all other nations which they conquered. But this beast
sends out her Idols and Saints and petty gods, and commends them to the
worshippers, promising great things if they do it.

Another mark follows, that she has in her forehead a name written: A
mystery. This very name in letters was written on the Popes Myter, which he
did wear upon his head, and so they used it for a season. Their Myters were
branded with this mark, Mysterium. But they after took it out, and now they
use not to bear that name in their foreheads. But in the forehead of the
whore, that is, of their whorish Religion, it is written still: but none save
Gods elect can read it. For the poison and infection of their Religion is
secret: It has a goodly show, it beguileth many. For they keep the names of
Scripture, and Christian religion, but they have turned them into another
meaning, yea they commend the basest and vilest ceremony that they use, as a
great mystery. Wherefore albeit the name mysterium be taken out of the Popes
miter, yet it remains still in the forehead of his religion.

John comes yet nearer, and points out the very place unto us: for he
calls it great Babylon. for as Babylon had the Monarchy, and oppressed and
carried captive Gods people: so likewise did both the old and the new Rome:
the first and the latter beast, and so he calls it, when he speaks of the
fall thereof. It is fallen, it is fallen, Babylon the great city. And in many
other things was Rome like to Babylon, as in the building, but especially in
the Monarchy and oppression of the Saints. All this the Papists will grant
of old Rome, but not of new Rome. But if the first beast be old Rome, and
the latter reuiueth the first, then the first being Rome, the second must
needs also be Rome: and therefore while he points out one, he points out
both.

Some Papists have imagined that Antichrist should make his seat at Babylon
in the East, or there be borne, and so the name to be taken here in his proper
signification. But why then does he call it a mystery? There is in her
forehead a name written, a mystery, great Babylon. It is Babylon in a
mystery, and not in the proper signification of the name. To point out Rome by
the dominion which it had by the Empire, and should have by the popedom, he
says further: The waters which thou saw where the whore sits, are
people, and multitudes, and nations, and tongues: and afterward more plainly,
The woman which thou saw, is the great city, which reigns over the kings
of the earth. Two or three notes yet he adds to describe the city, and
government, and authority thereof. One when he says: The beast that thou have
seen, was, and is not. And again: The beast that was, and is not, and yet is.
The Monarchy was there under Augustus, Tiberius, and some that followed, most
flourishing, but now in John's time is not, and yet is. for under Domitian it
did not flourish, and therefore was not in comparison of that it had been, and
yet was then: for it had great power. But after this, it should ascend out of
the bottomless pit, even out of hell, by the subtlety of the devil, after it
was quite overthrown by the Goths. for it was revived and quickened in the
Pope, and Rome had as much authority by the papacy, and as much riches as
ever it had by the Monarchy.

The other note is, when he says: I will show thee the mystery of the woman,
and of the beast that bears her, which has seven heads, and ten horns. But
of the ten horns, because they are set for ten kings, I will speak afterward,
when I shall speak of the kings that join with the beast, in the fight
against him that rides on the horse. Therefore of the seven heads thus he
says. Here is the mind that has wisdom. The seven heads are seven
mountains, whereon the woman sits, they are also seven Kings. First of the
mountains, then of the Kings. The woman sits upon seven hills, and the woman
is a city. Rome then on seven hills, and the latter beast reuiueth the first.
No matter if this Rome stand not upon all seven, nay if it stand upon none of
them, so that it stand for that Rome that stood upon them, has that name and
dignity, and answers to it in idolatrous religion, and cruel persecution of
the Saints. Then was Rome well known to stand on seven hills. No other city
did so: no other city bearing rule over Kings does so. It was called
Septicollis, of the seven chief hills, whereon it stood. Virgil has relation
to them, when he says: Septem quae vna sibi muro circumdedit arces: Meaning
by towers the hills on which that stood. And Propertius says: Septem vrbs
alta nigis toto quae praesidet orbi. Romulus set it on four hills, which
were called Palatinus, Capitolinus, Auentinus, and Exquilinus. Afterward
Seruius Tullus added three, which were Caelius, Viminalis, and Quirinalis. From
this time was it called Septicollis, although when it was further enlarged, it
comprehended mo hills. And the second beast with his kingdom and dominion, is
most fitly described by the city: for they challenge all their privileges by
the city. Because Peter (they say) was Bishop there, thence, even from the
place, they derive all their authority. There they delight to dwell, although
other cities are more pleasant and commodious. There the Cardinals must meet,
when they choose the Pope: there all the counsels and conspiracies are made
against Gods Church. Bellarmine makes so great account of the city, that if
the Pope should be driven thence, or it be destroyed, yet wheresoever he were,
he should still have the honor and dignity and title of the Pope of Rome.
Thus here by the seven hills, the very place is noted. As in this Chapter Rome
is most expressly described: so of learned men, in the sixteenth it is thought
almost to be named. They gather themselves together in a place called in
Hebrewe Armageddon. Fox and others, take it to be an allusion to Megiddo, and
Har megiddo the river and hill so called, where Sisera with his army was
overthrown, which should signify the like event to the battles of the beast.
But for as much as it may be read, and so in some books was in two words,
each of two syllables, arma geddon, and Sigonius says, he saw it written
Geddon harma: and the letter N. is not in the name of the place where Sisera
was overcome, therefore it is thought that some other thing then the allusion
to Megiddo, must be found in the letters, and the signification of the word. If
John had meant the place Megiddo, he need not have said it is named so in
Hebrewe, for the name only would have referred us to that place, although he
had left out the mention of the language.

The signification of Geddon harma agreeeth well to the Rome that now is: for
it signifies excidium excelsae, the ruin of the high city, and it alludeth
to that of Sibylla, (...), Rome a ruin. This should be the place and shop of
all conspiracies against Christ, and his Gospel. Harma signifies the high
city that has dominion over the rest, and differs in sound very little
from Haroma, and short in Hebrew it might so be written, Harma. In the place
where this ancient great city was cut down by the Goths, there the other was
erected or hard by, in steed of it, and thence come all mischiefs to Christ's
Church. There are the battles conspired and made. What could be said plainer to
describe the city, then that of the seven hills, or this of Harma, so near in
sound to Rome, and in sense the high and mighty city?

Now as concerning the kings, there are two orders of them pertaining to the
city: first seven, and then ten. Seven heads are also seven kings, and ten
horns be ten kings. But the ten kings are kings assisting, and with power
helping the beast at the first, and after as willing and ready to pull down the
beast as they were to set him up. But of those assisting kings afterward. The
7. kings are the states of Rome in it self, succeeding one another from the
beginning to the end, in ye government of it, which is manifest, because he
says thus. The 7. hills are also 7. kings, five are fallen, and one is, and
another is not yet come, and when he comes, he must continue a short space,
and the beast that was, and is not, is even the eight, and is one of the seven,
and shall go into destruction. They that expound this of Galba, Otho,
Vitellius, Vespasian, and Titus, five past, and Domitian present, and Cocceius
Nerua the seventh, and the eight Traian a Spaniard, say nothing to the purpose.
For besides that John's prophecy could not be shut up in so short a compass,
and not only 5. but more Emperors were past, no man can tell how Traian should
be the eight, and yet one of the seven that were before. And to understand it
of the seven Electors of the Empire, is much further from the matter, for none
of them were then, much less five past already. The seven kings therefore,
are the seven states of government in Rome, from the building of it, whereof
five were past before S. John's time: for first they were governed by Kings,
secondly by Consuls, thirdly by Decemuiros, fourthly by Triumuiros, and fifthly
by Dictators: all which were past, and in effect were kings, although not in
name. The sixth were the Emperors that reigned in John's time, and after, till
Rome was destroyed. The seventh is thought to be the popedom, which has
succeeded the Emperors: and he is also the eight, for he sustaineth two
governments, one temporal, another spiritual, and his spiritual government
is one of the seven, for it is also external, and in pomp like that of the
Emperors. Wherefore they would make him the seventh, and the eight too, and
his spiritual dominion which is the eight, is also temporal, and so one of
the seven, because it is exercised after a temporal manner. But this dividing
and applying of the popedom unto two or three states, is not agreeable,
especially when the seventh which they make his temporal government, should
last but a short time, and yet it has lasted longer then any of the other
governments. Therefore we may say that the government of the Goths, or rather
the Exarchi of Rauenna, (for they held Rome a season) was the seventh, and
that lasted but a short time, and then came the popedom which is like one of
the seven, for he is a priestly king or emperor. To make Pontifex Maximus in
Rome one of the seven, that is not so fit, because the Pontifex as Pontifex
never had entire and sovereign government of all: and he succeeded not the
other governments, but was a companion to them all. Neither did Tribuni rule as
chief Magistrates, but were intercessors for the people, with the chief
Magistrate. Thus has John evidently described Rome unto us, with the double
persecuting state thereof. There is no city can be showed to have altered the
kind of government so often: and if others may be found to have done it, yet the
other marks together with this, agree to none but this.

Besides these things in the Revelation, there remains somewhat in Paul,
pertaining to the description of this beast, which shows his intolerable
pride. Paul says of Antichrist, he exalts himself against all that is
called God, or that is worshipped, so that he does sit as God in the Temple of
God, showing himself that he is God. This the Papists deny to agree to the
Pope: and therefore think he is not that proud beast, for (say they) he
calls him self seruum seruorum Dei, and acknowledges himself the vicar of
Christ, so far is he from making himself Christ and God in the temple of
God, and he prays to God and Christ, and kneeleth at his altars humbly. But
he must be measured, not by his hypocritical actions, nor by his words in his
hypocrisy, but by the nature and kind of his government. Fox says, that he
exalts himself above all that is called God, or is augustum in earth, when
he lifts himself above Emperors and kings, for they are not gods, but are
called gods, and they are Augusti, they are (...) in earth, they of all men
should have honor and worship given to them. But the Emperors and kings he
has so debased, that he has made them think it some honor for them to kiss
his foot. The Pope has caused the Emperor to hold his stirope: he has put
his feet in the Emperors neck, he has fed a Prince like a dog under his
table, and he has turned the imperial crown from the head with his foot:
he has made the Emperor attend at his gate bare footed. In this behalf they
have done that also which pertains only to God, for they will give and take
away kingdoms at their pleasure. Thus in one sense they have exalted
themselves above all that is called God, or that is worshipped, and showed
themselves as God. And they have showed themselves as God many other ways, in
respect of the conscience, either in holding it gilty, or in acquiting it, for
that pertains only to God. But they would bind it by their laws, and
interpretation of scriptures, and thundering of excommunications against the
innocent, and loose it by forgiving sins, and granting pardons and
dispensations in all kind of things. Thus have they showed themselves as God in
the Temple of God in respect of men's consciences. And in respect of heaven, and
hell, and purgatory, he has pretended to rule as God in all these places: for he
will make saints in heaven, whom he will, and hold in purgatory, or let out
whom he list: and for this last, it is no marvel, for it is of his own
making. Last of all in his laws, and by his flatterers he has been called
God in plain terms, and he has suffered it. There it is written, Dominus
Deus noster Papa: our Lord God the Pope: and again, Tues omnia, and super
omnia, Thou art all, and above all. How can any creature show him self as
God in Gods temple more presumptuously then by these means, or more directly?
for otherwise in flat terms to proclaim himself as God to be honored with
divine honor, it is too gross, and it is not such a crafty mystery, as
should deceive a mean man, much less bring into danger Gods elect. To these
things agree the words of Daniel, which many take as spoken of purpose of
Antichrist, or at least they are applied to him by the Fathers. The king shall
do what him list, he shall exalt himself, and magnify himself against all that
is called God, and shall speak marvelous things against the God of gods, and
shall prosper till the wrath be accomplished: for the determination is made,
neither shall he regard the God of his Fathers, nor care for any God, for he
shall magnify himself above all. Peter and Jude speak of their pride in
lifting themselves above Magistrates, saying, that they should despise
government, and speak evil of them that are in authority.

These are the marks of this beast: other might be added out of Daniel, Paul,
and Peter, as that they shall worship God with gold and silver, for all their
religion stood in outward worldly ostentation: that they should forbid marriage
and meats, as they make great holiness in single life, and account marriage
unclean, and the eating of flesh at certain times, they utterly condemn as
unholy. That likewise they should be rich and mighty, and should make
merchandise of all things, yea of men's souls: for they as in way of religion
sold wood, stones, incense, oil, and all things, if they had dedicated them
once to some holy use, they were costly merchandise, although otherwise the
vilest things that might be. All these marks agree most fitly to the Romish
Antichrist, and to none other. The Pope therefore is the beast, which being
aided by the kings of ye earth, fights against Jesus Christ.

As for the marks which the Papists make of Antichrist, they touch him not,
they come not near him. They imagine he should be of the tribe of Dan, because
that tribe is not reckoned among the tribes, of which many are marked to be
saved. A weak foundation: the tribe is there omitted, therefore Antichrist shall
come of that tribe. Thus they ground their religion of that which the Scripture
has not said. And as for Enoch and Elias to come and preach against him in
their own persons, which they say they have not done against the Pope, and
therefore he is not that beast, that is a thing imagined as the other: for no
Scripture has said, that they two should come, but they ground it on this
that Christ says: Elias should come, and restore all things, which was
fulfilled at his first coming, and that two witnesses are promised to be sent
against Antichrist, which are understood by many to be John Husse, and Hierom
of Prage, both burned at the Council of Constance, or as others expound it of a
sufficient number, to convince the errors of Antichrist: for the scripture
makes 2. witnesses a sufficient trial. And this age has sent out many
witnesses against him. That also which they say is not yet fulfilled, and yet
must be before the coming of Antichrist, is false: which is, that the gospel
must first be publicly preached, and received in all kingdoms of the world:
but it is not any where said, that this should be before the coming of
Antichrist. Christ says, that the Gospel should be preached through the
world, before the end should come. And it is one thing for the Gospel to be
preached, and another thing to be received. It has been preached, that is, by
some means made known to all nations, but it has not been publicly received
of al nations by common consent. Another thing that comes near this, is that
which S. Paul says, that there must be an apostasy first. A falling away from
the faith, and not from the Empire of Rome is meant by it. For Paul says,
using that word to Timothy, (...), some shall fall from the faith, and the word
is not used otherwise in scripture. And the Apostle seems so to expound it
afterward himself, when he says, because men received not the love of the
truth, that they might be saved: for if they received not the love of the
truth, it seemed they had the truth, but loved it not, and therefore were thus
punished. Wherefore there must be a falling away from the faith, and from the
love of the truth, and strong delusion to believe lies, where Antichrist is.
These things came to pass in popery. So much therefore as is said concerning
the gospel to be received or forsaken, before or in the kingdom of Antichrist,
is fulfilled in the^.

Yet they say the Pope is free from one especial and notable mark of the
beast. What is that? John says, he that denies that Jesus is Christ, the same
is Antichrist. And again, every spirit which confesses not that Jesus is come
in the flesh, is not of God, but this is the spirit of Antichrist. And Peter
agreeably says, they shall deny the Lord that bought them. And Jude in like
manner: they deny God the only Lord, and our Lord Jesus Christ. And somewhat like
it by way of affirmation, is that of Daniel, he shall honor the God whom his
fathers knew not. This mark (they say) of denying Christ, the Popes have not.
If they have not this mark also, the^ they have none of the rest. Large books
are written of this, to show how they deny Christ. They deny him to be the king
over his Church, for the Pope makes himself the king. But says Bellarmine,
he acknowledges himself Christ's deputy. But it is certain, that Christ
never commanded any such deputy, nor vicar: and if he will be Christ's deputy
against the pleasure and will of Christ, or if he were deputed, yet rule
otherwise then Christ would have him, and only according to his own affection
and humor, does he not thrust Christ out of his kingdom? As though one might
not call himself a deputy, and yet draw all to himself, so does the Pope,
howbeit, Christ never ordained such a deputy. Therefore while he will be as
Christ, and for Christ, he is made against him, and is Antichrist. Furthermore,
he does not suffer Christ to be the only and sufficient Prophet to his
Church, which has revealed fully the will of the father to it: for partly he
shuts up his Testament, and will not have the people read it, and partly
he ordayneth other laws, as necessary to salvation, as the laws of Christ
by his decrees, and partly he interprets the words of Christ, not according
to Christ's meaning, but according to his own fancy, to establish his own
earthly kingdom. Last of all, he denies to Christ also his priesthood: for
neither does he admit the sacrifice of Christ by himself, in his own person
upon the Cross, as sufficient for salvation, but he ordains another
sacrifice of the Mass, and satisfactorie works of penance, and men's merits to
redeem their own sins. Neither does he permit Christ to be the only
intercessor and maker of request to the father for his people, but he joins
with him, or substituteth under him the Virgin Marie, and a great number of
saints of his own creation. Thus he denies Jesus to be Christ, and shows
himself to be an enemy unto him, and the very Antichrist. Wherefore all the
notes and marks of the beast fall upon him. This is the beast that John
speaks of, which does associate to himself the kings of the earth, and
their armies, and makes war against Christ and his army. This is now our
enemy, he and his kings fight against us. It is good for us to think of him
as he is, and as he is called in Scripture. Let us not think of him, as of an
holy Father, Christ's Vicar, a sacred person, the pillar of Christ's religion,
the highest Bishop, a god in earth, as the Papists and his own servants and
flatterers (so many as have not received the love of the truth, such, whose
names are not written in the book of life) do esteem him. But let us think
of him as of the great whore, the mother of all fornication in the earth, for
his idolatry: as of Babylon for his persecuting Empire: as of an Apostata for
his falling from the true faith: as of Antichrist and the enemy of Christ, for
denying the sufficiency of Christ's Sacrifice and intercession, for expelling
Christ out of his throne of government, and stepping into it himself: for
displacing Christ's word and corrupting it, and putting his own word in the
room thereof. Let us account him as the beast, that has not one shape, but
the properties of many beasts, and therefore a monstrous beast. Proud like
the Lion, cruel like the Bear, filthy like the Swine, full of poison through
his blasphemies like the Dragon, and yet in show of horns like the Lamb.
This is the leader and captain of all our enemies, if we yield to them, we
yield to the beast, and the beast will make us beasts like himself. We must
bear the beasts mark. God defend us from him, and repress his fury, and
confound his enterprises, and overthrow his kingdom. Thus much of the beast.

The beast fights not alone against Christ and his people: for the^ he were
not much to be feared: but he has first kings, and then his own and their
armies to assist him. First will I speak of ye kings, and the^ of their armies.
Kings were prophesied to be subject to him. The Angel says to John. The ten
horns which thou saw, are tenkings, which yet have not received a kingdom,
but shall receive power as kings at one hour with the beast. These have one
mind, and shall give their power and authority to the beast. These shall fight
with the Lamb, and the Lamb shall overcome the^. For he is Lord of Lords, and
king of kings: and they that are on his side, called, and chosen, and faithful.
Again he says: The ten horns which thou saw upon the beast, are they that
shall hate the whore, and shall make her desolate and naked, and shall eat her
flesh, and burn her with fire. For God has put in their hearts to fulfill his
will, and to do with one consent, for to give their kingdom unto the beast,
until the words of God be fufilled. Thus kings shall subject themselves to the
beast, shall give their authority to him, shall fight for him so long as God
has appointed. The love of these kings to Rome, and their obedience is
expressed, which they showed to it in time of the prosperity thereof in this
manner: With her have committed fornication the kings of the earth. And in the
time of the decay of it in this sort. The kings of the earth shall bewail her,
and lament for her, which have committed fornication, and lived in pleasure
with her, when they shall see the smoke of her burning. What other state has
there bin, or is in the world, unto which kings have willingly subjected
themselves, and yet remain kings, but this? If any be under the great Turk,
the name of kings, and authority cease by and by: He only will be king. But
in Popery, the kings submit themselves, and become servants, and tributarie,
and yet remain kings, and take pleasure in this subjection, and strive against
al others that will not be slaves and bondmen as well as themselves. These kings
had the same occasion and time of beginning their kingdoms that ye beast had.
For the dissipation of ye West Empire, gave ye first occasion at one time to
both. For after ye great fight between the Hunni under Attila, on ye one side
being 500000 men, and all the power that ye other nations, Romans, Goths,
Frenchmen, Britons, and Germans could make on ye other side, after this battle
fought in campis Catalaunicis in France, ye countries were governed not by one
Emperor over all, but by their own several governors. Then the French began in
France, the Hunni in Hungary, the Saxons in England, the Goths in Spain, and
so in every country, either strangers, or the old inhabitants took the
government to themselves. To find that they were just ten, and neither more
nor less, it is hard: but ten may be set for a perfect and full number, rising
of all the Unities. The occasion of the rising of the Popedom, and of these
kingdoms, was one and the same, and at once began: albeit the Popedom showed
not it self in his great pride and high name of Oecumenicall Bishop, till
Phocas the Emperor of Constantinople, in the year six hundredth and six. Then
Rome was great with child of this beast, yea, and brought him forth, and gave
him the name. But he did grow up afterward in great haste, till he became the
mightiest in the West parts of the world. But his growing was by the
suppressing of the Empire, and by sucking of strength from the Emperor, and
from these kings. The first milk that he did suck, was that title gotten of
Phocas, that he might be called and taken to be the Oecumenicall and general
high Bishop of all the world. Before that time, the other Patriarchs were
equal with him: but by this title, he was set over them and all other
Bishops. Then he obtained more milk of the Emperor, although he had much a
do to get it, namely, that the Emperor should not confirm him: but his
election should be ratified by the Romans, and not by the Emperor. When he
had this, then he was able to go alone. After this, he obtains yet more
plentiful nourishment, and begins to swallowe down strong meat. He
obtains by much striving, the inuestiture and placing of all Bishops in
Italy, and the Emperors dominions, and at length in all the West besides. By
this, the beast was grown so strong, that he would now take upon him to feed
or famish his father and feeder. For he would make the Emperor, or else he
should be no Emperor: he would excommunicate him, and depose him at his
pleasure. And having wrastled and overcome him, it was an easy matter for him
to overcome the other kings. Nay the Emperors and kings did willingly give the
beast those things, which made him strong, and themselves weak. For they
swear obedience to him, and that they would not diminish his dignity, nor
commodities, or dominions. Edelwulphus king of the West Saxons here in England,
was the first that made his land tributarie to the Pope, in the year eight
hundred forty and six. And as this land received the yoke first, so first it
cast it off under king Henry the eight. By occasion that the Emperors in the
East destroyed images, and for want of might could not hold up the state of
Rome against the Longobards in Italy, the Pope excommunicated the Emperors of
the East one after another, and called Carolus magnus the king of France into
Italy for his aid, and there made the people proclaim him Emperor, and he
himself anointed him, in the year 801. Thus Charles being an Emperor of the
Popes own making, conferred upon the Pope a great part of Italy, and to
requite him, made him rich. After that part of England, other kingdoms by
sundry occasions came under the Pope. The Sclauonians would use their own
tongue in their public service of God, but they were content to do it by the
Popes permission, and so declared themselves subject to him, an. 861. When
Miesko king of Poland embraced the faith of Christ, and appointed bishops in
his kingdom, Ioannes 13. sends one Giles the Tusculan bishop and Cardinal,
to consecrate his bishops after the manner of Rome, and so makes Poland subject
to himself, as soon as it was christened, in the year 965. To Benedictus the
8. Stephanus king of Hungary sends ambassadors for his crown, and
confirmation of the kingdom of Hungary, and the Churches builded by him. He
then brought his kingdom to the obedience of the Pope: and Stephen himself at
every time the Pope was mentioned, bowing his head, did bend his knee, that
by his example he might persuade also his people to the observance of the Pope.
Robert duke of Apulia and Calabria in Italy, binds himself by oath and his
hand writing to Pope Nicholas the 2. to send him aid whenever he should
need, because the Pope absolved him, for deposing his brothers son, the
right heir from the dukedom. A little before Stephen the 9. brought the bishop
of Millaine, which before that time had always been free, to the obedience of
the Sea of Rome. These increases came to the popedom about the year 1057 A
little after this, Hildebrand called Gregory the 7. (that is reported to have
poisoned six Popes one after another, to make a way for himself to the
popedom, and was a most infamous coniurer and Magitian) exco^municateth and
spoileth of his empire Henry 4. and sets up first Rodulphus his servant, and
afterward Henry 5. his own son against him. He sent a crown to Rodulph,
with this posie, Petra dedit Petro, Petrus diadema Rodolpho. But Rodulph having
lost his right hand, and dying, cursed them that persuaded him to this. The
crime laid to the Emperor, was simonie, as the Pope called the bestowing of
Byshoprickes and other ecclesiastical livings by the Emperor. These things
fell out about the year one thousand threescore and ten.

Henry the fifth strove so long with Gelasius the second, and Calixtus the
second, for the bestowing of Byshoprickes, till at length he was constrained
by the thunderbolt of excommunication, and by fear of deprivation through
treasons and conspiracies, by his letters to grant it to the Pope for ever:
and the letters of the grant in token of the Emperor being overcome, were
hanged up in the Laterane Church at Rome, for a monument of the victory.
Through this victory, Calixtus the second, (as seems) waxed bold: for thus
he decreed. A Romana Ecclesia non licere dissentire, quia vt filius venit
facere voluntate^ Patris, ita oportet Christianos facere volu^tatem Matris
Romanae Ecclesiae. It should not be lawful to dissent from the Church of Rome,
because as the son came to do the will of the father: so must all Christians
do the will of their mother the Church of Rome. Sicilie was a long time
tributarie to the Pope, and none almost should hold it but at his pleasure. In
the year 1130. Innocentius the second makes war against Rogerius duke of
Sicily for it, but it was like to have cost the pope well, for he himself was
taken in the war: yet the pope got by the help of Lotharius, the dukedom of
Calabria from him, and gave it for a reward to Rainold captain of Lotharius
army, that helped him again to his popedom. Norweigh in the time of Eugenius
received the faith of Christ, and then became subject to the pope in the year
1148. Liuonia had no sooner received the Christian faith about the year 1158:
but pope Alexander seizes upon it, and by asking a bishop of him, they are
brought in bondage to him. It were long to tell how Frederike the first was
handled of pope Adrian the fourth, and Alexander the third. The quarrel at
first of Adrian against him, was because he required homage of his bishops, and
excluded his legate out of Germany, if he came when he was not sent for.
Adrian for these things cursed him, and suborned one to feign himself a
iester, and finding opportunity to kill him: but the emperor escaped, by
leaping out at a window. Then he procured one to poison him by an infected
ring, and that he escaped also. Alexander the third pursued him, for that he
favored Victor chosen against him: therefore he cursed him, made his chief
captain forsake him in fight traitorously, and so was the emperor made to
flee secretly away. And at length, when at Venice the emperors son fighting
rashly against his fathers commandment, before his coming, was taken of the
pope, by the help of the Venetians: he, to redeem his son, was constreined
to come to Venice to submit himself to the pope. At the stairs in S. Marks
church in Venice, the emperor lying on the ground, the pope puts his foot
on his neck, vttring this verse of the psalm, Upon the aspe and cockatrice
shall thou walk, thou shall tread upon the lion and dragon. This was the
insolency of that beast. Peter king of Arragon in Spain, makes his kingdom
and all that belonged to him, tributary to the pope, in the year 1202, vt sic
salutem animae mereretur, (says Vincentius) that he might thus merit the
salvation of his soul. King John of England, having detained six years the
revenues of the church, at length is compelled to flee to the mercy of the pope
Innocentius the third, and makes England and Ireland tributary to the church
of Rome, and grants the Peter pence, and promises to pay yearly an hundred
marks of gold for both Islands. Innocentius the fourth sent certain monks,
legates to the Tartarian emperor, with his letters, exhorting them to the faith
of Christ, and his obedience. He thought that upon the sight of his holiness
letters the Tartarian empire would yield it self unto him. Maudauus king of
Lituania, being turned to Christian religion, falls into the popes net in the
year 1255. The emperors had too much experience, and great fear of the evil
that this beast might do unto the^. Henry the first would not receive his
crown of the pope, nor go into Italy for it. He said it was sufficient for
him, that he was left emperor by his ancestors, and so saluted by his nobles.
When Frederike the first was going to Rome with his army, the Romans sent
messengers to him, that they would not receive him, except he came in manner of
triumph. Thus they mocked the emperor, meaning, if he came so, to waste him by
his expenses. But he perceiving it, answered, that he came to get money out of
Italy, and not to leave his own there. Rodolph ye emperor put off the
fetching of his crown from Rome, saying that the emperors entering into Italy
was pleasant and stately, but his going out was always miserable and doleful.
Boniface the eight that ordained the first Iubile, and kept it an. 1330, had
great contention with Philip king of France. In the presumption of his heart,
and to declare that he is this beast and Antichrist exalting himself, he writ
unto the king as follows. Se esse dominu^ omnium tam temporalium quam
spiritualium per orbem terrarum, etc. That he is lord of all, as well temporal
as spiritual things through out the world, and that consequently the kingdom
of France ought to be received of him, which because he had not done, he had
deserved to be deprived: but the king despised his legates, and burnt his
letters in an open fire, and stopped the ways of his kingdom, that none might
pass to Rome. But the pope prevailed against him: for he excommunicated him,
gave his kingdom to Albert the emperor, caused him to be taken by his own
household servants, and laid all his treasures open to the spoil. John the two
and twentieth excommunicated Ludowike the emperor, because he took upon him
the name of the emperor without his consent. Benedictus the twelft confirmed
that excommunication against the emperor, and used the empire as his own,
placing officers in it himself. Clemens the sixth absolved those that did
favor Jews, but upon these conditions, that they should swear fidelity to
the pope, and acknowledge none to be emperor, but such as was confirmed by
him. Sigismund the emperor, when three popes did strive together, showed
himself so much a servant to that seat, that he traveled into France, and
sailed into England, and passed into Italy, and came to the council of
Constance, and sung the Gospel, like a deacon, in great humility before the
pope: the Gospel which he did sing, was Exijt edictum a Caesare Augusto. All
this he did, traveling from one king to another, to make these beasts agreed:
so glad he was to please. And the greatest care of Frederike the third was,
that neutrality being removed out of Germany, he might submit himself and
his people to the bishop of Rome, in the year 1440. In this age wherein we
live, Cosmus Medices was made by the pope great duke of Ferraria, that he might
trouble the world, in the year 1570.

Thus kings have willingly served him in times past, and some have been brought
unto it whether they would or no, and yet at length all content to do it. In
this age he has yet some that favor him, and labor to hold him up, and
fight for him with all their power: the king of Spain, and those that depend
upon him, the duke of Sauoy, the duke of Parma, and the states of Italy: and
some favorers he has in France. The beast is now much weaker then he was, and
it is marvel that there are any found in this land, or else where, that make so
great account of his favor.

I have showed unto you, how this beast has had kings his assistants, and as
it were, his servants: which never came to pass in any government in the
world, that kings not subdued by arms, but scarsely threatened by words, so
many, and so willingly, should submit themselves to one, and be content to
hold their crowns of him, and in all things to be at his commandment. They
received his decrees, they forsook their kingdoms, they waged war against
one another, they resigned a great part of their subjects, they suffered their
land to be tributarie, they would attempt to win the Holy land, as they
called it, with hazard of their lives, and intolerable pains, and exceeding
great expenses, and all at his commandment. When was there any power in the
world that could work this, and bring them thus to obedience? The emperors of
Rome had kings under them, which remained kings: but they were overcome by
battle, few voluntarily did yield themselves. They fought often for Spain, for
Afrike, for Greece, for Egypt, for France, for Britain, and for every part of
Italy it self, before they could obtain it: but the pope had all the West
part subject to him, and scarce ever fought for any: by the sword he subdued
almost none of them unto him: nay he never fought for any, except it were for
some small dukedom or city of Italy, which he counted Peter's patrimony. Is
not this plainly that which the Angel says to John: These have one mind, and
shall give their power to the beast? And again, God has put in their hearts,
to fulfill his will, and to do with one consent, for to give their kingdom to
the beast, until the words of God be fulfilled. They shall give it, they shall
not be conquered and constreined by his power unto it. Thus much of the kings
that assist the beast.

After the kings assisting the beast, there are placed also armies under him.
Not one army, but many armies are levied for his defense. They boast much of
multitude and number. And the Holy ghost gives unto them the greatest number,
as a sure mark of the beast. This cause stands not by number, but by weight
of voices. If number should carry the matter of religion, the Turks should have
the truth of it on their side. There is more dirt the^ gold, more stones then
pearls, more chafe then good corn, and so more that hold on superstition
then on truth. Our Savior says: Many are called, but few are chosen: and
narrow is the way that leads to life, and few there be that find it: but
broad is the way that leads to destruction, and many there be that follow it.
Let the^ therefore boast of the greater number, yea and number not naked, but
armed, furnished and instructed to fight. We grant it them. It was theirs much
more then it is, and yet is theirs more then (I hope) it will be hereafter.
The holy ghost has given them the multitude for a time. A great number was
signified to adhaere to the beast, when it is said, He caused the earth and
them that dwell therein, to worship the first beast. And again, He deceived
them that dwell on the earth. And yet more, He caused that as many as would
not worship the image of the beast, should be killed. And further, He made all,
both small and great, rich and poor, free and bond, to receive a mark in
their right hand, or in their forehead, and that no man might buy nor sell, but
he that had the mark, or the name of the beast, or the number of his name.
Thus in the thirteenth chapter, the greater number is showed to appertain unto
the beast. In the seventeenth chapter it is called the great whore, the great
city: and it is said moreover, The waters which thou saw where the whore
sits, are people and multitudes, and nations and tongues. And to omit many
other places, here at last, it is said, I saw the beast and the kings of the
earth, and their armies gathered together to fight. Should we then doubt,
whether their side be the side of Antichrist, because their favorers are many?
Nay, thereby we are made the more certain of it.

Another note they have, by which they think to further their part, which is
unity. It is a good token of Christ's disciples, if they love one another: but
to consent, and to conspire together, is not proper to the good, but agrees to
the wicked also. The heathen agreed all in their general superstition, and no
falling out greatly among them for it. The Turks have but two parts or sects,
and each sect agrees and holds strait together. All the Israelites agreed to
make the Golden calfe: the ten tribes consented to the setting up of the
calves in Dan and Bethel. And what marvel then, if all the West parts of the
world have consented together to worship and maintain the Romish beast? John
says, the ten kings have one mind, and shall give their power and
authority to the beast. And here it is said: Their armies were gathered
together to fight. They were not dispersed, and scattered, but gathered
together in one purpose, and in one meaning, to fight against Christ and his
army.

The common sort of Papists seem to care for no point else in religion, but
only this. The Spanish, and Italian, and French, and the ignorant English
papists seek scarce any further into the cause, but only stand upon that head
and branch, that the Holy ghost has set down, that is to fight against Christ
and his army. As for all other points of religion, it is their greatest
religion not to search into religion. Thus the Holy ghost in two words sets
down much of that whereupon they stand, and which in our days we see
fulfilled. These are the general notes of their armies gathered out of these
words.

In that there are armies named, we may well gather that they are of more kinds
then one. They themselves divide their whole multitude into the Spirituality
and Laity. So by their own division they have two kinds of armies, one of
great learned men, lawyers, divines, and other professors of learning: and
another of captains and soldiers, and armed men, and generally the rest of
the people. Such an army as the first is, especially of priests, Lib. 4.
epist. 38.
Gregorius Magnus assigns unto Antichrist. Rex superbiae prope est, and quod
dici quoque nefas est, sacerdotum ei praeparatur exercitus. The king of pride
is near at hand, and that which is an heinous thing to speak, an army of
priests is prepared for him. And this he spoke agreeable to this revelation.
For John says, I saw three unclean spirits like frogs come out of the
mouth of the dragon, and out of the mouth of the beast, and out of the mouth of
the false prophet. For they are spirits of devils, working miracles, to go
unto the kings of the earth, and of the whole world, to gather them to the
battle of that great day of God almighty. Yea, and their endeavor was not in
vain, for they did gather them together.

In this chapter it is said: The beast was taken, and with him the false
Prophet that wrought miracles before him, whereby he deceived them that
received the beasts mark. These spirits, this false prophet, are set down to
note their first and most dangerous kind of army. They call themselves the
spirituality, and this scripture calls them spirits: How could it come
nearer? The other name of false prophets, is taken from the state of the Old
Testament: for as then false prophets always opposed themselves against the
true prophets, so now their priests and monks, and the rest of their religious
rabble, against the true preachers of the Gospel. But why does he term them
the false prophet, and not false prophets, when it is evident that they are
many? Is it for their consent in this matter of gainesaying? or is it not
rather for that in every age, and for each profession of law and divinity,
they have one especially, upon whose wit and learning they all depend: for
their law, Gratian: for their divinity, Lumbard: after him in one age,
Aquinas, and against Luther, Eckius: in this time, Bellarmine: for so in each
age they seem to suck their learning, and all their arguments, and quiddities
from the breast, of some one above all the rest. But for what cause soever it
is termed in the singular number, false prophets pertain to the state
ecclesiastical, and they are the greatest doers in these wars.

Now consider all the states in the world besides, and see where there is
authority, yea, or almost any dealing for war matters, put in the hands of
them to whom the matters of religion directly are committed. Among all those
that profess the Gospel in all kingdoms of Christendom, there is scarce any
one in a kingdom admitted to council about those things, much less do they
contriue wars, and stir them up, or almost intermeddle in them. Amongst the
Turks they have not to deal in it: their religious persons are not the
procurers of their wars, by running from one prince to another. They shake a
spear, and use some words in their own temple, to stir up the people to
fight against Christians: but otherwise they contriue not the wars. In the
Tartarian government, the affairs of the wars are not in such men's hands. So
that in this point the Papists only are fully answerable to this prophecy,
and the Turks come next unto them, but yet they are but babes to them in this
exercise. Let the name of the false prophet be common to Mahomet and his
priests, with the Popish clergy, but the three unclean spirits like
frogs, that came out of the mouth of the beast, can be no other but the
Popish spirituality: for the father, and the number, and the quality, and the
comparison, and the work, and effect agrees to none other.

The beast is said to be their father: for the pope did beget and nourish all
that spirituality as it stands, and is Popish: for by his commandment they
had their beginning, and still have their being, and therefore it is said, that
these spirits come out of his mouth. There was no order among them, of
cardinals, bishops, priests, of monks, and friars, but they were all in
number and form by his appointment and confirmation. They used no ceremony
but it was ordained by him. Their privileges and exemptions from the secular
power were all granted by him. Their living and maintenance was all held of
him: and to him in token thereof the paid the first fruits of their liuinges.
He invested the bishops, and by his authority the bishop made all the rest:
so they came out of the mouth of the beast.

It were long; in particular, to prove all these things. The quality of
uncleanness and filthiness is praedominant in them: for they are unclean in
their souls, as not being washed in the blood of Christ, nor with the pure
water of Gods word. And they are unclean in their bodies; for the most part of
their monks and friars took a pride in their slouenlinesse. And they are
unclean in their actions, as being defiled with adulteries and Sodomiticall
sin, because they condemned marriage. They are aptly also reduced to the
number of three: for their bishops and priests, and such as have the actions
of all their religious matters, make one order: and their friars and monks,
and scholasticall students, which are sequestered from action, and placed as it
were in contemplation, make another order: and their canonists and lawyers,
with their other officers, make their third order.

All these together make the beasts spiritual army. And these are fitly
compared unto frogs: for as frogs lie in the mudde, so these tumble in
worldly things and humane speculations, and can not lift up their minds to
that which is heavenly. And as frogs have but one tune, so they sing only
obedience to the pope: and as frogs cry most fiercely about the time of
rain and tempest, so these when they come crying over the sea unto us, always
give a most sure token that there is a tempest coming. These frogs delight not
by any means with calmness and quietness, their delight is to have the
world and all kingdoms troubled. Therefore their work is this, to run from
one prince to another, from one noble man to another, from this gentleman to
that gentleman, to persuade them to war. Thus is their spiritual army
described.

To set forth how they fight with scriptures and fathers wrested from their
true meaning, with decrees of councels of their own making, with promises of
great success and victory, with lies and slanders against princes and
preachers, and all professors of the Gospel, with conspiracies and treasons,
and murders, and poisoning of great persons, with contributions of money, and
all that they can make to the maintenance of these wars, with indulgences and
pardons from all sins past and to come, with incantations, coniurations and
enchantments, for they are the spirits of devils: with promise of heaven it
self to all that take sword in hand for them, it were infinite. Our experience
in this age teaches us enough, and too much (if it so pleased God) that we
cannot be ignorant of their most deuillish and desperate manner of fighting.
Thus much of their spiritual army, and of their fight.

They have also other armies of warlike soldiers and captains. The pope never
yet attempted any matter so wicked against any prince, or for his own estate,
but he had kings and dukes, and noble men that would always be ready at his
commandment to fight in his quarrel: and if other things failed, yet Peter's
patrimony in Italy is so great, and the sums that have and do come in by
first fruits, and other infinite taxes, both of his clergy and laity, that it
was easy for him to raise an army at any time in this later age. One while
Charles the French emperor fought for him, another while Henry the third
emperor of Germany. Sometime he has them of Italy at his commandment, as
in times past the dukes of Hetruria, of Florence, and almost any other. The
king of Sicilie was ever as his servant. France has fought for him against the
emperor, and against England, and against the Italians, and against one pope
for another Pope. England has not wanted in this kind of service for him. Our
kings he has set against France, and France against us, and our nobles against
our own princes, both of old time, and of late. And this thing still he does
attempt. God confound his enterprises in this behalf, as he has done
hitherto in her Majesty's reign. Now he has but few in comparison, that will
take arms at his devotion. The Spaniard, not in any regard of his Religion,
but in hope of a Monarchy under his title, has stepped forth as his champion
in this age, to fight his wars for him. By him the armies are renewed and
supplied in the Low countries: by him the wars are holden up in France:
through his means, Geneua has bin besieged: and he has sent his invincible
navy to subdue us: but God be thanked, that has drowned it in the seas. We
may not think, that either the beast or his champion will so give over. For it
is against the nature of the enemies of Gods people to desist, although they
see Gods hand never so manifestly against them. Not ten plagues will keep
Pharao from pursuing the Israelits. Not the Angel destroying an hundred and
fourscore thousand in one night, will fear the Babylonians, but they will
come against Jerusalem. It is fatal to the beast to bid battle so long, till
he procure his own ruin, and the fall of the^ that would hold him up. They
will fight again: The frogs, these unclean spirits, that come over to us, are
a most sure token that we must look for a tempest. It will come most
certainly: but when it will fall we are not certain. God turn it upon their
own heads when so ever it comes, as he did that which is past.

I have spoken longer then I thought I should, of the first part touching the
beast and his kings, and their armies. We can not speak too much against the^,
that never think they do enough against us. It is good for us to have our
minds armed against them, and to be persuaded, that they are not only enemies
to us, but unto God, and Jesus Christ, and his gospel, and the salvation of his
people. God grant to our Queens majesty, and all our nobility, and the
whole people, his spirit, and grace, against the poison of their doctrine, and
his mighty defense against all their manifest terrors and secret conspiracies.
This the God of all might and comfort, grant unto us through Jesus Christ our
Lord and Savior: To whom with the Father, and the holy ghost, three persons
and one God, be all honor, and glory, world without end Amen.

The second Sermon upon Apoc. cap. 19. verse 19.
I Divided this verse into two parts. The one is of those that do oppugn: the
other of those that do defend. I have spoken already of them that give the
onset. They were the beast, the kings of the earth, and their armies. I showed
that the beast is the Pope of Rome: the kings of the earth are they that yield
obedience to him: their armies are first the spiritual and learned sort, that
strive to maintain the popedom by wit and learning: and secondly, the
warriers and other people, that by sword and force do fight for him. Now it
remains, to speak of the parties ye are oppugned, and do defend themselves.
They fight against him that sits on the horse, and against his army. For
army, some translations read soldiers: But it does not so well answer to
the Greek. The word signifies an army pressed forth, and set in order to
battle. He that rides on the horse, is understood to be Christ. His army
are they that believe his gospel and obey it. These are assalted and oppugned
by the beast and his armies. Two things must be observed in this onset made
against Christ and his people by the enemies. First, that Christ and his people
have the right and lawful possession of the Church and the truth, of heaven,
of earth, and of all things, and that they would thrust both Christ and his,
out of this possession. Christ says of himself: All power is given unto me
in heaven and in earth, and his people are made the heirs of the world: for to
the^ it is said, all things are yours: and again: He that over comes shall
inherit all. The beast then, and his armies, labor to thrust Christ and his
army out of all: Which they could not do, if Christ and his people had not
the right and possession of all. And Christ has suffered them to besiege him,
and his people, and to thrust them into very great straites for a season. For
they have been constrained to fly into the wilderness and there to ly hid. But
now Christ will up on the white horse and raise the siege, and be shut up so
strait no longer. That is, the first thing that follows of this, that the
beast is he that makes the assault.

The second thing that follows thereof is this: that the enemies ever seek
their own destruction, or else it would not come upon them. It should seem
reason, that Christ and his people should set upon the beast and his armies.
For is it meet that they, holding that which belongs unto Christ from him,
should not be suffered to live and to enjoy it? But Christ deals not so: he
suffers the^ quietly to withdraw themselves from him, and lets their fury
increase, till they go about to root him and his people from among them. He
gives them scope to show their malice. Now when Gods people seem
strangeliest assaulted, and are in danger of greatest bondage, then is their
deliverance near at hand. A proverb was made of ye dealing of Pharao with the
Israelities, Quando duplicantur lateres, tum venit Moses: When the brickes are
dubled, the^ Moses comes. When the enemies armies are greatest and best
furnished, then are they most near their overthrow. It is a thing worthy to
be marked, how Antichrist still gives the onset, and all his attempts for the
most part, have turned to his loss. This much of the beast and his assaulting,
and of Christ and his being assaulted, and defending themselves.

It follows to show what it means, that Christ is described here by riding
upon a horse. The horse that he sits upon, is said to be a white horse. And
that it is Christ yt rides upon him, there can be no doubt. For the
discriptio^ that goes before can agree to none other. Thus John says of him:
I saw heaven open, and behold, a white horse, and he that sat upon him was
called faithful and true: and he judges and fights righteously, and his eyes
were as a flame of fire, and on his head were many crowns, and he had a name
written that no man knew but himself, and he was clothed in a garment dipped in
blood, and his name is called the word of God, and out of his mouth went
asharpe sword, that with it he should smite the heathen. For he shall rule them
with a rod of iron: for he it is that treads the winepresse of the fiercenes
and wrath of almighty God. All these things agree to Christ alone. He is
faithful and true in his promises, he judges and fights righteously, in
punishing the wicked, and defending his people, while they continue in
obedience to him: his eyes are as fire, he sees and searches all things, yea
the hearts of men. He reigns over all, and has obtained many crowns by many
victories, and kings and princes subdued unto him: his garment was dipped in
blood to redeem us, and he has dipped it again, and does now daily in the
slaughter of his enemies: his name and essence is such as none knows but God,
that is, himself. And he is the word of God which was in the beginning: which
is, God by whom all things were made. Out of his mouth comes the sharp
sword of Gods just decree, which co^de^neth the enemies: and last of all he
executes gods vengeance upon the^, and as it were presses them in the
winepresse of his wrath. Christ therefore is understood by him that sits on
the horse.

But why is Christ said to sit upon a horse, and that a white horse? What
means this horse? It is well known to all men, that the horse is a warlike
beast, and as it were made for war. He is strong to carry, and bold to come
upon the face of the enemy: he is swift to make speed, and fit to be turned
this way and that way. So he was appointed to war. But for priestly actions,
and persons, he was not thought meet: Therefore the priests of Egypt might not
ride upon a horse. It was thought among them a thing profane. Neither might
some of the heathen Roman Flamines so much as touch a horse. And even now, it
is thought an unseemly thing for the Pope to be seen to ride upon a horse
within the city of Rome, except only upon one solemn day in the year, when
he rides to the Laterane, and all his prelates with him upon white horses. For
otherwise in Rome he is carried upon men's shoulders for the most part. Once a
year he would like Christ, ride upon a white horse: yet he never rides on
the horse whereon Christ rides, he can not abide yt white horse.

What then is this white horse? Some are of opinion, that the white horse is
set as a token of the last judgment, and that Christ is here described to come
upon a white horse to judge the world. In such a sense a white cloud is given
to him wherein he shall come. But it may seem rather, that this description
pertains not to the last judgment: First, because in judgment he is said
commonly to sit upon a throne, as in the next chapter, and in Daniel. And Paul
says: We shall all appear before the judgment seat of Christ. Now a throne,
or a seat, and a horse, have a contrary signification: For the one pertains
to quietness, the other to motion. This description sets forth Christ, as
moving and going forward, and not as resting and ending all. Secondly, the
space of time, that is between this viage wherein Christ thus rides, and the
judgment, will not suffer this to be understood of the last judgment. For as
some think, there shall be after this battle and overthrow of the Beast here
mentioned, a thousand years, or a great long space before the judgment, or the
end of al. Because after this, John reports that he did see Satan bound a
thousand years, and then let loose for a season. I speak not of the Chiliasts,
which imagined a thousand years of happy life here on earth, after the
resurrection. But Morelius thinks there may be a thousand years, or a long
time before the last judgment after this overthrow of Antichrist, for this
should not be his final overthrow, but that he should renew his strength
somewhat again, and fight yet against the saints of God, which John seems
to mean, when he says in the next Chapter, that Gog and Magog, whose number
was as the sand of the sea, were gathered and compassed the beloved city, and
fire came down from heaven to consume them. These and other things, which I
will now recite, make many think, that the white horse here spoken of,
pertains not to the last judgment.

What then may this white horse be? It is the Gospel, that being published and
made known to the world, carries Christ abroad: according to it he
overcomes the beast. This runs swiftly, this carries him from place to
place, upon this he rides as upon the wings of the wind. For he is described
here by those things which yet pertain to the publishing of his name among
men, to the furtherance of his knowledge, and vanquishing of his enemies, and
enlarging of his Church upon earth. To this it appertains that he is said to
be faithful and true in his promises to his elect; that he judges and
fights righteously for his people, in a righteous cause, and while they
embrace righteousness, that he has many crowns upon his head, kings yielding
their crowns to him, which before they submitted to the Pope: that he is
called the word of God, as yet revealing his secret counsel: that his garment
is dipped in blood, making daily great slaughters of his enemies, and that a
sharp sword comes out of his mouth, even his just decree against the wicked.
In the sixth Chapter, the white horse has received the like interpretation of
the most Interpreters. Thus John says: I beheld, and lo there was a white
horse, and he that sat on him had a bow, and a crown was given unto him, and
he went forth conquering, that he might overcome. There by the white horse
is meant the Gospel: with the bow he shot the arrows of his word, his
threatenings and grievous judgments, and wounded his enemies. He went in the
first age after his ascension, conquering and converting the world to himself,
and still had more and more to conquer, because he never wanted enemies. And
now toward the end he mounteth on the white horse, and again rides
gloriously in the sight of his people.

This horse (that is, his Gospel) is said to be white. First, because without
all veil or cover it shows forth the full purpose of Gods good will unto
men, for by it we see God as in a glass, and are made to know his favor
most clearly. Secondly, because it teaches and brings to us justification
and forgiveness of sins, which being laid hold on by faith, makes us white
in the sight of God. Thirdly, because it does commend unto us an innocent and a
pure life, all the stains and blacknes of sin being washed forth. And last
of all, because Christ by it shows himself victorious and triumphant: for a
white horse was used in triumph. Thus is Christ described, by riding upon a
white horse.

The beast and his kings, and their armies, fight against him while he is thus
sitting on the white horse. They cannot fight against him as he is in heaven,
they cannot reach to his person there. Neither shall they have any mind to
fight against him, as he sits or comes to judgment, but their fiercenes
being then banished, they shall tremble at his presence. But as he sits on
the white horse, as he is made known to the world in his Gospel, by which
he makes us white, forgiving our sins, and changing our lives, so the
beast fights against him. It will be too late to fight, when he comes in
judgment: Then the beast himself shall have no courage to fight. But now the
meanest soldier, the basest Seminarye that is under the beast, every busy
schismatike will encounter him and his whole army, while he sits on the
white horse. Therefore in these days they are so saucy with him and his
horse, and all his army.

Of this, that Christ only is captain and general on the one side, it
follows that they which will be saved, must cleave to him alone for their
salvation. Every thing that is against him, or seems to step into his
place, must be removed. The Popes supremacy, the sacrifice of the Mass,
adoration of images, invocation of saints, confidence in works, all these
must be rejected, and we must cleave only to Christ for salvation. His people
are known by having him to be their leader, and not by a Pope, or a city, or
any one earthly power ruling over them. Again it is to be concluded, that
seeing Christ comes no way to his Church, but sitting upon the white horse,
and that horse is his Gospel, therefore all men that will receive him and his
benefits, must submit themselves to be taught by his word, and seek to know
his Gospel: he that receaueth not his word, can not receive him.

Now would it seem meet to show (seeing the Gospel is this white horse that
Christ does sit on) whether he comes unto us upon it being read, or being
preached? and whether the learned and preaching ministers only be this white
horse, or also the unlearned and readers may be accounted such as bear forth
Christ unto his people? I think Christ comes by the one and by the other,
and each of them does bear him forth, albeit he does ride more gloriously
and swiftly in the sound of learned preaching. But of this point I shall speak
somewhat in the next part. Thus much shall suffice to have spoken of him which
sits on the horse, which is Jesus Christ our king and only captain.

The next and last general head to be spoken of, is the army of Christ. The
beast and his armies fight against Christ and his army. The Church of Christ
is called by many names, but here in the matter and time of war, it is called
an army. Likewise Solomon says of it, that it is terrible as an army with
banners. Paul using the same Metaphore, will have us put on the armor of
light, and says, that the weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty
through God to cast down holds, and wills us to put upon us the whole
armor of God, that we may be able to stand against the assaults of the devil:
and of himself he witnesses, that he had fought a good fight, and finished
his course. So that there is a war, and armor, and weapons, and fighting,
that belongs to gods people, and they altogether make an army.

The Church of England is an excellent and noble band of this army. We are
Christ's soldiers, we bear his colors, he rides before us, and among us upon
the white horse, he is our captain, and we are his army. Two kinds of enemies
we have that labor to persuade themselves, and the world, that we are not
Christ's army, the Papists, and the Barrowists.

Against the Papists we have maintained, that the sound teaching of the word of
God, and the lawful administration of his Sacraments, are the most sure
ensigns, whereby his army is known: and that we have these among us, and
they are effectual in us. When we allege that which Christ says: My sheep
hear my voice, and a strangers voice they will not hear: That which Esaie
has: To the law, and to the testimony, if they answer not according to
this, it is because there is no light in the^. When we allege these, and the
like places: we obtain, that the true and sound setting forth of the word of
God, is a most certain sign and note of the Church. That which Paul has: If
any man preach another gospel, let him be accursed. That which John says: He
that abides not in the doctrine of Christ, has not God: and if any man bring
not the doctrine of Christ, receive him not: declares, that a false doctrine
of the gospel and Christ, destroys the Church: especially, if ye error be in
the foundation, which is our justification by faith in Christ, and all those
things which do necessarily depend upon it. Therefore the Apostle says: Other
foundation can no man lay, then that which is laid, even Jesus Christ: And
again, Ye are built upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus
Christ himself being the chief corner stone. For this cause, Paul does so
carefully and often, stand upon the clearing of this article of our justification
by faith in Christ, in so many of his Epistles. The true doctrine of the
Gospel, is thus found to be the note, yea, and seed of the Church. That the
right and lawful administration of the Sacraments pertains to the
description, and declaration of the Church, we may easisily confirm.

Our Savior joins the Sacraments to the word: Go teach all nations,
baptizing them. The Apostle does the like, when he says: Christ has
cleansed his Church, by the washing of water through the word. And of the other
Sacrament, it is said: Do this in remembrance of me. And, drink ye all of
this. And the first Church gathered together after Christ's ascension, is thus
described: They that gladly received his word, were baptized, and the same day
there were added to the Church about three thousand souls, and they continued
in the Apostles doctrine and fellowship, and breaking of bread and prayers.
These things by the benefit of God we have, the truth of the Gospel, and the
whole new and old Testament in all points of substance of doctrine truly
taught, and set footh in this land: the sacraments also are rightly
administered. Wherefore we have the true notes of the Church.

These are the true notes of the Church, such notes as are also causes of it:
for the word and sacraments do beget and nourish faith, by which we are united
to Christ as to the head. Many other things agree to the Church, as good
works, mutual love, true repentance, shunning of idolatry, a right
invocation of the name of God, and the like. But these are parts and effects
and ornaments of the former, and concur together with them: for the word
taught must be understood to be fruitful, and so the sacraments to work in
men's souls, and both to be of power, or else they are no longer tokens to us
that we are of the Church of God. These things thus understood, are the true
and sufficient marks, whereby he that has spiritual eyes, may see the Church
of God. These, by the special working of Jesus Christ, we yet retain in such
sort, as they bring forth fruit in men's hearts and lives. God grant they may
continue with us, and be more effectual to work amendment in all. As for
those marks, whereby the Papists would have the Church to be discerned, they are
deceitful, they can not point it out. Antiquity has erred, Universality
has bin corrupted, Unity may be in falsehood, Succession in place may be
without succession in truth: their other marks are of like nature. The word
and Sacraments rightly set forth and received, and bringing forth fruit, can
never deceive us, but bring us directly to the true Church of Jesus Christ. But
what shall we say to them that make discipline a necessary mark of the Church:
because our Savior says: Baptize them, teaching the^ to observe whatsoever I
have commanded you? The observation that our Savior speaks of, is not of
some certain form of outward government, but generally of obedience to
faith, to love, and to the whole law and Gospel. As for that discipline by
Elders in every parish, it will not be found in those words of Christ. The
Church can not well stand without all ecclesiastical government. Yet it
seems it did so stand in the captivity of Babylon: but without that form it
may very well stand and flourish, and so has done in this and former ages in
many places. Wherefore the word and sacraments remain as the marks in
general, whereby the Church may be discerned.

But the Barrowists, and such of whom they have learned their principles,
descend into a more special and near description of the Church. The word and
Sacraments are not such notes with them, as can point out a Church. What then
is the Church of Christ in their account? diverse of them have gone about to
describe it, but one especially would seem to do it most fully: therefore he
describes it in these words at large. The true planted, and rightly
established Church of Christ, is a company of faithful people, separated from
the heathen of the land, gathered in the name of Christ, whom they truly
worship, and readily obey, as their only king, priest, and prophet, joined
together as members of one body, ordered and governed by such officers and
laws, as Christ in his last will and testament has thereunto ordained, all,
and each of them, standing in and for their Christian liberty, to practice
whatsoever God has commanded, and is revealed to them in his holy word,
executing the Lords judgments against all transgression and disobedience,
which arises amongst them, and cutting it off accordingly, by the power which
their Lord and king Christ Jesus has committed unto them. This is the Church,
this is the army of Christ in their account: and such they will not
acknowledge us to be.

Our parishes which they call perishes, they examine by all ye parts of this
description, and will not allow to any parish, any one of these things. Ten
parts are found in it: Let us see how they examine our Churches by them.

First they say, the Church consists of a faithful people. None are
accounted of the^ to be of the Church, but such as are regenerate, and have
the spirit, and are endued with knowledge, and have received the gift of a
saving faith. But it is certain, that many are in the visible church, that
have not these things. For first the kingdom of God is like a net that
gathers together good and bad: the bad are not regenerate, neither have these
things by the^ named. And as many followed Christ, when he walked upon earth
and were his disciples, which followed not for regeneration, but for that he
fed their bodies: so is it in ye Church now. And what shall we say of the tares
ye Christ commands to be suffered til the harvest, least the wheat be
plucked up with the^? They are not only hypocrites which are like the good, for
ye tares are not like ye wheat, but ye open wicked and mighty: which, if the
Church would go about to root out from among them, they would endanger the
whole, as by experience has often bin feene. When Paul says: All men have not
faith: he speaks not only of them that are without, but even of them that
are within the Church. And to the Corinthians he says: Some have not the
knowledge of God, I speak this to your shame. Wherefore, even in the Church of
Corinth, (the people whereof are called faithful and Saints) there were some
that had no knowledge of God. And why may not that befall the Churches of
Christ, which befell the Israelites? Unto us was the Gospel preached, as unto
them: but the word that they heard, profited not them, because it was not
mixed with faith in those that heard it. As we are like them in hearing, so
why may not some among us be like them in not believing? And yet as they were,
so may we be reckoned of the outward Church. They see that the Church in the
time of the Prophets, had many, which were neither regenerate, nor faithful,
such as had neither the spirrte nor knowledge. But they would make us differ
from them, in a straiter covenant of separation. For they say, the carnal
propagation from Abraham, and outward circumcision, was enough to keep them in
the Church: but nothing keeps us in it that is outward, not baptism, nor any
outward thing, but only grace, and faith, and the spirit: If any man have
not these, and be not so esteemed, he is not to be accounted so much as of
the visible Church. And this they ground of the practice of the Jews, which
as they say, separated none from their Synagogues for sin. But this is
false. Them that confessed Christ, they put out of their Synagogues, although
unjustly: and for diverse kinds of sins, they had diverse sacrifices, which
must be offered by them, before there could be any atonement for them. So
the Jews separated some for sins, and yet wicked persons were still of their
outward Church. As for the places that they allege, to prove that all in the
Church must be faithful, and have the spirit, petaine either to the elect
only, and such as are called according to purpose, as when it is said, to so
many as received him, he gave power to be made the sons of God: And again:
I will write my laws in their hearts: or else declare what every one ought to
be, and not what every one is, or shall be: as when Paul says: In Christ,
neither circumcision avails any thing, nor uncircumcision, but a new
creature: or else speak of outward profession and show of faith: as when the
Corinthians are called faithful, and such as S. James speaks of in his
second chapter: or last of all, because some have these in truth, they are
ascribed to ye rest, because they make one outward body with the^, and are
denominated of the best, as when Paul says: Such were some of you, but ye are
washed, but ye are sanctified. As Augustine says, that a heap wherein lies
more chafe the^ wheat, is yet called a heap of wheat, and not of chafe,
because it is a heap for the wheates sake: So although there be wicked and
unfaithful men in the Church, yet ye Church is called faithful, because it is
a Church for the faithful and godly, and not for the wicked. Wherefore it is
not necessary, that the visible Church should consist only of a faithful
and a regenerate people, such as have the knowledge and the spirit of God: the
outward profession of these things, and the Sacraments, and the shadow as it
were of the good, keeps the^ in the visible Church, although such men are in
it only for their further damnation, except they repent. Thus much of that they
say, the Church must be a company of faithful people.

The second note which they make, is a separation from the heathen of the land.
These heathens they term by many other names, calling them ungodly, profane,
and atheists: and the other common sort of them take all such as come to Church
with us, to be no better: the other (that will seem to speak with more
judgment,) make such to be profane, which are without the Church, or return
to their former filthiness, or have done any thing that may show them to be
without the covenant of Gods grace and free promise. Every man that has not
knowledge to render a distinct account of his faith, in all necessary branches,
they esteem profane: thus they minse it: but their writings and doings show,
that all are profane with them, that are not of their own society. Now the
separation from profane persons is so great a matter with the^, that if but
one such man remain and be kept in the Church, either he makes it as they
think, no Church, or at least, makes all exercises of prayers, and of
Sacraments, to be of no virtue nor value, but offe^siue to God, and hurtful to
the Church. Therefore they account our churches no churches, our sacraments no
sacraments, our prayers no prayers, (if there were no other fault but this
among us) because we retain ye profane and ungodly in our Churches. That the
Church ought to be separated from all such, or else that it can be no Church,
and that the covenant otherwise is broken, Leuit. 20.24.
thus they labor to prove: First, because the Lord says in Moses: I am the
Lord your God, which have separated you from other people. I answer: the
Israelites were separated from other nations by blood, and by outward
ceremonies: we likewise by profession and Sacraments. And as for the ignorant,
and unbelievers, and ungodly, the Churches of the Israelites and Jews, could
not be separated from them, neither can the Church of Christ be in this life
freed from such. Secondly, they would prove this separation by the words of
Paul: 1. Cor. 5.6, 11.
A little leaven leaueneth the whole lump. And again: If any that is called a
brother be a fornicator, or covetous, or an idolater, or a rayler, or a
drunckard, or an extortioner, with such a one eat not. And to these, 2. These.
3.6.
that is joined as being of like nature: We charge you, that you withdraw your
selves from every brother that walks inordinately. Of these places they
conclude, that there is an infection to the Church by the wicked retained: and
that the Church can not be the Church, except this law of separation be
practiced. I answer, first, that the leauening and infection, was not in a
wicked man's being in the Church, but in the rejoicing at his wickedness. For so
Paul says: your rejoicing is not good: know ye not that a little leaven
leaueneth the whole lump? Moreover, a wicked man may infect and leaven others
by his example: the rest he does not infect. And last of all we say, our
Church retains none such, as that incestuous person was, if they be known.
Where Paul says: If any that is called a brother, be a fornicator, eat not
with such: and again: Withdraw your selves from every brother that walks
inordinately: First, I answer, he must be accused and convicted to be such,
and admonished: and if he amend not, he must be avoided. Secondly, he must be
shunned as touching familiarity, with lyking, and fellowship, not to be
companied with, as those with whom we eat familiarlie. For so much imports
that he says: Eat not with such, and withdraw your selves from such. To
shun their company in all things it is not meant: For in buying and
selling, in submitting our selves to their government, if they be our
Magistrates, or in any other necessary duty, they should not be avoided.
Last of all, their presence defiles not the Sacraments, nor makes prayers
unprofitable ts us, but to themselves. He that eats and drincketh unworthily,
eats and drincketh his own damnation. But they say, we are unworthy, by
admitting unworthy ones. I answer, it is not in every one to admit or to
refuse, and therefore every one cannot be guilty. And Judas defiled not the
Pascal lamb nor the Lords Supper, nor yet the rest that were present, but
himself he defiled. Again they say, if we may not eat commune bread with
them, much less may we eat the Lords bread with them in the Sacrament. I
answer, for our common meat we are often at choice in what company to take it:
but the Sacrament we must receive with the Church, the wicked has a
commandment to abstain from it: and the worthy has a commandment to come
unto it: his presuming to come that ought not, must not exclude me that ought
to come. This I speak of persons suspected to be rejected, and in deed wicked
in themselves, but yet not convicted openly before the Church. Of them yt are
convicted, I may say as Theodoret does upon this place. Si non oportet eos
communis esse cibi participes, nec mysticiquidem certe and diuini. If they must
not be partakers of the common bread, then certainly neither of the mystical
and divine bread. and as Ambrose says, Cum fratre in quo vitia haec
reperiuntur, non solum Sacramenta non edenda sed nec communem escam docet, vt
erubescat cum vitatur and corrigat. He teaches that we must not only not eat
the Sacraments, but not so much as common meat with a brother in whom these
sins shall be found. Photius reads these words otherwise. If any brother be
named a fornicator, Talem fornicatorem, auarum, maledicum, ebriosum, hoc est,
illum qui in propatulo talis est ita vt sic ab omnibus and dignoscatur and
nominetur, and as he said before, ita vt communem illam appellationem in
seipsum amplexus, ex hac potius quam ex peculiari and proprio nomine, and
cognoscatur and vocetur, hunc inquam, and fugi imperat and vitari, and cum eo
nec cibum sumere, nec miscere sermones, nec simul vitam ducere, non autem illum
quem quidam carpunt esse maledicum. Such a fornicator or rayler as is such a
one openly, so that he is after that sort of all men known and named, so that
he has received this common name to himself, and is rather known and called
by it then by his proper name, he commands such a one to be avoided and
shunned, and that we should neither take meat, nor use familiar talk, nor
lead our life with him, but he commands not that man so to be shunned
whom some carpe, as though he were a backebiter. Thus they understand it of a
man notoriously known and convicted, and then of private and familiar
company, and last of all, of society in the Sacraments. Them that are
notorious, the government and laws of our Church command to be excluded,
and it is put in practice: Wherefore our Church is not to be condemned for
this. That which they object in the second to the Corinthians: Be not unequally
yoked with the infidels: 2. Cor. 6.
For what fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousness? is spoken first
of such, as acknowledge not Christ to be the redeemer, but were heathenish
idolaters: we have none such among us. Secondly, if it be understood also of
the wicked livers, it forbids familiar conversation with them: for with such
as we live familiarlie, we may be said to be yoked. Thirdly, he will not
have us be partakers with them, in that they are unrighteous, and idolaters,
neither by practice nor consent: but otherwise, to be in their company upon
necessary occasions, he does not condemn. As for that which Paul practiced in
the Acts: Acts 19.9.
When certain were hardened and disobeyed, speaking evil of the way of God, he
departed from them, and separated the disciples: persuades a separation from
the open, and professed enemies of Christ. To such dogs, the holy things of
God are not to be given. And of such speaks Saint John: 2. John. 11.
If there come any unto you, and bring not this doctrine, bid him not God
speed: for he that bids him God speed, is partaker of his evil deeds. If
he be a blasphemer of the name of Christ, an open despiser of his Gospel, one
that refuses him, and acknowledges him not as Redeemer and God, he is to be
accounted an infidel, and by all means to be rejected. None such are admitted
of us, or mingled with us, being once known. Moreover, Isa. 65.11.
they think that Esaias condemns us, for admitting a whole parish to the holy
Communion, when he says: Ye are they that have forsaken the Lord, and
forgotten my holy mountain, and have prepared a table for the multitude, and
furnish the drink offering for the number. Esaias speaks not of receiving a
number into society, to offer to the Lord: but rather of sacrificing to a
multitude of Idols, in stead of the true God. For he opposes the only true
God to a multitude whom they served: yea, some think that the names that are
translated a number, and multitude, do signify Mars, and Mercury. Wherefore,
this pertains not to the admitting of many to the Communion. It was a
commendation for the people and service of God, when they did all eat the
passover, and offer sacrifices together, as at their coming out of Egypt, and
in the wilderness: and under Josias and otherwise. It is much more to be
misliked with us, that some refrain from the communion, then that so many come
unto it. They object many other things against the retayning of wicked men in
the society of the Church: but these are the chief. To answer all, would
require a several treatise.

Their third note of a visible Church is, that it must be gathered in the name
of Christ. Esai 11.14.
Esaias did so prophecy. In that day the root of Ishai shall stand up for a
sign unto the people, the nations shall seek unto it. Whole nations and many
nations should come to Christ in steed of one nation. Could this be but many
wicked and ungodly should be mixed? and how should the nations seek to him?
some in show, some in truth: some by outward profession, and some by inward
feeling. Ioh. 12.32.
When our Savior says, If I were lift up from the earth, I would draw all
men unto me, he means that such as come in truth, shall come by his power:
but he means not, that there should none come in outward fashion only, and
in word, and yet in heart be far from him, and in their deeds deny him. And
as he says again, Mat. 18.20
where two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst
of them: so are our assemblies in the name of Christ, if to come upon his
commandment, to call upon him, to hear his word, and to receive his
Sacraments, be to be gathered in his name: and the wicked coming with us,
hinders not this our purpose, nor disappointeth our work.

That which Peter says: To whom ye come as unto a living stone, disalowed
of men, but chosen of God, and precious, and ye as lively stones, be made a
spiritual house, an holy Priesthood, to offer up spiritual Sacrifices
acceptable to God by Jesus Christ. This I say, is spoken of them which are
called of God according to his eternal purpose. But none are thus joined to
Christ, but only such: yet for their sakes, the rest are so accounted, and
take the name of that which is the chief: and so far are they from making us
to be separated from God, when we consent not to their sins, that they are
tolerated and received into some outward honor of the Church for us.

These places sufficiently prove, that the Church of Christ must be joined unto
Christ the head. But what exception can be taken against our Church? how can
it be said, that we are not gathered together in the name of Christ? They
say, our Churches are gathered together, not in the name of Christ, but in the
name of Antichrist. This is a most vile slander against the Church. All that
is proper to Antichrist we withstand, and therefore Antichrist seeing himself
cast off, and us not gathered in his name, strives by force and policy, to
gather us to himself again. The name of Antichrist included especially his
supremacy, his humane traditions against the written word of God, his
idolatry, his adoration of Saints, his pilgrimages and relics, his prayers
for the dead and purgatory, his justification by works, his satisfactions for
sins, his doctrine of freewill, his vows of poverty, of single life, his
works of supererogation, his pardons and the like. To come together in these
opinions, and in the practice of those things, is to be gathered in the name
of Antichrist. But thus we do not. Contrariewise, we come to worship God in
the name of Christ alone, to be justified by him, to hear his truth:
therefore we are gathered in the name of Christ. The fourth note of a visible
Church they make this, that it must worship Jesus Christ truly. It is out of
question, that the true Church of God worshippeth Christ aright. But what can
they allege against us and the worship that we perform to Christ? First the
commandment, Thou shall make no graven image. They account us idolaters. Then
that to the Corinths, 1. Cor. 10.
If any man say unto thee, that is sacrificed unto idols, eat it not because
of him that showed it. Our service they say was once offered to idols, and
therefore now must not be used. To these they join that of Esaias, Esai 66.17.
They that sanctify themselves and purify themselves in the gardens behind a
tree in the midst eating swines flesh, and such abomination, even the mouse
shall be consumed together says the Lord. In their account our prayers and the
form of our public service is swines flesh, or as a mouse, which things were
unclean, and might not be offered to God by the law. And to this end they
heap up many places of like nature, as that of Deuteronomy, Deuteronomy. 17.1.
and such other: Thou shall offer to the Lord thy God no bullock nor sheep
wherein is blemish, or any evil favored thing, for that is an abomination to
the Lord thy God. Such a sacrifice they judge the service that we offer to God
by the book of common prayer to be. Therefore they give names of reproach and
disdain unto the book, calling it the Statute book, and stinted service, and
staruers book, and such like. Against this book they fight as against a most
pregnant idol. We worship not God aright, because we worship him by this
book. The worship of God is large: faith, hearing of his word, reading of
the Scriptures, and every good work pertains to his worship. All the
service and duty we do to God, are not done by the reading and using of that
book. Nay all our prayers in the Church are not out of it. The preachers use
the liberty of their mind, and motion of Gods spirit. So that all our
worship, and all our prayers are not done by that book.

But they say, that book and the worship done by it is idolatrous. First they
condemn it in general, and then in particular. In general they mislike for
five things.

First, because the prayers are read. The reading of prayers, they say, can not
be with sighs and groans, nor come of faith, nor proceed from the motion of
the spirit, nor have any feeling joined with it, and has no warrant by
commandment or practice from Christ and his Apostles. Prayers read (they say)
are only for meditation, and not for invocation. This is their accusation
against the prayers that are read out of a book. When our Savior says: The
true worshippers must worship the father in spirit and truth: and Paul, the
spirit helps our infirmtties, then they suppose that prayers read are
excluded, as though they proceeded not of the spirit. Prayers are not so much
used of the people, nor of any of us as they ought to be. It is the chief
means to obtain Gods favor, to keep our selves in his fear, and to work
all goodness in us. If prayers by the book were no prayers, we should be much
more barren in this exercise then we are. This were a good means for the
devil to bannish prayer from a great number altogether. I would know in
respect of the hearer, what great difference it is, if the prayer be read to
him or pronounced out of thy heart? Neither way does it come out of his heart
as the fountain. It comes thus to pass also with many that utter conceived
prayers, that for the most part they use the same form of words, and the same
matter in most points of their prayers. Again what would this liberty of every
man's praying public at his own motion, having that office, bring upon the
Churches? Infinite and intolerable babbling in some, and damnable and most
heretical petitions in a great number. But they say prayers read are not of the
spirit, nor with sighs, nor feeling. The very reading is not praying but the
motion and desire to God in reading is praying. This motion is not hindered,
but furthered by reading: because it brings to the understanding that which
the heart longs after. As one candle receives light of another, so even in
prayer the heart receives light and heat by means of the words read and
heard. Christ set down a form of words and said, when you pray, pray thus.
Now he that uses the words, and matter, and affection, prays thus, rather
then he that uses the matter and affection only. And the words of some
petitions we use of necessity, as forgive us our sins or trespasses, and
therefore may well use all. Christ himself in the garden prayed thrice, saying
the same words. David made diverse Psalms to be sung in Gods service, and
intitleth them to the parties that should be leaders in them. The hundred
thirty and sixth psalm was commonly sung in time of thanksgiving, for great
and extraordinary victories: first David himself used it, then Iehosaphat,
and after that Judas Maccabeus. Joel in the public fast tells what the
priests should say, and bids them pronounce these words: Spare thy people,
Joel 2.17.
O Lord, and give not thine heritage into reproach, that the heathen should
rule over them: wherefore should they say among the people, where is their God?
Hose 14.2.
Hoseah bids the people take unto them words, and say to the Lord: Take away
all iniquity, and receive us graciously, so will we render the calves of our
lips, Asshur shall not save us, neither will we ride upon horses, neither
will we say any more to the work of our hands, ye are our Gods: for in thee
the fatherless finds mercy. God prescribed a form of blessing to Aaron
and his son, Number. 56.23.
wherewith they should bless the people: commanding them to say, The Lord
bless thee and keep thee, and so soorth. Moses used a form of words as a
prayer at the going forward and resting of the Arc: Numb. 10.35, 36.
and David in his prayer has the same. Seeing these things are so, Psalm. 68.2.
prayers read may be used, and a man by them may perform unto God spiritual
and acceptable service.

The second thing for which they mislike the book is, because it is prescribed
and imposed, and used continually. This cutteth off the liberty of the Church
(they say) and brings it into bondage: this is tedious to men, and Penrie is
not ashamed to say, it is loathsome to God to be served so often as it were with
one dish. The liberty that these men challenge is such, as that they will be
bound to nothing, especially in religion. and in things indifferent, neither by
prince nor by any law of man be it never so good and godly, the thing is
misliked, because it is prescribed and imposed upon us. Does the very imposing
and bond by law make it unholy? Then acknowledge not the Trinity, nor receive
the canonical Scripture, nor seek to know Gods commandments nor Christian
faith: For these things by law are imposed upon us. But this diminishes not
our liberty, nor takes away our willing serving of God, in these things
imposed, but rather makes us more willing. And as for tediousness to the
Lord, because these prayers are old and usual, it is not to be feared. For in
his service he requires not new words, but a new heart. The worship and
prayer is new to God, so often as our heart is renewed with zeal and true
repentance, and good affection to it. For the prayer to God is not the outward
word, but the inward desire and affection.

The third thing in general for which they condemn the book is, for that it
is man's invention. Whatsoever man deuiseth, that they count unclean and not to
be used in prayer. When men's traditions and inventions are reproved in Gods
service by scripture, hitherto by all godly writers, those things have been
understood which are contrary to Gods word. Things agreeable are not so
accounted men's inventions, that they should be condemned. For if simply to come
from the wit and brain of man be naught, the^ were preaching to be banished,
and then even conceived prayers must be excluded, and so much more, because
they be new inventions every day: and this, if it be any, it is but one. It is
not a devise of man, therefore to be rejected, which is agreeable to the word
of God, as those things in this book are, whereby we worship God.

The fourth general cause of rejecting the book is, for that it is in many
points taken out of the Popes portesse. Therefore Barrowe calls it a great
colloppe, or a pigge of that mezeled hog. In this behalf another of them
says, we bear the image of the beast, for that we use some part of his
form of liturgy. It is certain that a great part of the public prayer in
that book which the Romans use, was practiced in the Church before the beast
came in that chair. And often times Gods people have either taken or resumed
those things to Gods worship, which have been abused by idolaters. The
spoils of Egypt and of Jericho, the vessels of the temple abused by the
Babylonians were again applied to Gods service. If we used any thing wherein
the Pope shows himself to be the beast, as his worshipping of dead Saints,
and images, and the Mass, and such like, then we might be said to bear his
image or his mark: But in the prayers that we have, there is no part, no
limme, no clawe of that beast. The people of God must not fashion themselves
like the Cananites, nor the heathen about them, in any thing wherein they are
idolatrous and impious: but in that they have as men, Gods people may be like
them. As they are Papists, we will not be like the Romans: but as they are
Christians, we may be like them. In taking good things from them we take not
any thing that was theirs, but we take to our selves that which was our own.
We must not use the Bible, nor the name of God or Christ, nor Baptism, if we
will have nothing that they had.

The fifth and last thing for which in general they cast away the book is, for
that it mainteineth a reading ministry. A book of common prayer is no cause
of a reading Minister. The chiefest cause is, that preachers will not be had,
nor can be made in this slender maintenance of sundry Churches: the next cause
is, the covetousness and wicked dealing of many godless patrones: and a third
cause is this, contention and strife that is raised in the Church. This has
cast out many that were in, and has driven back many that were coming on:
this has caused diverse to forsake the study of Divinity and learning
altogether. But the book of Common prayer is no cause of it: for the preachers
with us use it, and where all are preachers, there is a set form observed, and
is necessary to be had of all well ordered Churches. These are the things,
for which they condemn the book in general.

Now in particular, they trifle about many things: As first about the holy
days, whereof some they call double Idols, and double feasts, Hallowmas,
Christmas, Candlemas, Easter, Whitsonday, Trinity sunday: Then there are the
Ladies days, Saints days with the Eues fast, and feasts, and devised worship
unto them. Last of all, they reckon the celebrating of days to Angels, as
Michael, and the naming of many Archangels. This cauil will easily be
answered. For first we make not the Calender any part of Gods worship:
Wherefore it is vain to accuse us of a false worship by that, when we put no
part of his worship in it. That distinguishes the times, and directs us
to the Psalms and Scriptures: but is no part of Gods service, no more then a
mark by the way to direct them which go by, is a part of the way. The names
may be somewhat offensive where Mass is added: but in the old tongue from
whence our language came (long before the corruptions of the Mass were crept
in) the word signified nothing but Tide, or some solemn time: and the common
people have used to speak so, and the name Missa, from whence that is supposed
to come, is read in ancient fathers, in a good and a godly meaning: yea, and in
most Calenders those names are reformed. The Saints we worship not, nor
Angels, neither with prayers, fastes, nor any such thing: But God we worship,
and take occasion at such times, when we call to mind them by whom the
worship of God has bin spread throughout the world. The people of God have used
and appointed more days to public prayer, and Gods service then the Sabbath,
Hester. Euang. Joan.
without controlement: as the feast of Purim and of Dedication. Last of all,
those days, except the nativity of our Savior, and those that fall usually
on the Lords day, are in most places grown to be equal with the rest: Our
people are ready enough, to make no difference of days in that behalf.

The next thing that comes under their censure, are the fastes, Lent, imber
days, Ashwednesday, Maundie, Holy thursday, Goodfridaye, and the rest. Two
things are regarded of the Church, in distinguishing these times from others.
First a time to be observed of all, for the use of fish, and refraining from
flesh, that navigations might be maintained, and that seeing we may have
provision of all kind of food, we do not continually use only one, to
which we are most given, to the decaie thereof, and hinderance of the other.

Secondly, that there may be used also a moderate abstinence, not to the
honor of Saints, nor as though there were any worship of God in it of it
self, but that our bodies may be kept under, and the mind might be made
the fitter to serve the Lord. If all those days and others, were used in a
whole or half abstinence, it were better for men's bodies and souls, and for
the commonwealth, then it is. The superstition and merit in such things is
condemned: but either a civil or holy use, to the better ordering of our
bodies and affections, of none that are wise can be mislyked.

A third matter of reprehension is (as they call it) a blasphemous abuse of
scriptures, shredding, and rending them from their natural sense and true use,
to bend and apply them to the Idol feasts. This accusation is both foolish
and impudent. If they think (as it seems they do) that it is not lawful to
print or read by it self, some portion of the scripture, severed from the
rest of ye whole body, it is foolish: for what offense can there be, in making
choice of some part for instruction, seeing the body is left whole
notwithstanding? And to say they are turned from their true sense, it is
impudent: for in the same words and meaning are they set down in the Communion
book, as they are in the body of the scripture: neither do we apply them to
the feasts, but to our selves, to be instructed by them.

The fourth crime they set down in these words: Abominable Collectes over,
for, and to the dead. What can be spoken more spiteful and shameless? We
pray neither for the dead, nor to the dead: we pray for our selves, at the
burial of the dead.

In the fist place, about Baptism and that which pertains to it, they find
many faults. They say it is corrupted with the sign of the cross, with
godfathers, and godmothers, with the Font, with unlawful and impossible vows
of gossips: to these they join purification or churching of women, with their
offerings, hasty baptism by Midwiues, bishopping and second baptism: by
these things, they judge that baptism is corrupted. But why should the sign
of the cross corrupt it? Is it so odious to express the figure of that
whereon Christ dyed, without opinion of adding grace, without giving any
worship to it, but only for remembrance? there is none impiety it it. And
what impossible vow do the godfathers and godmothers make? They say not (as
they allege.) that the child shall believe, but that it does, in way of
Sacrament and outward profession, in as much as it is offered to baptism,
which is Sacramentum fidei, and is borne of parents that are professors of
Christian faith. And as for the procuring of these things in action in the
child, there is none that understands I think any further, then as it may
lie in them conveniently, and as need shall require. But what can there be in
the Font to corrupt baptism, more the^ in the Church walls to corrupt prayers,
and scriptures, and and preaching, and all? Women are not purified, as though
they were otherwise unclean: but they give thanks for their deliverance, and
for the increase of mankind and the Church: In giving thanks for Gods
benefits, there is not any fault. Confirmation is retained as a means to
procure the instructing of the children, or as a trial of it, not as a new
baptism, nor as any Sacrament, nor as that which should confer grace,
otherwise then by prayer to God for it. Baptism by women is not warranted by
the book, nor allowed to be put in practice.

About the Lords supper they have many cauils, as that it is soulde for two
pence a head: that the institution is broken and changed in the delivery: that
there is a stage-like dialogue between priest, clarke, and people: that there
are new Apocryphal laws and injunctions added, the Priest to stand at the
Northside of the table, the people to kneel, verse, and Collect: that there is
popish and idolatrous houseling of the sick: that there is popish visiting and
pardoning of the sick, with this Sacrament: These are heinous things.

The Sacrament (they say) is sold for two pence: who sells it, who buieth it
so? He is to give that, whether he receive or no: It is no price of the
Sacrament, but a poor alowance to the Minister: The institution is not broken
in the delivery. The words of institution are then used, when the bread and
wine are set apart for the use of the Sacrament, and so much set apart for it,
as is used in it. The words in the delivery, are to apply them to the
persons, to stir up their faith: the institution was past before. For the
speeches uttered by the Minister, and clearke, and people, there is no fault in
the matter, but they condemn the form. They think the Minister must utter
all that is spoken: the people must only say, Amen. That they are commanded to
say, and they are not forbidden to say more. How can that sound of the
multitude be made in the praising of God, compared to the sound of many
waters, and of mighty thunders, if the people say nothing in Gods service?
Their own speech makes them more attentive, and stirs up their minds the
rather. The finding fault with standing, kneeling, and such necessary and
seemly gestures, proceeds of infinite curiosity, and most froward
peeuishnes. We can not be together but we must have some place, some gesture,
and these are the fittest. Last of all, as prayers and the word of comfort, so
likewise the Sacrament may be given to the sick. There is no pardon otherwise
given to him by it, then to other men, at other times. If he believe and
repent, he has forgiveness by faith in Christ, and it is sealed and confirmed
to him by the Sacrament. Thus much of the particular faults which they are
most offended with.

Moreover besides these, they carpe at comminations, which are nothing but
sentences of scripture: and how bitter soever the curses are, yet they are the
curses of God, against such as offend. They find fault with a seuenfold
repetition of the Lords prayer at one meeting: some of them are often omitted:
with tossing of Psalms and sentences to and fro like tennis balls: which is a
profane speech: and the thing is not commanded: and it may well be practiced,
so they read, and speak in such sort, that all men may hear and understand.

These are the chief things, with which they find fault in the book. The
most of them are circumstances, and as it were the shells: the kirnel is the
confession of our sins, the asking of things necessary to soul and body,
for the common state and our selves, the praising of God for his benefits, the
setting forth of Gods will, his word and testament. These are the substance of
the book, and of Gods worship. They make a buzzing about men's ears, with
trifles and vanities for the most part: and for these, they will turn all
vpside down: which are such things in deed many of them, as it would not come
into our minds once to speak of them, if their exclamations and outcries did
not stir us of necessity to it.

Yet there is one thing pertaining to Gods worship among us, which they can not
submit themselves unto. An oath is a part of the honor we give to God, when
upon just cause in the truth, we call his name to witness: this we do, by
laying the hand upon the book of holy scripture. The oath is taken in the name
of God, that gave his word to his Church, by the promises and threatenings that
he in it has made unto us: the book is kissed and touched in sign thereof:
otherwise, by the dead paper, or ynke, or cover, we are not willed, neither
ought we to swear: and this has neither impiety nor idolatry in it, no more
then if a man did lift up his eyes, or his hands to heaven, when he does it in
more vehement expressing of his sincere and earnest meaning in it. Thus much of
the fourth note of their Church, Gods true worship: for corruption whereof,
they accuse us falsely.

The fifth note of the visible Church, they make to be the obeying of Jesus
Christ as their king, priest, and prophet: Thus should Christ be received, or
else he is not received at all to any benefit. First then they go about to
show, that we acknowledge not Christ to be our king: we receive him not as
king (they say) because we reject his government, and stand under the
Antichristian yoke of popish government. There be many things which pertain
to Christ's government and reign as he is king, which we have, yea, all
things that are necessary and substantial parts of that his office. First
the spiritual government in the soul, by which he reigns in us, to the
peace of conscience, and the vanquishing of Satan, and the beating down of
sin and ignorance is found among us, and we specially rejoice in it. Of
this, it is said: the kingdom of God is within you: and that, the kingdom of
God is not meat and drink: but peace and righteousness, and joy in the holy
ghost: and that, we are translated from the kingdom of darkness, to the
kingdom of light.

Secondly, his word read and preached, reproving sin, and teaching
righteousness, is among us. Of this it is said, the scepter of thy kingdom is
a right scepter: and for this partly, the Gospel is called the Gospel of
the kingdom. These are the principal things pertaining to Christ's kingdom
here in earth: and these, by his grace and goodness, we have among us. Now
they have a third branch of a kingly reign, which is a form of outward
government, the end and scope whereof is, that order should be kept, sin
should be punished, and corrected among Gods people, by ecclesiastical
punishments, and censures. This (they say) we want, and therefore do not
acknowledge Christ our king. They imagine that Christ has set a form
external, by which every congregation should be framed in this behalf, as
that there must be (besides the teachers) in every congregation, a certain
number of Elders, which must elect, depose, ordeine, make orders and decrees,
reprove, suspende and excommunicate, when they see good. This is the kingdom
which they strive for: if this be not in every parish, Christ (they say) can
not be our king, we have cast him off. Christ is our king, not only by his
(...) necessary to salvation, and directly commanded, as the Priests did in
the days of Malachie. If we rejected government, and refused all correction
and punishment for sin, we rejected an express commandment of Christ our
king. But in rejecting the censures of ten, or six, or any such number in
every congregation, we do not repugne any open or known commandment of
Christ our king.

Wherefore, notwithstanding the government which we have, and the excluding
of that government which they would obtrude, we have Christ to be our king,
and he acknowledges us his people, subjects, and army.

Now we must see, what it is that makes them to think that we deny the
priesthood of our Savior Jesus Christ: and so make that he is no priest to
us. If he be no priest for us, then has he not sacrificed, and satisfied for
our sins: then has he not, neither does make intercession for us. He that
denies the priesthood of Jesus Christ, loses these his benefits: He is a
priest for ever, after the order of Melchisedech: and all must come unto God by
him. Now then, wherein do we deny his priesthood? Because (say they) we
sacrilegiously profane his name with our idolatry, and because we prostitute
his blood, and make him a priest and sacrifice to infidels, and most wicked
offenders. His priesthood were denied, if we trusted in any but in his
sacrifice for the forgiveness of our sins, or if we made prayers to God in
any mediators name but his. But (they say) we deny his priesthood, because
we make prayer unto him out of a book: for this they call idolatry. But by
that book we pray to God the father, in his name, for things agreeable to
his will, with faith, and from the heart. Therefore there is no idolatry in
that, nor any thing that derogateth from his priesthood.

The second thing, wherein we deny his priesthood, is (they say) because
we prostitute the blood of Christ, and make him a priest and sacrifice to
infidels, and the most wicked offenders. In baptism (they say) it is
prostituted, because we give the Sacrament to the whole nation: in the Supper,
because wicked impenitent persons are received of us to it: and generally in
both, because at the first by proclamation of the prince, and upon the sudaine,
from idolatry and popery, straight after the reign of Queen Marie, all were
received to the Sacrament: and that people is yet retained.

But for the infantes to be baptized, although the parents were wicked, there
is good warrant. First, for that their auncetors were received into the
covenant, and the sin of the father shall be upon himself, and is
personal, and necessarily the punishment passes not, God himself says: the
son shall not bear the iniquity of the father. Another reason is, because
there is hope of the child, that he shall be brought up to know God, and
believe in Jesus Christ: and last of all, for that there is none baptized, but
some do undertake for him, that it shall be performed: they marvel that a
whole nation should be baptized: and yet Christ has said: Go teach all
nations, baptising them. And as touching the whole multitude received after the
end of the reign of Queen Marie: First it can not be said, but they had
teaching in the days of the most worthy king Edward, although they fell from
it. Secondly, they came not as mere strangers to Christian Religion, but as
men from an aberration in Christian Religion, which they might easily correct,
if they were not wilful: And what should that prejudice the Church now? If
they had not been taught then, yet now they have been taught above these
thirty years. Last of all, in such manner Gods people have been reduced to Gods
worship again from idolatry under Josias and Ezechias Kings of Judah. Now
concerning the Sacrament of the Supper, we do not prostitute it to infidels.
We cannot count any in this land infidels, whom we know and receive to the
Sacrament of the Supper. All make profession of faith, all acknowledge Christ
God and redeemer, and hope for salvation in him: if they have not this, we may
and ought reject them. If any neglect his duty, it is no prejudice nor cause
to condemn the rest. So likewise, known wicked offenders, (if they be
impenitent) are removed: and if it were so that some such as are not to be
made partakers, do communicate, is that a denying of his sacrifice and
priesthood to the rest? It is evil applied to such: but it is not thereby
plucked from the rest. It is applied to him that has no benefit: but he is
not deprived, to whom the benefit belongs. The places of Scripture by which
they would prove, that we deny Christ's priesthood for giving the Sacrament
to such as we receive, are these: Ezec. 44.7.
first the complaint of God in Ezechiel: Ye have brought into my Sanctuary
strangers, uncircumcised in heart and uncircumcised in flesh, to be in my
Sa^ctuary and to pollute my house when ye offer my bread. God reproves the^
for making such priests as were uncircumcised in flesh, and strangers, even
heathens, and idolaters: for to be in ye sa^ctuary, and there to minister, was
to be a priest. Such we make not. and this pertains nothing to ye receiving
of any among us to the sacrament. To this they join another complaint of
Jeremy, Lam. 1.10.
The enemy has stretched out his hand upon all her pleasant things: for she
has seen the heathen enter into her sanctuary, whom thou did command
that they should not enter into thy Church. This is spoken of the enemies,
which should possess al they had, and be Lords over them, and spoil their
Sanctuary by violence. These were heathen idolaters, the Babylonians. Such
should not enter into the Church. We receive none such as profess themselves
to be idolaters, as believe not in Christ, and are open persecuters of his
people. Thus it is apparent, we do not prostitute the blood of Christ to such
as they name: and if any man do, the Church and government does not allow it:
and again, that this is not a denying of Christ's priesthood and sacrifice, and
the putting of another thing in stead thereof as ye papists did, but rather a
miss applying of it where it should not be applied. Wherefore, we do not
deny his priesthood.

As concerning the prophetical office of Christ, that by us is not obscured
and diminished, but magnified and highly advanced. His word only has
sovereign authority, it is published, and it is received in our Churches. Let
them show wherein we derogate from his prophecy.

The first accusation is a slander; as that we add to the word, that we use
humane traditions, we obtrude things contrary to the word, and that we oppugn
and reject the manifest truth. These things must be answered in the
particulars. We add nothing as necessary to salvation, we teach nothing
contrary, and we embrace all the known and evident truth. But that is not an
addition, or a known truth, or a thing contrary to the word which they
imagine to be so. But (as I said) these things are answered in the particulars.

The next accusation is, that we give not obedience to the word of Christ, but
use it as a mantel to cover our sin, rather then as a rule to direct our
life. We cannot say, that all do obey the Gospel in heart: and some in
hypocrisy use it, as a cloak for sin. This frustrateth his prophecy with
those persons, so that they have no benefit by it. But his prophecy hardens
and not only softeneth, and there be in the Church, such as wax worse and
worse, as well as those which wax better and better. And Christ is a Prophet
unto both. Neither the laws nor the public teaching do mind or propound
this, that the word of God should be disobeied, or that any should make it a
cover for sin. The fault of some persons may not be imputed to the whole
Church, nor to the laws and government.

Another thing whereby we weaken or quite frustrate (they say) the prophecy of
Christ amongst us, is because we seek not a true ministry, but maintain a
false, of which sort (they say) the whole ministry of the land is, which are
permitted to teach in the public places, to whom ear is given. Such are their
words. This accusation is very large and grievous. No true ministers in the
whole land? All false ministers? Why do they so account us? Is it because we
teach false doctrine, or have corrupted the faith, or do teach heresies? No
such thing. They object none of these against us. Then I hope we may answer
them the easier, and be heard the more willingly purging our selves. They
cannot object unto us heresy, nor false doctrine, nor teaching of any thing
that destroys the grounds of salvation. What be the things then which they
say make us a false ministry? I will recite unto you all which they lay
against us, I will dissemble nothing: the crimes then are these.

First they say, we have not the names of Ministers of the gospel, but are
called Priests, Parsons, Vicars, and Curates. It is not in our power what other
men will call us. Some of these names are given of the maintenance whereby we
live, and pertain not to our callings: we delight to be counted the Ministers
of the Gospel. But this about the names, is a vain cavil.

Secondly they condemn our preparation to the ministry, which is by study
and bringing up in the Universities. Schools and Universities they cannot
wholly condemn. The Church of the Jews had the schools of the Prophets: and
ever among Christians they have been esteemed as the best nurses of the
ministry. They condemn them for the study of human learning, and for
certain vices among some persons. If for the faults of some of the persons
that profess any kind of life, the trade it self be to be condemned, then no
course of life must be taken in the world. The study of Logike, Rhetorike,
Philosophy, and the Mathematicals is so necessary, that without them we
should be barbarous, and but by the help of them, never can any perfection (by
ordinary means) be attained in Phisike, Law, or Divinity. There are none but
mad men, which can condemn Universities.

Thirdly they mislike our entrance into the ministry: none of us is chosen by
a whole congregation, nor ordained by laying on of the hands of the
Eldershippe, nor just trial made of gifts and conversation. But we are
ordained by one man the Bishop, and are thrust upon the places where we take
charge whether the people will or no. The ordaining of a minister by one or
few is not against the word of God. Paul and Barnabas appointed Elders by the
laying on of hands at Antioch. And Titus was left in Creta, to ordain Elders
in every city. Wherefore it wants not the word of God, that Pastors are
ordained by one that has skill, yet that one with us does it not alone.
Cyprian and other ancient fathers acknowledge themselves to have authority to
do the like. If they be not examined and tried as they ought, the fault is in
the Bishop. That they are preferred by one to their charge, that is not
against the word, seeing there is nothing in the word that commands or
commends the election by the multitude, or inioineth it to be perpetual.

The fourth accusation is, against the unlearned and unpreaching ministers,
which is a crime that they make to touch al. for so much as they are no
ministers at all that cannot preach, therefore they themselves to be condemned:
then all the rest either by silence, or by consent, or by preaching in their
charges, or by defending them to be ministers, are also guilty. And the whole
people are wrapped (they say) by them in the same sentence of damnation, for
either keeping under the^ or suffering the^. And hereupo^ they make that they
are no sacraments, no prayers, no word of promise and salvation, that is
uttered by them, but that all their actions are void and frustrate. This being
so great a matter, would be examined by it self at large. But in a word to
touch it. The reader brings the word of reconciliation and forgiveness of
sins in Christ, shows the way of repentance and amendment of life,
mininistreth the Sacraments and prayers in a public function laid upon him
by the Church; therefore he is a minister, and a man may safely hear him, and
receive the sacrament at his hand. He nourishes faith by reading, therefore
he may beget it: for wherewith it is nourished, therewith it is begotten. By
the same means wherewith our best preachers have bin both at the planting of
the Gospel after the darkness of Popery in this land, and are made now daily,
and continued in their sufficiency; by the same means may the people come to
faith, and be continued in it. And who sees not, that reading both begets,
and chiefly confirms and nourishes many preachers? And seeing it is the
spirit that gives grace, and breaths where it lists, why not upon the good
heart when the word is read? In the time of persecution under Queen Marie, the
reading of some few books, brought many to the light, and did preserve them
in it. Every faithful man has experience how his own reading edifieth, why
should not then the public reading edify? The want of skill to preach makes
not a nullitie in him, as in a child or a beast: for he gives consent to that
he takes in hand, and nature it self excludes such from the office. Faith in
deed comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God, and they cannot hear
without a preacher. But reading is a certain kind of preaching: for if the
showing of Christ himself without words when Christ descended into hell, was
and is of many learned men called preaching, and so they could understand the
preaching that Peter speaks of: then why might not the reading of the word of
God be called a preaching of it? Act. 15.20.
And James calls the reading preaching. Moses, he says of old time has in
every city them that preach him, seeing he is read in the Synagogues every
Sabbath day. This imports that reading is a kind of preaching. There were
ministers that only read in the Synagogues of the Jews. When they were so
ready to desire a stranger to speak, it seemed it was not ordinary to have an
expounder in every Synagogue. They were not always preachers that did baptize.
Christ's disciples baptized, John 4. when as (in the judgment of many that are
learned) Christ had not sent forth any yet to preach. I speak not this to make
reading and preaching in the Church equal, or that reading should banish
preaching, or preaching exclude reading. The expounding of scripture and
applying of it to the present state, by the working of Gods spirit in the mouth
of a man called for yt purpose, is most excellent and necessary for all
Churches, and our Laws and government do require it. Otherwise, as some
conclude, let all be readers, banish preachers quite, hear only the reader, if
there be no excellency nor necessity of the preacher above ye reader. Therefore
let ye preacher by voice and by invention from ye spirit and his own heart,
have the first place, and (as the case stands with us) the reader must not
have no place at all. They may be weak ministers, or ministers of necessity,
or assisting ministers, although they be not the chief nor most perfect and
sufficient. Thus much of that matter.

The fifth defect they find in the ministry, is in the duties which are put
upon them or taken from them. Burying of the dead, joining of man wife in
marriage, making of funeral sermons, going about the bounds of parishes: all
these (in their opinions) are no works of the Minister of the Gospel. And
again, whereas they ought to govern in their congregations together with
others, all government is taken from us. besides, whereas no Minister should be
above a Pastor, Bishop. are above us, therefore (say they) are we no Pastors
nor Ministers of the Gospel. Public prayer does aptly agree and is a duty of
our calling. This is not wickedly join with burial and marriage, considering
our own frailty which are always near death and the difficulties in marriage
which God only helps. God himself joined the fi^^^ marriage, and why may not
his Ministers now do it in his name, seeing yet they which are married are
joined together by God? The word may be preached in season and out of season,
and no time amiss, when the people come together and are fit to be taught.
What time better to comfort them that mourn, or to rebuke the sinner, or to
put us in mind of our frailty, then at the burial of the dead? The going
about the bounds and limits of parishes pertains to his own maintenance and
the common quiet: therefore the doing of these things has nothing contrary to
his duty, seeing they hinder not yt which is principal, but rather further it.
And as for the government it is not mete for all: so much neither as they do
challenge, was never in ye church permitted to every particular pastor. To
admonish, to suspe^d, to rebuke is granted to us, and more is not necessary:
the labor of preaching is enough. Pastors have had superiors over them in the
churches: First Apostles, then Bishops, and so is it at this day. Neither is
there any disorder in it. In a moderate subjection the minister may better
perform his duty, and more safely. His poverty and means cannot sustain the
burden of public government any further the^ for teaching, exhorting,
rebuking, and suspe^ding or withholding ye unworthy from the Sacraments.

In the sixth place they will persuade that we are no ministers, because many
remain ignorant under us, and the sins of men are not cut off but abou^d,
notwithstanding al we do. This should argue Gods curse upon us, and upon our
ministry. If none did profit by us, we might mistrust our selves: but of
many we may say, Ye are our Epistle, ye bear witness of the fruit which we
bring. Yea this continual peace all this time is especially under God and our
most gracious Queen, to be ascribed to the preaching of the word of God among
us. That sects and popery spread not over all, it is to be imputed much unto
public preaching. There is no place in this land but the word of God works
in the hearts of some, to their conversion.

The seventh crime is against our maintenance. We live by set stipends, and by
tenths, and we depend upon noble men, and such as are able to pleasure us, we
preach for gain, we hunt after livings, and join diverse together. An
unlawful maintenance, if this were granted so to be, makes not an unlawful
ministry. If for gain we should pervert the truth, then we should degenerate
from our office. why should set stipe^ds hurt our ministry? Is an uncertain
living meeter then a certain? Tenths do not revive the ceremonial law, we take
not them in that sense. The Emperors had them, and afterward bestowed the^
upon the Churches. We challenge them not by the law of Moses, but by the gift of
the prince. And the Barrowists themselves confess, that as they were given by
princes, so they may be taken away by them. To adhere to them that are great,
so that we help them in truth, and do not for the^ pervert the truth, has no
dispraise but co^me^dation. In a good Christian government, if we be linked one
to another by many duties, it is the safer: and if the livings be of the
prince and laws, then may the prince and laws unite or sever them in some
moderate sort, so that the duties to the people be performed.

These are the chief crimes which they lay against us. In all this there is
nothing of false doctrine in any matter of salvation, in any article of our
faith, but all is of things that are clean without us, and our ministry: our
names, our coming in, our maintenance, our depending upon great men, and the
perfourming of more in labor, and taking less in honor then pertains (as
they think) unto us. Yet this is one of their maine grounds, for which they
depart and forsake our Churches, even our false and Antichristian ministry as
they call it. But these things either are no crimes, or be not such as therefore
can make us no ministers. These things being so, I may conclude that our
ministry is not a denying of ye prophetical office of Jesus Christ, but rather
it does bring the fruit and benefit thereof unto us. So then we deny neither his
kingdom, nor priesthood, nor prophecy, but in a true manner and great measure
have the^ and their fruit among us. God grant that they may continue with us,
and that the benefit may be much more large and plentiful to all the people.

The sixth note which they set upon the visible church is, that the people of
one church must be knit together as members of one body. So they gather first
out of Paul, when he says, 1. Cor. 12.12.
As the body is one and has many members, and all the members of the body
which is one, though they be many yet are one body, so is Christ. They grow
into one body, and are most nearly knit together, which pertain to Gods
election, and are spiritually united unto Christ. The rest are joined in an
outward profession, and so are (after a sort and to our account) of the body.
And thus are we one body in this land. Secondly they gather it out of Peter
when he writes: 1. Pet. 2.4.
To whom ye come as to a living stone, and ye as lively stones be made a
spiritual house. The godly are in deed living stones, and are made a
spiritual house: the rest, because they are among them, for the outward
profession are so accounted. Now let us see what unity necessary to Gods
Church we want. They say that we are not knit together as members, into one
congregation, but that men run and go, assemble and depart, at their
pleasure, when they will, whither they will, as they will themselves. What?
would they have us every one to keep in one place still? Or would they have us
to assemble to godly exercises, with none but the same persons continually,
such as are well known to us to be brethren? This they seem to mean: for they
condemn the assemblies at Paul's Cross, and at the common Churches in the
Universities, and of such solemn places. But this imagination is absurd, and
the places of scripture conclude no such thing. In some respect it is meet
that every man should keep him to his own congregation. But if desire of
instruction, or other occasion carry him to any other place of exercise, there
he is not as it were out of joint, as though he could no where do good nor
receive good, but in his own congregation. A hearer may be a profitable hearer
any where, and a preacher may preach with fruit in any congregation. God has
not tied any man so to one particular congregation, but at another time he may
have the same or another place in another asse^bly of Christians, for
Christians are of the same body whersoeuer they assemble: for it is the word,
and faith, and the spirit, which do make us one body, and these are the same in
every place among Gods people. Wherefore it is an absurd collection and nothing
to ye mind of Paul or Peter, yt a man should be so tied to one congregation,
that he cannot fruitfully be in another. The coming to spiritual exercises
sometimes in this place and sometimes in that, breaks not the unity of the
body of Christ. Another thing against the unity of the Church is as they
suppose, that we live in continual discord, and unpeaceable debate among our
selves. They accuse us of debate, which are the cause of all the discord that is
among us. For about these things which they would bring in, and about their
misliking of the present state, is all the discord. If discord destroy the
church, where became their church, when Brown and Harison their two leaders
fell out? The Apostles dissented, the church of Corinth had diverse sects: if we
keep unity in the foundation, dissension in ye inferior points, will not be
so dangerous, but yet we must strive to agree in all things, albeit we cannot
hope to obtain it. For that was never round in any Church long together: And
the voice of Paul is known: there must be heresies. These Barrowists in
diverse things slip and fall into popery, when they would seem to be
farthest from it. Unity and consent they make a note of their Church, even as
the papists do.

In their seventh note, they ouerrunne and ouerturne all the officers of our
Church at a breath. They say, the true Churches must be governed by such
officers as Christ has appointed to his Church. The officers that they think
every Church should have by Christ's appointment, are five: Pastors, Teachers,
Elders, Deacons, and Releeuers. These they make to be necessary in every
congregation, or else that there can be no established Church without them.
Two officers they appoint in every congregation for the teaching of the word:
Pastors for exhortation, Teachers for doctrine, and matters of controversy. It
were to be wished, that every Church had one well learned and furnished for
both these parts: for manners and life, to note and correct swearers, idle
persons, drunckardes, and all offenders, and to order every thing in the
Church, with the Pastor and teacher: they appoint Eders in no certain number.
The rebuke and correction of any sin, we account necessary, and is done
among us by sundry kinds of officers: the pastors by word, the
Ecclesiastical judges by censures, the other officers by punishments inflicted.
The thing it self we have, as we have the word taught and set forth among us.
The third thing in government that they count necessary, is the Deaconshippe,
whose office should be to make collection, and to distribute to the poor and
needy. This in every parish is done, although by officers of other names.
Last of all, they add Releeuers, which should attend upon the lame and sick,
and such as can not help themselves. There is not in every parish continual
need of such a standing officer. When it needs, some that are charitable and
pitiful, do take some order for it. Now therefore the things, as being
necessary, for the being or for the ornament of a Christian people, we have
among us: yet all the strife in the land, is especially to bring in this
government. we must have a change of all, that these Elders and Deacons may be
brought into every parish. This is their Helena that they fight for. The
places that are urged for the Eldershippe in the old Testament, are these:
First out of Leuiticus: Leuit. 10.10.
The Lord spoke to Aaron and his sons saying, ye shall not drink wine nor
strongdrinke, that ye may put difference between the holy and unholy, and
between the clean and unclean. This helps not an Eldershippe, but rather
establishes an Archbishop: Deuteronomy. 17.8.
An Eldership of lay men it can not set up: For Aaron and his sons were
Priests. The next is out of Deuteronomie: If there be any matter of plea,
thou shall come unto the priests of the Levites, and unto the judge that shall
be in those days. And again: that man that will not hearken to the Priest, or
the Judge, that man shall die. This likewise does overthrow the lay
presbytery, and by proportion and like equity, establishes the Archbishop,
and the prerogative of the Prince. And last of all, 2. Chro. 19 2.
that in the Chronicles may warrant an hie commission for the whole land, but
not a presbytery for every parish. Thus it says: Moreover in Jerusalem did
Iehoshaphat set of the Levites, and of the Priests, and of the chief of the
families of Israel for the judgment and cause of the Lord, and they returned
to Jerusalem. This was general for the whole kingdom, and will not help to
erect a presbytery in every parish. The places of the new Testament are
these: The first out of Matthew: Matthew. 18.17.
If he will not hear them, tell the Church. If Christ, when he spoke this, had
relation to the state of the Jews: he might mean the general Synedrion at
Jerusalem: for particular they had not. If the state of the Church to come be
understood: then either the governors in what form soever it shall be, or
else the whole body of the Church, may be meant: but an Eldership of lay
persons, can not any way be inferred of words so general. Another place is
in the Epistle to ye Corinthians: 1. Cor. 5.4.
when ye are gathered together: by which words, the whole Church is meant,
and not any lay Elders. For he speaks to them that were puffed up, and
should have sorrowed: and those were not Elders only, if there were any in
the Church of Corinth: and it is manifest that he writes to ye whole Church.
And out of the Epistle to Timothy, they would fetch an vnteaching Eldership,
when he says, 1. Tim. 4.14.
despise not the gift which is given thee by prophecy, with the laying on of
the hands of Eldership. This presbytery, or Eldership, Calvin says, may be
meant of the office which he received to be an Elder, that is, a Minister of
the word, and not of any company, by whom he received it. And how should
we think, that the laying on of hands to make a Minister, should pertain
to them that are no Ministers? After these particular places for their
Eldership, they have some also which seem to infer these, and all their
other officers: but the chief are two. The first is to the Romans: Romans 12.6.
Seeing then that we have gifts that are diverse, according to the grace that
is given unto us, whether we have prophecy, let us prophecy according to the
proportion of faith: or an office, let us wait on the office: or he that
teaches on teaching: or he that exhorts on exhortation: he that
distributeth, let him do it with simplicity: he that rules, with diligence:
he that shows mercy, with cherefulnes: hence they will seem to fetch all
their officers. But this, none of the ancient fathers, none of the learned
writers of our time did see, till of late. This seems not exactlie to agree
to their plot: for first here are three names for doctrine: Prophecy,
Teaching, and Exhortation: and all may be performed by one man. Then to Rule,
and to have an Office are so general, that they can not be restrained to the
form and name of such Elders as they appoint. To distribute, and to show
mercy, either pertain to all: or else, if there must be such officers, it is
not necessary under their names of Deacons, and Releeuers, nor at all times:
but as time and occasions require. Their other place is to the Corinthians: 1.
Cor. 12.28.
God has ordained some in the Church, as first Apostles, secondly Prophets,
thirdly Teachers, then them that do miracles, after that the gifts of
healing, helpers, gouerners, diversity of tongues. Here are more then five:
and by no direct way can these precisely be hence fetched. Apostles,
Prophets, Teachers, diversity of tongues pertain all especially to doctrine.
The gift of working miracles, and of healing, were but for those times:
Helpers, and gouerners are too large names, to bring in only Deacons, and
Relieuers, and Elders, into every congregation, in such sort and order as they
prescribe. Governors we have, and helpers, although we have not their Elders
nor their Deacons. These are ye chief places, whereon their discipline is
builded. Other they have in the Acts, and to the Ephesians, and Timothy, and
Titus: but none of them make the whole number, nor the particulars in their
form, and especially (which is the chief) they help not their Eldershippe of
vnteaching persons. Now then, we may have Christ's government, and seek his
kingdom, although we have not these officers, in these names, and this order.

Their new officers are not necessary to the building of the Church: but
peradventure they whom we have, do pull down the Church. That is their
opinion: for thus they speak of our estate: In stead of these, they remain
most seruilely subject to the Antichristian government of the popish
Archbishops, Bishops, Chauncelors, Archdeacons, Deanes, Commissaries, Doctors,
Proctors, Advocates, Notaries, Registers, Purseuants, Cursetors, Summoners: and
from the Apostaticall seat of the Bishops, they receive as Antichristian and
false a Ministry, as their Parsons, Vicars, Curates, Hirelings, Lecturers,
Mercenarie preachers: All which together, with this people, stand bound and
subject to the Bishops Romish courts of hie commission, of faculties, of
arches, of prerogatives, of delegates, of their Commissaries, and the rest.

Because we have some officers of like name, though not all, nor of like
quality, as they childishlie imagine: They say, neither gouerners nor
subjects, neither pastors nor people, can be the Church of Christ. Four
orders they make here of things and persons to be condemned and removed.
First, all those that have Ecclesiastical government committed unto them, the
Bishops and all that do assist them. Secondly, all sorts of Ministers,
preachers and not preachers. Thirdly, Ecclesiastical courts and judgments.
Last of all, the whole people for being and continuing subject unto those. If
we ask a reason of this their peremptory sentence, we can perceive none
here, but because they are popish and Antichristian. If I should confess
this, and say the government is such, and defend our Church, by the example
of the Church in Babylon, as one does: I should justify them, and condemn
our selves: I should lie against the truth, and against mine own soul. But
thus I say: If these things be popish, as they do stand among us, let them
be excluded: nay let us be excluded out of the Church altogether. Now then,
how shall we know, whether a thing be popish and Antichristian, or no? By the
names? that can not be: Names of their nature be indifferent: the things
contained in the names, as they are used of us, must be examined. And how shall
we find, whether they be popish and Antichristian? If they serve to promote
popery, then are they popish, then are they Antichristian: But if they further
Christ's glory, and his kingdom: then may they be retained in the Church of
Christ: and we having them, be his Church. Therefore, if none of these
offices, nor courts, nor Ministers help to maintain idolatry, or the Popes
supremacy, or men's traditions against the written word: or free will against
the grace of Christ: or men's merits against justification by faith, or the
Idol and sacrifice of the Mass, or pilgrimages, or purgatory, or prayer for
the dead, or auricular confession, or satisfactions for sins by penance, or
indulgences, or the keeping of the word of God from the people in an unknown
tongue, or such like: if they do not maintain vice, nor injustice, nor
heresy among us, but are directed to root out popery, to keep us in ye true
faith, to advance the word of God, to establish our justification by faith, to
further repentance and good works, to punish sin, to define that which is
equal and right, to keep the common peace of the Church: then are they not
popish, seeing they are bent and exercised to the ruin of popery: but they
are Christian and holy, and appertaining to the Church of Christ, for as much
as they further the kingdom and glory of Christ our Savior. All that are
zealous, strive for two things, wherein all men are to put to their help by
counsel, by credit, by authority, by power, and by all lawful means that
be in them. One, that the word of God may be more diligently, and commonly
taught: the other, that sin may be more severely and generally punished. If
these two may by this government be more set forward, much of these troubles
and contentions will be easier stopped. There is no fault in ye names, or in ye
offices, but they may help forward these or any good things. Wherefore they be
not simply popish, or Antichristian: but in the abuse they were, in the right
use they are now holy and Christianlike. Now let us see what scripture does
condemn these names and offices. Two places are brought out against the^: One
out of the Psalm: The kings of the earth band themselves, and the princes are
assembled together against the Lord, and against his Christ: let us break
their bands, and cast their cords from us. But do our gouerners and all the
people in this estate, band themselves against the Lord, and against his
Christ? do they not band themselves for the glory of the Lord and of Jesus
Christ? It might be done I know more plentifully, yet this government
sets forth Christ only to us, with his benefits to salvation. Christ's
deity, Christ's gospel, Christ's sacrifice, Christ's justice, Christ's kingdom by
this is advanced. Wherefore they band not themselves against Christ, neither do
they say, let us break their bands, and cast their cords from us, but rather
they willingly receive the bands, yea the chains of Christ if need be. We
are content that his law bind our feet, and hands, and eyes, and hearts
also: but we cast off their bands, because we cast away their government by
Elders. They are not the bands of Christ, they are but small threeds, that will
easily be broken. Luke 19.14.
The other place which they allege against those titles and offices is in Luke
Now his citizens hated him, and sent an embassage after him, saying, we will not
have this man to reign over us. These places that were spoken of the obstinate
Jews, that hated ye name and faith of Christ, of the heathen idolaters, that
worshipped false Gods, and would not acknowledge Christ to be God, of ye
Mahometicall sect that reject Christ's gospel, and deny his redemption, of the
Antichristian and popish rabble, which keep his name, and deny his efficacy
and sufficiency in redeeming us; those (I say) they bring against them that
acknowledge all which they themselves do for sufficiency of salvation, for
infalliblenes of his truth, and for all his benefits, only because we yield
not to the^, for a certain form of outward government. But they must prove
more evidently, that those things are evil, or else we will not be terrified
by those places, but that we may safely say, that yt true Church of Jesus
Christ is with us even in this government.

To return again to their other notes which remain, whereby they will
describe a visible church of Christ, they say, that Christ's Church must be
governed by his own laws, taken out of the old and new Testament, and no
other. They think, as it seems, that no laws need more to be made for any
thing, but that the laws of Moses should stand, and be sufficient to
determine all matters: Or if for civil matters they will admit more, yet for
punishments in matters Ecclesiastical, it is certain they will acknowledge no
more, nor any other. Their grounds for this opinion are these scriptures.
First out of Saint Matthewe: Mat. 17.5.
This is my beloved son, hear him. It extends to matters of doctrine and
salvation, and all that he has taught: but not to matters of government
Civil, or Ecclesiastical in particular: For he has not made such laws. The
next is out of the Epistle to the Hebrews: Heb. 3.6.
He is Lord of the house: 1. Cor. 2.16.
therefore he is to be obeyed, in so much as he has set down. Particular
ordinances he has not prescribed for government, but left it free. The^ they
bring this out of the Epistle to the Corinthians: We have the mind of Christ:
he means for matters of salvation, and the worship of God: but not for
particular actions that must be considered in government. After this, comes
that to the Galathians: Gal. 3.15.
A man's testament, when it is confirmed, no man does abrogate, or adds to it.
Paul speaks of justification by faith, whereto, works as a cause of
justification must not be added: nothing there of outward government. Now as
for their other places, 1. Tim. 6.13.
they infer not, that in the word are sufficient laws set down for all
things: but that such as are commanded, should be observed: as that to
Timothy: I charge thee that thou keep the commandment without spot, and
unrebukable, until the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ. That which Paul
has set down as a commandment to be kept, or has so declared, that must be
kept for ever. But who can say, that Paul has set down laws for all things
in that Epistle? Ephe. 4.11.
And that to the Ephesians does not conclude their purpose: He has given
Apostles for the work of the Ministry, and gathering together of the
Saints, til we all meet to a perfect man. This place speaks only of
doctrine, and not of laws for government either in the Church, or
commonwealth, except they think their Pastors and Doctors must make laws for all things. And as for that to the Corinthians, 1. Cor. 14.37.
cutteth not off al laws for ye Church made by men: If any man think himself
to be a prophet, or spiritual, let him acknowledge that the things which I
write unto you, are the commandments of the Lord. He writes there, of not
using strange languages, where they are not understood, and and of women, that
they should not preach in the Church. But there are other things which by
laws must be ordered, which Paul, nor the scripture any where has determined
in special. Last of all, they apply to this purpose, all those places of
scripture, which teach that nothing must be added nor taken from the word of
God. The making of laws about orders in government, is no addition to Gods
word: For the thing is not there forbidden. Thus they will seem to prove,
that in the word are sufficient laws to order men's actions: upon this
ground, they will have the penal laws of Moses revived: then they must bring
us again to the land of Canaan: they must establish to us again that
kingdom: For those penal laws like as the ceremonial, were proper only to
that people. Now the Priesthood being changed, the law is changed. As they
say, the word has sufficient laws to determine all things: so likewise,
they will not admit that princes should make laws, thereby to help
forward the kingdom of Christ. For they say the kingdom of Christ comes
not by the laws of men, but by the word and spirit. For this purpose they
abuse these scriptures. First, that of Saint Luke: Luke. 17.20.
The kingdom of God comes not with observation: They mean with observing
princes laws: but Christ means that his kingdom comes not, neither is
discerned by outward pomp and worldly glory, which the Pharisees looked for:
but is properly a thing inward in the heart. That place nothing pertains to
outward laws. Also they misapplie that of Zachary: Neither by an army nor
strength, Zach. 4.6.
but by my spirit, says the Lord of hosts. This is spoken by comparison,
that God in the preserving of his Church uses principally the working of his
spirit, and not an army, nor strength of men: Yet that he uses armies, and
strength for their defense, the Church in all ages has had experience. But
the principal is his spirit: outward strength and laws in comparison of it,
and without it are nothing. When Esaie says: Behold, Esaie 40.10.
the Lord God will come with power, and his arm shall rule for him: his arm
rules, even by the good and wholesome laws of men. Iere. 17.5.
And that curse in Jeremy pertains not to us, because we are ruled by laws
of princes. Thus says the Lord, Cursed be the man that trusts in man, and
makes flesh his arm, and withdraws his heart from the Lord: For we trust
not in the laws of princes, nor in them, when we use the^ under God for our
quiet government: we know that Kings are nursing fathers, and Queens are
nursing mothers. David, Solomon, and Iosaphat, and Ezechias, and Josias, and
all godly princes made laws for the Church of God, and were approved: yea,
the laws and decrees of Nebuchadnezzar, of Cyrus, and Darius, were for the
behoof and benefit of it. Many things are left undetermined in special,
wherein princes make good and profitable decrees for the Church. If their
position were true, the Prophets, and our Savior should not have condemned
either the princes, or the lawiers for making unjust laws, but for making any
laws at all. Princes especially serve Christ, even in making laws for Christ.
Wherefore it appears not, that sufficient laws in special, are set down in
the word for the Church: nor that it is wicked for the Church, to use the
laws of princes, and to be subject to them, if otherwise they be not
ungodly. Now mark what they say of our laws: We (they say) are not
governed by the word of God, but by Canons, Injunctions, and Decrees, of these
Antichristian and Popish courts. Let them name one Canon, or Decree and
Iniunction, that maintains any thing that is popish or against Christ, and
surely it ought to be abolished. But there be laws which they had, which came
not from them, but either from the word of God, or the light of nature, or
former holy constitutions. Why should their detaining of them in
unrighteousness, hinder us from the converting of them to the furtherance of the
Gospel? They are not popish so long as they are not directed to maintain
popery, but are applied to godliness and peace, in obedience of the truth.

The ninth mark of their Church is, that al and each one of them must stand in
and for their Christian liberty, to practice whatsoever God has commanded,
and is revealed unto them in his holy word. This their liberty is one of the
chief points wherein they stand. Here neither Prince, nor Counselor, nor
Bishop, nor Law must restrain them, from refusing or casting off whatsoever
they mislike, or from taking upon them and putting in practice any thing that
they have determined and concluded to be done. Seeing according to their
conceit, they have found out that Bishops and all other officers in our Church
are popish, and that the ministry bears (as they suppose) popish names and
marks, and the laws are popish, they will neither sue to Prince nor Counsel
for the removing of any of these things, but with all speed cast the yoke from
their own necks. And seeing they have found in their fancies, that an
eldershippe and no other laws but the written word is to be heard, therefore
they will erect these things among themselves. For God (say they) has left
power in every man and every assembly of his people, to cast off all that may
hinder, and to transport themselves to any thing that may further their
salvation. In matters necessary to salvation we grant there is by Gods
gracious working such freedom given to Gods people, that all the devils in
hell cannot hinder them from having that whereby it should be brought to pass.
But such are not the things, which they strive for. Salvation may be had in
this state without them. But their opinion of us in respect of Christian
liberty is this. They say, that all we remain in bondage to the Egyptian and
Babylonish yokes, yielding obedience to these Courts and their Cannons. Now let
us hear their scripture, by which they will maintain their so absolute
liberty, and condemn us as men in Egyptian bondage. The places are these:
first that to the Galathians, Gal. 4.9.
But now seeing ye know God, yea rather are known of God, how turn ye again
to impotent and beggarly rudiments, whereunto as from the beginning, you will
be in bondage again? Paul there speaks of the observation of days and
ceremonies of the law with opinion of necessity to salvation and
justification: we repose neither salvation nor justification in any ceremony or
outward thing which we use: not in the government, not in apparel, this or
that. In the use of them our minds are free. The like meaning has that to the
Collossians: Collos. 2.20.
If ye be dead with Christ from the ordinances of the world, why as though
ye lived in the world, are ye burdened with traditions? There is no
tradition in our Church that can be a burden to a man's conscience, being
rightly taken, seeing there is no idolatrous tradition among us, nor any joined
with opinion of necessity, or worship of God, or merit to salvation. But in
those things the soul is left free to depend wholly upon Jesus Christ. The
like meaning has that to the Corinthians: 1. Cor. 7.23
Ye are bought with a price, be not the servants of men. Paul condemns
not obedience in things lawful, but in voluntary worship. And as for us, we
place no necessary part of Gods worship in the traditions of any me^. The book
of common prayer is not reckoned so necessary, as if God were not otherwise
rightly worshipped; neither yet absolutely as mere traditions of men, for as
much as it is either scripture, or agreeable unto scripture. Outward ceremonies
are retained for order, but no part of Gods worship placed either in cross or
garment. To these places of scripture as of like nature may be joined that of
the Acts, Acts 4.19.
We ought rather to obey God then men, that is, when they command things
contrary. But in the government, or in the ministry, or in Gods worship, or in
the admission of men to the sacraments, the laws of this land do not command
things contrary to God, for any thing that we have yet found. Last of all for
our bondage, Apoc. 14.19.
they produce first the Revelation where it says: If any man worship the
beast or his image. The government by Bishops, they take to be the image of the
beast. They were (we confess,) so to be accounted, while they maintained the
Pope and his laws: but now they are not so, when they are set to further the
Gospel and truth of Christ. These are the places by which they would convince
us to be in bondage. But the Scriptures by which they challenge their large and
infinite liberty are these: Ioh. 8.33.
first that of John, Ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you
free. Christ speaks of freedom, not from laws and Magistrates and
Ecclesiastical government, but from sin and Satan: for he says, He that
commits sin is the servant of sin. The next that is pretended to speak
for their liberty, is Paul to the Galathians. Gal. 4.6.
Jerusalem which is above is free, which is the mother of us all. Paul
disputes of our freedom from the curse of the law, and from circumcision and
other ceremonies, so that the curse is not to be feared of us that are made
free by Christ, nor justification to be sought by the ceremonies of the law,
nor any part of Gods worship to be reposed any longer in them. And the same
is his purpose in the fifth Chapter, when he says, Stand fast in the liberty
wherewith Christ has made us free. This is the freedom of conscience, the
liberty from the curse pronounced by the law, and from the ceremonies
thereof, with opinion of worship or merit of salvation. Thus are we free. We
are under a government, and have some few ceremonies: but we neither count
them parts of Gods worship, nor any cause of our justification or salvation.
Thus our minds are free, although our bodies be bound in an outward obedience.
They may therefore become subject with us to this government, and yet enjoy due
Christian liberty.

The tenth and last note of their Church is this, that it must have the power
that Christ has given to his Church to the worlds end, and all the powers in
earth and hell cannot take from them: namely to bind and loose, and to reform
things that are amiss. Which power they say we have not. For our assemblies as
they judge, cast out Satan by the power of Satan: namely (say they) by these
impes of Antichrist, the Bishops, Commissaries, and Priests. These be their
words. Then if they say true in deed, in this Church government we have no
binding sinners, and loosing them that do repent, but by the devil. Let us
see what binding or loosing the church of God should have, and how far that
which we have is wanting and disagreeing from the truth. The power given to
the Church in this respect they affirm to beco^tained in these places which
follow. Psalm. 149.
First in the Psalm when it is said, To bind their Kings in chains, and their
nobles in fetters of iron. This place seems properly to be understood not of
Ecclesiastical censures, but of outward victory gotten by the sword against
Gods enemies by his people after their oppression. This God gives oftentimes
to his Church, and has (his name be praised) given already unto us: God grant
when need shall require, we may obtain it hereafter. The next place by which
they challenge this power, is in Matthewe: If he will not hear them, Mat. 18.17
tell it to the Church, and if he refuse to hear the Church also, let him be
unto thee as an heathen man and as a publicane. By the Church might here be
understood ye governors to who^ this authority should be committed of the
church, or else the whole assembly speaking by the voice of one or few, for the
declaration of the obstinacy and damnable state of such an one: but as for a
presbytery in every congregation it cannot serve, seeing if it be spoken by
relation to the practice of the Jews, they had no such thing: but in
Jerusalem, in one city, one assembly, one consistory of such judgment for
all. After this they seek somewhat for their excommunicating presbytery in
Luke. Luke 10.19
Behold I give unto you power to tread on serpents and scorpions, and over all
the power of the enemy, and nothing shall hurt you. This was a miraculous gift
conferred upon the Apostles both for their preservation and the glory of Jesus
Christ, as Paul by the viper hanging on his hand received no hurt. The things
going before are referred to the power of the word beating down Satan from the
souls of men. As for excommunication or punishing the wicked by censures, this
pertains not to that. That to the Corinths makes the most show for their
purpose, When ye are gathered together and my spirit by the power of our Lord
Jesus Christ, 1. Cor. 5.4.
let such a one be delivered unto Satan. But this makes against that which
they seek, and seems to favor that order which we have. For Paul being one
man alone, did decree this sentence: The Church was to declare it. But whether
it be done by one or many, this needs much heed and care and conscience, that
this sword be drawn against none, but those that do deserve it. Last of all,
that of the 2. Corinths, does not help the presbytery. Thus he says. The
weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God to cast down
holds, casting down imaginations and every hie thing that is exalted against
the knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity every thought to the
obedience of Christ, having ready vengeance against all disobedience. A great
part of this is understood of the word preached, which works these effects.
The vengeance against disobedience was a thing in Paul's own hand as minister
of it, not in the power of the multitude or any presbytery there mentioned. So
that if it pertain to the censure of the Church, it might be executed by one
man. But it is thought rather to be meant of bodily punishment, which by the
mighty power of Christ, the Apostles in the beginning did inflict upon the
disobedient: So Peter killed Ananias and Saphyra, and Paul stroke Elymas blind.
These are their authorities, whereby they challenge to their Eldership, power
and might to bind and loose, and would infer, that in the Church of England
there is no casting out of the devil, but by the power of the devil, because
their presbytery is not called to conjure him out. Some reformed Churches use
no excommunication at all, and yet are the Churches of Christ. They have other
punishments for the offenders: The truth is, that excommunication cutteth no
man from the Church, whom his own sin and unbelief has not cut off
before: Neither can it loose any, whom faith and gods spirit does not loose.
Thus much of the tenth and last note of their Church. Thus I have briefly
set before you a short view of the difference betwixt the Sectaries and us.
They that favor these opinions, these innouations, are in diverse degrees: some
say they are imperfections, and wantes, and maimes in our Church, the most of
those things which they mislike, but yet to be tolerated. It must be confessed
there is no Church, but has imperfections. We may not maintain all things,
as blameles in our Church. No man is found faultles: every Church is wanting
in their duty, both in respect of men's laws, and of the persons. We can not
justify our selves in all things: but that every thing is such a deformity,
and maime, or any so gross as they seem to make them, if the particulars be
examined, it will not be found. These mislikers and tolerators have begotten
the last and extremest degree of reuolters, of forsakers, of refusers, and
plain contemners, whose case is much to be pitied: especially of those
misslikers, because through them, they are come into this downefal. The
controversies wherein we differ, have small weight in the matters, and less
in the proofs, yet behold the conclusion.

Thus they speak. Therefore the parishes of England are not, and for all these
reasons several and joined, cannot be held in any Christians judgment, the
true Churches of Christ. This is their sentence upon all the parishes and
people in this land, that come to the Churches, that hear the word at our
mouths, that receive the Sacraments at our hands: they shut up all in one
state of not being the people of God, nor the Church of Christ. As for our
selves, notwithstanding their rash judgment, we know upon what ground we
stand. There can no other foundation be laid, then that which is laid, even
Jesus Christ is the head corner stone, he is the rock: Every parish in this
land is taught, either plentifully, or sparingly: yet all are taught this,
that Christ only is our head, our sacrifice, our righteousness, that he is to
be laid hold on only by faith joined with repentance, and a good
conscience. Where this is taught, and received, there is the Church of God.
All the parishes in this land be taught it, and by public confession do
witness that outwardly, at least, they do receive it. The Lord grant that
it may be made more clear, and that it may be whetted more sharply upon
all, and that all may receive it fruitefullie, to comfort and salvation. 2.
Cor. 13.
Paul says: Prove your selves, whether you are in the faith, examine your
selves, know ye not your selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye
be reprobates?

We need not be cast in doubt of our selves, for a supposed appendant truth
of an outward form of government, as though if we have not that, and yet have
the truth of faith, the spirit of Christ, the word of God, the sacraments of
the Gospel, repentance and newenes of life: having these (I say) that are
most necessary and substantial branches of Christian religion; it were madness
to think we have nothing, because they imagine we have some as bad, or worse
then infidels and heathen men among us, and because we have not such an
outward government as pleases them, because we worship God by the book of
Common prayer, and because our Ministers some are not preachers, and all are
made by the Bishops, and all tolerate or allow the book of Common prayer, and
the outward government. These are the chief heads of the difference
between them and us. While men seek to perfect Churches, they will bring to
pass, that there will be among us no Church at all. Now with us, there is
leave for all men to be good, if they will by Gods grace endeavor. They would
have it so as they fancy, that no man should be evil: but this is impossible.
If we can bring to pass, that the Gospel be taught in all places, and that
sins be most severely punished, and all be brought to the learning of the
word of God: then shall we see a more perfect and beautiful form of the
Church among us. Thus many of these controversies will be appeased, then shall
we most clearelie appear to be the army of Christ, and he will show
himself to be our captain, and Lord, and God. Thus much to them that deny
that we are Christ's army, and that our Churches as they now stand, are not the
true Churches of Christ.

This matter being thus run over, it is time to return to that which we
have in hand. The beast, and the kings of the earth and their armies, fight
against him that sits on the horse, and against his army. A part of this
army, the Church of England as it stands now is, by the singular goodness
of God. All Gods people make but one army, and that an united army. How much
more then is it necessary, that we which be but one band as it were, of this
mighty army, should agree together in one? Let all lay aside envy, pride,
and aemulation. Let us especially now in the time of so dangerous threatenings,
and attempts of the enemies, put away strife about these matters. Many
doubtless stir up, and set a fire the parties on both sides, and yet bear
no love to either. It were the best means of the enemies victory, to increase
strife. Cyprian ascribes the violent persecution that came upon the Church in
his time under Decius, to dissension, which fell among them, especially, by
means of the Nouatians, even such a sect as this is, that under pretense of a
greater purity, would make a Church by themselves. Thus he describes his
times. Patrimonio and lucro stude^tes, amulationi and dissentioni vacantes,
simplicitatis and fidei negligentes, seculo verbis solis and non factis
renunciantes, vnusquisque sibi placentes and omnibus displicentes: Vapulamus
itaque vt meremur. While we study for gain and riches: while we follow
pride: while we are earnest about aemulation and dissentio^, negligent about
faith: while we renounce the world in words only, and not in deeds: while we
please every man himself, and displease all men else: while we give our
selves to these things, we are beaten as we deserve. Eusebius makes dissension
ye cause of ye most grievous persecution that Dioclesian brought upon the
Church, which lasted 13. years: In which the Churches were thrown down, and
made even with the ground: the Bibles were taken and burnt in the open markets:
the pastors and Bishops were put to death, or were feign to lie Lid in caves.
Thus he says: Postquam res nostrae, etc. After our estate by too much
liberty, Hist. l. 8. c. 1.
degenerated into nicenes and sluggishnes, and one hated and reviled another,
and wheresoever it happened, we among our selves, and by our selves, did set
upon one another with armor and weapons of words, and rulers fell out with
rulers, and pastors with pastors, and people moved sedition against people, and
after this unspeakable hypocrisy and mocking, did grow to the top of malice
and naughtines: Gods judgment (after his accustomed manner) came upon the
Churches. This was the estate in the time of Eusebius, before the persecution
came. Ours is not much unlike. God grant dissentio^ cease, that there follow
not the like event. The severity of some men in maintaining unity is misliked:
but there is nothing but severity can help us. Abbas Vrspergensis by reason
of ye schism in Germany about ye election of the Emperor, some leaning to
Philip, some to Berthold, some to Otto, says: that there was not one parish
which agreed with another, and that by occasion of this, and such strifes, the
Pope did grow so great. Iocu^dare super adiutrice tua discordia, quia erupit de
puteo infernalis abissi, vt accumule^tur tibi multa pecuniaru^ praemia. Habes
quod semper sitisti, decanta ca^ticu^, quia per malicia^ hominu^ non per tua^
religione^ orbe^ vicisti. Thus he speaks to Rome: rejoice for thy helper
discord, because she is broken out of the infernal pit that much money may be
brought to thee: thou have that which thou have always thirsted. Sing this
song, that thou have overcome the world, by means of the malice of men, and
not by thy religion. It was ye discord of men that made the Pope great, and
brought his tyranny upon them. That also was the cause of Gods judgments
upon the East Churches: the dissension about the Trinity made a way for
Mahomet. If any thing will bring the Antichristian yoke upon this land again
(which God turn far from us) it will be dissension. Therefore all bitterness,
and libelling, and slaundering must be laid away.

If it might come to pass that we were an united army, then we might easily
hope to stand, we might prevail against our enemies, although they came never
so many, or so often against us. To bring us to unity, and to help us to get
the victory against the common enemy, we have need of many means. These
causes that are in controversy must be opened by preaching, by writing, by
conference. So Augustine stopped the mouths of the Donatistes, that are most
like to those with whom we have to deal. After this manner, he often overcame
the Maniches, and the Palagians, Zwinglius by disputing, writing, and
preaching, drove the Anabaptists clean out of Zurich, although there they
began. If sectaries write, and no man answer: if they priuelie sow the seed
of their sect, and no man publicly root it out: they will ouergrowe all.
While Doctor Fulke lived, his aunswering and confuting of every popish
Treatise, which came forth in English, did much good in keeping away from us
the infection and poison of Popery. Able men should be chosen (if they offer
not themselves,) which should continue that course, that nothing might appear
against Religion, or government, which should not be answered. If they can
not be answered, let the faults be amended, let them not be retained. This is
one means to help to recover unity.

Another help must be in the civil Magistrates, which by authority and
punishment, must restrain the liberty of railing, of libelling, and of
contemning the governors in place. Vile pamphlets of reproach and slander,
should not be suffered to go forth: no, not against an enemy. While we suffer
one part to rail, we provoke the other, and peradventure a third comes in,
and painteth both in the foulest colors. These should be means to unite us at
home.

Against our common enemies, we had need first to be armed with innocence
and righteousness: we must bear the colors of our captain Jesus Christ: He
rides upon a white horse; and the warriors which were in heaven, by hope and
conversation followed him upon white horses clothed with fine linen, white and
pure. And before in this Chapter it is said, that the white linen is the
righteousness of Saints.

If we be known by these colors, our captain and general will not suffer
us to be ouerrunne. Nineue repented, and after threatening was saved. God has
generally promised to any nation repenting, that he will turn away the
evil which he has devised against it. We can not but see the land full of
sin: Contention and strife in the Ministers, and a great part of the people:
Theftes, robberies, murders never so many, nor with such multitudes and
boldness attempted: Whoredom, excess, pride, and drunkenness ouerflowe all.
These filthy rags must be cast away, and we must put upon us the fine
white linen of righteousness.

Let us not think that the righteousness of ten will save our land, as it would
have saved Sodom. God has not made such a general condition with all people:
and there is no comparison between five little cities in a valley, and all
this land. When the captivity was brought upon Jerusalem, there were diverse
that feared God among them. The righteous man shall escape himsefe in the time
of Gods judgment: He shall not save any other: God will provide for those
that are his, living, or dying. If Noah, Job, and Daniel were among this
people, As I live says the Lord, they should save neither son nor
daughter: they should save but their own souls. Every man labor to be
righteous himself, and he shall be safe. Remember that Christ judges and
fights righteously.

To this righteousness of life, we must also join faith, or rather
righteousness must be joined to faith. This is our victory that overcomes
the world, even our faith. By faith David, Gedeon, and the rest subdued
kingdoms, and wrought deliverance to Gods people. Although we have sin, yet
let us repent and trust in Gods mercy and power, and commit the event to him.
Faith prevails with God by prayer. By prayer, Moses fought against Amalek:
Elias by prayer obtained fire to consume the fifty that came to take him.
Prayer delivered Jerusalem and Ezechias, when Senacherib was ready to devour
them. These must be our spiritual armor. These must we put on as Christians:
and as men, we must arm our selves if need require otherwise. It is needful
that we should always be ready. The beast will not change his nature: His
favorer is mighty and impatient of a foil. Let us not be secure, because
God has fought for us, and given us one victory. Caesar at his first coming
into this land, had the repulse. The Danes were at the first beaten back. The
Goths at their first coming into Italy with three hundred thousand were
overthrown: but within five years after they came again, and destroyed all
the West Empire. The Sarasens at the first, were dispersed and drowned with
tempest coming into Spain: but at length they took it, and inhabited it
certain hundred years. Constantinople was not won at the first expedition
against it. It is not in vain, that God brings enemies against a people, and
delivers them once or twice. It is not to make them proud nor secure, nor
more licentious: but (if they amend not) to bring a more severe and horrible
revenge upon them. Let us not therefore trust to this, that God has done it
once, as though he would do it always, though we become negligent, and wax
worse and worse.

Thus if we arm our selves, we shall see such an end of the battle, when the
enemy shall come against us, as God has here foreshewed. The beast and the
false prophet shall be taken, and cast into the lake that burns with fire and
brimstone: The rest shall be slain in such number, that their bodies shall not
be buried, but the ravens shall feed upon their carcasses. Hitherto, God has
given victory upon victory against the beast, and I trust he will do it
still, till that enemy be consumed. This age has seen many victories
against him, and it is verelie to be thought, it shall see more. The
triumphant songs set down so often in this Chapter, after the discovery of
Antichrist, and the beginning of his overthrow, make me greatly to hope for
it. First the multitudes sing: Halleluiah: Salvation, and glory, and honor,
and power be to the Lord our God. For he has condemned the whore, and
revenged the blood of his servants. And they said again: Halleluiah: and her
smoke rose up for evermore. Then the pastors, and all the creatures said
Amen, Halleluiah. And the fourth time, a voice came out of the throne saying:
Praise our God all ye his servants, and ye that fear him, both small and
great. And last of all: John says: I heard like a voice of a great multitude,
and as the voice of many waters, and as the voice of strong thundrings,
saying, Halleluiah: for our Lord God almighty has reigned. Let us be glad
and rejoice, and give glory to him, for the marriage of the Lamb is come, and
his wife has made her self ready. Thus about the time of the fall of this
enemy, the joy of the Church shall be unspeakable: victory follows upon
victory, triumph upon triumph. God grant that we may be prepared against
these enemies, that (if they come against us) we may yet have experience of
these victories, that we may sing these thankful and joyful songs of
deliverance, and that we may be prepared to the marriage of the Lamb, and
found clothed with the wedding garment when he comes, Amen.

Imprinted at London by George Bishop and Ralph Newberie. 1590.


