A NEW AND Short Defense of Tobacco: with the effects of the same: and of the
right use thereof.

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON Printed by V. S. for Clement Knight, and are to be sold at his Shop at
the Sign of the Holy Lamb in Paul's Churchyard.

1602.

To the Reader.
GOod Reader, the Author of this little Pamphlet perceauing how vehemently (yet
without just cause) the use of Tobacco has of late been by common speech
detracted, and by diverse, publicly written against, desires herein briefly,
by his own example and experience (being a man of good quality, learning, and
judgment) to satisfy and direct his friends and countrymen, in the practice,
and taking of that herb; And has, to that end, set down such a perfect and
sound. Rule, and Method, as may confirm those who do rightly use the same, in
the continuance there of, and confute others, who unjustly, speak evil
against that, of whose true virtue they are utterly ignorant, themselves either
not using it, or abusing it, Extm, and vltra modum, know not, that, Insani
sapiens nomen feret, aequusiniqui vltra quam satis est virtutem si petat ipsam.
And that the best things may loose their natural property, being disordered
and misapplied, as continual experience in most things does too well
witness. But for the virtue of this divine herb (well applied) the Author
hereof is testis oculatus, without any exception, one that has practiced the
same (and that very profitably,) on his own body, which, by the power thereof,
he has recovered to perfect health, and strength, as a man of so many years
may have, so as to his own comfort, and for others to follow in the same
directions, he may justly set it down probatum est. There are (I know) many
others, who by the like right use of Tobacco have found the like happy effects,
but through want of kind affection to their countriemen, or like miserable
Euclioes (unwilling that any should participate with them in their golden
felicity) do smother the virtue of that which no charitable mind would have to
lie and die in silence. Let those therefore, who shall receive, either delight
in reading, or profit in practice of what is contained in this little Epitome,
think but thankefully of the writer, who wishes a general benefit of his
poor labor.

Farewell.
TOBACCO Artis poeoniae decus.
PErvsing two several Discourses, lately put down by two singular
exquisite learned Physicians, Con and Pro, touching the nature, use and
operation of our multum magnifico, lately recepted Indian Tobacco: The one of
them, bitter, inuectiue, and patheticall against it: The other, mild, modest,
and apologeticall for it. And finding them both in effect, and greatest
material points to concur, only differing, and dissenting, in trifling toies,
and terms, triuiall: I could not hold, but somewhat admire their serious
dispute, De lana caprina. For in good sooth who wots not (trow you) that every
poor simple in Physic, as all other matters elsewhere of good worth, and
greatest esteem, ( Per inscitiam ac in curiam) may lewdly be abused. Now,
forasmuch as: Scholam medendi, mutua concordia deceat, vt hanc litem quodammodo
(...), I thought it not amiss, Pro meo m^dulo, to insert hereunto my censure
of proof, and that also, so much the more willingly, inasmuch as I am not
Prosopoleptes, any way partially affected, neither yet, tam astergus
senseless, to conceal mine indebted, and devoted affiance unto that famous,
and renowned Tobacco, for it rare, and manifold demerits. By fortunate use
whereof, not only diverse gentlemen, elsewhere generally, but my self likewise,
principally, and particularly, have received such admirable graces and helps,
as may not in any wise, without impious ingratitude to Godward, and the like
injury, to the herb it self, be either smothered up in oblivion; or else,
buried, ( amnestia quadam perenni, quod absit.)

The commendation and virtue whereof may easily be discovered by these two
special means and marks, Nempe,

Skill. Square.
The former of them is collected and gathered by

Reading Reason.
The other is approved and confirmed by

Practice Demonstration.
Terms (I confess) quaint and conceited, yet not far unfit, pro materia
subiecta, vt sequitur.

And here, by your favor, Prima etiam front, before I proceed any further to
my purpose, I am seriously and friendly to forewarne all forward Tabacconists,
that of purgative medicines, Some are compoundes: Others are simples.

Compoundes.
Electuarium Indum: Electuar: de succ: ros: Diaprunis Diacatholicon
Diaphaenicon.
And many such like, of that crew

Simples.
Scammonie Stibbium Colocynthis Laurel Saena Alex.
with some others of that sort

Unto this latter Rank I do associate Tobacco, as one like, both in Nature
and Quality.

Now let me tell you by the way, that all these, and every of them in it self,
whether it be compound, or simple, is endued with some one malignant quality or
other, and that same also otherwise praedominant and pernicious, unless in
compounds, by mixture, it be reformed: or in simples singularly well restrained
and curbed, algates portending and intending, Non tam redimendam, quam
dirimendam sanitatem. Wherefore vigilant circumspection must be had, that
Tobacco be handled considerately and respectively, not, phanatically,
phantastically, insolently, excessiuely, and wantonly, as some humorous,
pragmaticall, Iocodocians (vain and (...)) use to do, whose noses are like
unto Mount Aetna, their mouths and lips (as it were) th'out-brust of Pluto
his hellish smoke, flying, and flashing about their faces, with every Huffe,
Snuff, and Puff, spitting out their own folly, to the great offense of many.
I dare not theere presume in this point to limite unto Tobacco and
Tabacconists, any exact Doses in weight, or measure* but will remitte that
matter to Discretion, to be received, by grain, scruple, or dragme, according
to the list and capacity of the taker.

And now forward to my purpose.

Ast, pugnare metus, retro pudor ire vetabat: Well: Etsi omnia non possumus
omnes: Tamen, Est quodam prodire tenus: si non datur vltra. Skill

Reading. Reasoning.
Praesuppose some small reading in me to have preceeded.

Then my reason shall be drawn and derived from the

Substance of Tobacco. Quality of Tobacco. Condition of Tobacco.
First, Whose Essence and Substance, cannot rightly be termed bad or base, but
ought truly to be accounted pure and precious, by virtue whereof, in marvelous
operation, men's bodies and members are delivered and cleared from innumerable,
and those also most gross, taedious, doleful, and desperate maladies.
Contraria contrariis curantur.

Second, Whose Qualities of high degree, scilicet, in exiccando celebriter, and
in aperiendo celeriter, do mightily and mainely work change, and reform all
the enormities in our queasie bodies; The head, from destillation: The leights,
from straightness: The liver, from obstruction; and consequently, all other
our principal parts, from infinite diseases, and grieuances, vt nihil supra:
All which effects, do sufficiently argue, and declare the admirable and
powerful force and dignity thereof.

Third, Whose Condition and property (doubtless) most mild and comfortable to
me, does leave behind it, in my mouth (taken by pipe) a certain sweet
fragrant moisture, Referens mellitum quid, not much unlike the pleasant deaw on
oken leaves, in prime of May, whereupon Hony-bees, at that time, do most
commonly and comfortably feed.

Then, to pretend, that by smell and taste, our sense is offended by Heat and
dries thereof, Radical moisture is exhausted, concoction hindered, propagation
decayed, poison and venom into men's bodies infunded, and melancholy bredde and
increased, are mere nugations, and yet grievous imputations, and great
indignities offered to that innocent Tobacco, admit such accidents do happen
by the immoderate and inconsiderate usage thereof: Vitium est hominis, non
artis nec herbae.

For, whosoever list without prejudice, to make faithful trial thereof, as my
self have done, shall easily find, feel, and confess, without impeachment,
that it is: Absque omnifarragine.

In

Essence, commendable. Smell, comfortable. Taste, tolerable. Virtue, forcible.
Effect, most admirable.
Ecquid amplius?

So that every discreet person without al suspicion of

Deleterion, Anodinon, Stupifaciendi, Inficiendi, Horroris, aut Offendiculi,
And every other considerate man and woman, etc. of

Highest degree. Finest grain. Sharpest sense
May safely without danger, I say (not feed,), smell, touch, taste, and take,
of our renowned Tobacco, without annoy: By it, ( Certes,) all superfluous
redoundant moisture in men's members, are wonderfully drained, and drenched,
obstructions reserate and opened, pains, surrances, and grieuances,
maruellously appeazed; melancholy, and such mad humors, never a deal the
more, supra modum, augmented.

I am neither Pary the French conceited, (as a boggle or a Bug-beare)
Antipathetice, to fear and abhor it, neither yet: D. T. English
Metamorphosed, Sympathetice, to feel and confess so much defect, by one days
want of it. But Vt ingenue referam: Nec inficias eam; Ego sum, qui sum, (...),
Tamaegomet sum rigidus inclytae Tabaccae, satelles, vt existimem hercule ac
credam, (me Iudice) there is not any one simple under the Sun, worthy to
stand in Mood and Figure, with this our noble Tobacco, neither yet, in any
parallel, or degree of comparison, (yield all due complements unto it;)
neither is there any other herb else (in my conceit) in Orb, aut per Orbem,
(all Circumstances observed) whereof, and by which, discreet Physicians may
make to themselves, more, or the like gain and commodity be it by fume,
infusion, syrup, electuarie, or by way of extraction, Experto creed Roberto.

And yet by your leave (ne nimium efferam) semper excipio Platonem, I do
confess without disparagement unto Tobacco.

That there is one transcendent medicine, Supra Solemn, most Sovereign in
majesty, and powerfarre surpassing this our Tobacco, and all herbs else:
Whose praise is in the Prophet saying:

Neque herba neque malagina, sed sermo tuus Domine, sanat vniuersa. Sit nomen
Domini benedictum. And thus far concerning the word Skill, founded and formed
upon Reading and Reasoning.

Square

Demonstration. Practice. Proof.
Square consists upon four Mathematical dimentions.

Motive. Affect. Effect. Rule.
Motive, Contains th'opportunitie, occasioning me, to admit it. Affect,
Declares th'infirmities which forced me to frequent it. Effect, Shows
th'alterations, strangely performed in me by it. Rule, Sets down the manner
and fashion, how rightly to use it.
By the first you see, how dainty I made it before I durst receive it. By the
next, you may learn in what plight I was, before I did practice it. By the
third, you may understand, how much I am amended, by operation of it. By the
last, you may know, how safely and fruit fully to handle it.
And here by the way, omnis facessat in

aliis inuidentia. meipso arrogantia.
Enimuero, Etsi, vnica hyrundo, non faciat ver; Neque, exparticulari: sit
sylogizari: Tamen. One particular true strange experiment, well tried in my
self.

Instar multorum esto. Give credit, as shall seem to your selves best, and
make trial, as you shall find cause and occasion.

Now, whether Tobacco do purge, Elective, aut promiscue, one, or more humors at
once, by chance, or by choice, per se, aut per accide^s, Qualitate manifesta,
aut Virtute occulta, a contrarictate substantiae, aut similitudine naturae:
These Questions I leave, as not pertinent ad nostrum institutum, unto the
discuss and determination of greater Clerks. And moreover, why some men do
affect it, Per sympathian, (vt qui pica laborant) lovingly, and longingly: And
why others contrarily, do fly, hate, and abhor it, per antipathian, as the
Bird the Kite, the Mouse the Cat, the Bear the Ape, the Lion the Mouse, the
Horse and the Bull, Ape and Cat, Pathetically, and maliciously, I wot not. But,
my self (I say) without all vagrant affection, do embrace, praise, and
recommend it, for that thereby, chiefly, taken by pipe, I have received
exopted health, rarely, speedily, and perfectly.

Thus to the Square, and first to my Motive, and other reports.

Motive.
THe first sunday, after Twelftide, now four years past, a certain godly
grave preacher, being at my house, and making him ready, that morning, I
fortuned to salute him in his chamber, taking a Pipe of Tobacco: who eftsoons,
earnestly entreated, and at length with much ado, enduced me, to harp upon
his instrument, Ad vnum vsque aut alterum simplicem haustum, whereunto I
assented, but disdainfully.

Again after a pause, resorting to his Lodging, I hapt to find him doing as
before: Then he demanded mine opinion of Tobacco. And hearing of no dislike
from me, he importuned me most instantly, to try some few sippes more,
whereunto I yielded, yet very scornefully. Affirming withal nevertheless,
that it seemed tolerable, and might prove no less profitable (doubtless)
not only, to many others, but to my self especially, (circumstances
considered,) I being a Man, lean, feeble, full of defects, and infirmities,
full of sleame and rheumaticke humidities; if ever it proved profitable for
any manne under the Cope of Heaven, comparing my self, in that dainty
conceit, unto a Mad Dog, (and no better,) whose property is, to shun,
flee, and refuse, the fresh running waters, his principal and chiefest
comfort. Then, after Service and Sermon done; at dinner time, in company of
diverse good merry Gentlemen (my friends,) I hapt to forget my self a little,
in eating and drinking, somewhat beyond my wonted measure and manner, expecting
nothing more consequent, then due deserved torments, for that same days
delight. And at supper, finding my self unfit, I did of purpose abstain, (for
it needed not) but yet I conueighed over frankely, and freely, a good cup of
sack. Since which my first acceptance of Tobacco, until this instant, I
protest I never felt any more of any my former pitiful and painful greeuances;
And those manifold and dolorous of me, 50. years space, and above,
discomfortably endured. And for further testimony hereof, How, in the state of
my body, it fared with me many years at Oxford, in the time of Master D.
Marbecke, where I continued Multum diuque Valetudinarius, I appeal to his
report and others that do know, Quod non mentiar.

Thus, and by these motives, became I dealer with Tobacco.
Affectus.
ABout twelve years of age, by means of a moist shirt, I was so dainly cast
in Ptysin, (...), the ptisicke and straightness of breath, with a continual
destillation from head to lunges, increasing daily, and hourly more and more:
till, in the end, I was constrained to change my study, from Divinity, unto
Physic, for healths sake; yet for all mine own painful labors, and all
other friendly helps, even of the best learned Physicians in our time, I
prevailed not, to any purpose, or effect: So that, I became dwined and pined,
and finally, brought to such a pickle of leanenes, and feeblenes, throughout
all the region and limbs of my body, that I could not ride four mile end-way
at any time, but incontinent, I became bedridden for six days space after;
insomuch, as I was scarce able to walk over mine own chamber, without some
rest, or stay. Neither could I receive any drink at any hand, were it Beer,
or Wine, hot or cold, neither yet the very common air at my mouth, but that
immediately, I should be forced to cough, reach, strive, strain, and toil my
self laboriously, and most lamentably, Ad vsque sudorem and dolorem non
vulgares. Moreover my meat, by the space of xiiij. years next before the
taking of Tobacco, commonly never stayed with me much above one quarter of an
hour, or an half hour at the most, (and yet I durst not forbear my meat
utterly, lest I should have disused Nature:) And then, after a little slumber,
at my first lying down, I rejected my supper continually: Insomuch as, I was
forced every night in bed, to receive a draught of warm posset Ale, for to
loose it with ease. Then moreover, after my first sleep, about 12. or one at
midnight, lo, I did usually cough, with every drop of sweat upon my body like
a Bell, that even fountains of blood would spring from my nose, and streams,
or streikes of blood likewise issued from my lungs Empyematice, in spitting and
streyning, together with a shortness of breath, soreness of breast, and a
general faintnes throughout all the chest, and region of my body and limbs,
in such sort, that I did seem unto most men, destitute, and deprived of all
earthly comfort. And, as I may speak it, to be Nec animans, nec amans, both
liuelesse and loueles, fearing and suspecting, not alitle, for diverse years
together, the utter ruin and decay of all the serviceable parts of office
within me; the head, lungs, liver, and such other praedominant members.
Nevertheless ( vt verum fatear) since the first taste of Tobacco, all those
formerly most pitiful and painful affections, are vanished and departed
from me, miraculously, clearly, and utterly, I praise God: So that from the
first day I received this noble Tobacco, until this hour, I never felt any of
those former grieuances any more, neither yet shall hereafter, I trust,
through good guidance. Yea further, will you have me to tell you ingenue,
merrily, and unfeignedly, a truth? Lend me your ears alittle while, not long.
The first night that I took Tobacco, being demanded upon my waking, how I
felt my self; I did directly answer: That me thought my breast was slitte,
cloven, and divided, (as it were) from throat to nauill, and I my self at
large happily redeemed from captivity to liberty, from sickness to health,
from pains to delight, from continual discouragement, to comfort and
consolation: And so it seems to me still, God wottes, Wherefore, Lauda anima
mea Dominum, and all that is within me, praise his holy name.

Thus, and no otherwise, was I affected.
Effectus.
Tobacco, in my conceit, does, not only open and dry, Ratione caliditatis and
siccitatis, but also, suapte virtute, does purge and expel, quicquid noxium,
mightily and mainely. To give you an instance or example in my self; In
process of weeks, well I wot, it has forced out of my brains, through the
great middle Suture of my scull, at an emunctorie, not much above the top of
my ears, by times, more yellow, bitter, corrupt, choloricke moisture, I am
sure, then three gill cups could contain, before it left that course of
purging. This humor was the primarie and principal occasion (as I take it) of
all my former inueterate fluxes and destillations, dropping from the head
downward, infecting the leights, and forcing withal, intolerable soreness,
ptisicke, and many other such inconveniences, of the like grain and grime,
sustained of me, by the space of seven and fifty years continual, and more.
Now all these accidents notwithstanding, (blessed be God for his mercy, in the
means of man's health) even since the very first assay of Tobacco: There has
been, and yet is, quietness in my head, comfort in my stomach, liberty in my
lungs, strength and agility in my limbs, ((...)) perfection in my liver, rest
in my bones, and in vniuersa carne mea, sanitas. Finally, all the powers and
faculties within me, be they Natural, Vital, or Animal, are so refreshed,
and revived, that now being three score and nine years of days complete:
my mind and body both, are made apt, nimble, and active (never better erst)
for study and travel, fitting and convenient. The Lord be praised.

These, and no less were the effects wrought upon me by Tobacco.
Rule.
AT the first brunt, sending to Durham, for some of this geere, to work
withal: two Tobacco pipes miscarried by the way, which might portend aliquod
malum, (Nam in primo limite titubare ominosum:) Sending again the second time,
I spedde: Then Bonis auibus, I entertained Tobacco into request, and made
trial of it actiuelie, as follows. The first week, every day once, I took
one pipe only at a time; The second week, every other day, one pipe only a
day; The third week, every third day, one pipe only a day: The fourth week,
once only, and so forth, weekly, monthly, or quarterly, as occasion. The manner
of my usage is thus; being a man lean of constitution and feeble, early in
the morning, being made ready, and my throat, lungs and stomach, scoured, by
hauking, reaching, coughing, and spitting: Then I take my pipe of Tobacco,
sitting close by a warm fire, the space of half an hour and more, until the
giddiness and swimming in my head be past, and the medicine also have done it
feate: then I use to gargle my mouth with a cup of beer, well warmed with a
toste. After that I receive a good cup of Sack. By means whereof, Tobacco,
being, as it were, revived, nam vinum vires auget, begins afresh sensibly, to
visit and salute, head, stomach, breast, fingers, and feet, for a pretty
season: And when all those storms, and stowers are ouer-shot, then do I feel
my self light, and lively unto any competent exercise, forbearing
nevertheless, both meat, and common air; keeping also within my chamber some
two or three hours at the least, lest I should either hasten appetite too
quickly, or else, catch some cold disorderly, all the pores of my body lying
open and apt to harm, through the vehemeut operation and force of the foresaid
Tobacco. Now, if this be true, as true it is, (et ipse luce clarius) that it is
so comfortable to choloricke, lean, and spinie men, much more of force must it
needs be profitable for gross, fat, and foggy bodies, repleat with
hydropicall humors; so that consequently, I may confidently infer hereupon,
that Tobacco, (good order observed) is comfortable and commendable, for most
men of any age, degree, constitution, or condition soever; And thus did I use,
and yet by times do still use Tobacco, with comfort and comoditie. Howbeit, of
late, (not to dissemble,) having my whole body, vessels, and frame thereof,
sufficiently reformed and cleansed, I do of purpose forbear the frequent use
of it, lest I should seem to have forgotten what Galen said: scilicet,

Sanas carnes habentes: facile medicina soluuntur. And hereupon, whereas,
before I did infer, and auerre, that Tobacco is commendable for most men of
any age, degree, constitution, or condition soever: I would not be mistaken
(for my meaning is, and so my words import) chiefly men and women of riper
age, in whom matter may appear to work upon (...), adultos ac prouectiores,
and those either lean, full of humorous superfluities accidental, or else, fat
and foggie, having pleuthorica corpora, abounding with gross matters,
excrementitiall, apt to putrefaction: But for chill youths, and such other,
having corpora mollia and carnem halienosam, ac spiritum locupletem innatum,
(...), tender and healthful, I take it not fit, by the sense alleged. Apho:
lib: 2. Apho: 36.

Now you have heard, and may conceive, in what sort I have unfolded and
declared, pro posse, proque viribus, the true construction, and faithful
interpretation of my first two capital terms

Skill and Square.
And that geniculatim in their subdiuision and members

Of

Reading and Reasoning.
Of

Motive: Affect: Effect: Rule.
distinctly and clearly.

Wherein some men perhaps may suppose, that I have satisfied, in some sort,
and fully accomplished mine intended purpose, in the setting forth of the
Enargie, Virtue, and Valor of that worthy and twice redoubted Indian Tobacco:
Yet nevertheless, upon reuiew, and further contemplation, me seems I have
tript over, two of the most necessary reports, and reputations belonging to
Tobacco, vtpote

Use. Application.
Whereof, the former I find to be four fold.

For it is profitable to

Reform and rectify what is amiss. Provoke vomit upward. Purge by siege,
humors of any combination. Cure wounds of every condition.
Uses.
First, Taken (by Pipe) in fume, to draine up all superfluous moisture, be it
in ventriculo, hepate, cerebro, aut ipso etiam pulmone; or moreover, to open
and ease all the sluices, conduites, pipes, and passages, from part to part,
in the whole frame and course of man's body, It is most sovereign, and of
singular operation.

Secondly, Taken for Vomit, it is a present mean, used maustice (...), being
chewed up and down in the mouth, three or four small pieces of Tobacco leaf
at one time, one piece after another, until four or five drops thereof be
drilled into the stomach: Then, well I wot, there will be anon old tumbling,
heauing, reaching, and flinging, whilst all matters offensive be forced thence
upward: Albeit it will require your patience.

Thirdly, Taken for Purge, a leaf stiept over night in a portion of white Wine
or Rhenish, will give a mighty purge, deducing and deriuing in short process,
humors of any combination and excrements of every condition, Per loca
conferentia.

Fourthly, Taken for Cure, the only ashes thereof are profitable, and in most
use (no doubt) for green wounds, ulcers, and old sores of all sorts.

These are the four principal ends and uses of Tobacco.
And, as the Use, so is the Application of Tobacco.
First, when you take it by Pipe, mine advice is, that you put into your box of
prepared powder, one grain at the least, of the oil of Anniseedes, it will
give your powder a marvelous grace, and comfortable, both to the smell, and
taste, of the taker, not only pleasant and delectable, but also profitable and
commendable, especially to the daintier sort.

Secondly, when you use it for Vomit, do not, in any case, abridge, or
restrain, the violent operation thereof, by apposition of any dilatory
mixture: But, suffer it to express it own force in action, secundum libitum
suum, and vim innatam, for the more effectual and speedier dispatch, of a
surcharged stomach, by reiectation.

Thirdly, when you intend to Purge, omit not, forget not, it will be very
expedient, and no less convenient, for you, and every man of every condition,
the night before you take it, to infuse together with your Tabaccoes leaf in
white wine, or other liquor, some pretty portion of Synamon, Ginger, and Nutmegs
bruised, with two or three cheires of whole Mace: And (if you list) of
Liquorice and Anniseedes likewise bruised, a small quantity. These things are
vere carminatiua, cordial, and Alexipharmaca, and will make your Tobacco to
become medicamentum benedictum.

Fourthly, When you apply it for Cure of wounds, you must remember to reserve
the burnt ashes remaining in your Tabaccoes pipe. Of the same, sprinckle into
your green wound, ulcer, or sore, and you shall see it perform strange and
admirable effects (as it were) vnum idemque, drying, cleansing, filling, and
reforming the part and place affected, as shall appertain. Many men do
diversely report wonderful effects, in this behalf, brought to pass, only
by the virtue and operation of Tobacco. And some pretty helps (I confess) at
home, have I also seen thereby, to no small ease of diverse, encouragement to
others, and tending chiefly to the inestimable praise of God, the Author of all
gnod: Wherefore I will conclude with this Epiphonoema,

Omnis spiritus laudet Dominum. Let every thing that has breath, praise the
Lord.
THus much then, finally, and aphoristice, for conclusion of mine own
experience and knowledge, in the trial of Tabaccoes virtue, not minding
hereby, any way to offend, prejudice, or interrupt my superiors; But rather
algates, by all my best means, to forewarne, and exhort, all followers and
favorites of Tobacco, to remember, Ne quid nimis, and circumspectly to foresee,
Ne quid temere attentetur aliquando; and that due circumstances regarded, every
thing may rightly be ordered and marshalled, by skillful direction of the
learned, lest happly, unhappily, through men's rash and inconsiderate usage
thereof, they themselves (sua ipsorum culpa) catch Copper for Coin, and,
insteade of vain hoped for help, some due deserved harm.

*

FINIS

