THE Seven deadly Sins of London: Drawn in seven several Coaches, Through
the seven several Gates of the City Bringing the Plague with them.

Opus septem Dierum.

Tho: Dekker.

At London Printed by E.A. for Nathaniel Butter, and are to be sold at his
shop near Saint Austens gate. 1606.

Reader,
IT is as ordinary a custom (for us that are Bookish) to have about with
thee, after we have done with a Patron, as for Scholars (in the noble
Science) to play at the wooden Rapier and Dagger at the end of a Masters
prize. In doing which we know not upon what Speeding points we run, for you
(that are Readers) are the most despe^ate and fowlest players in the world, you
will strike when a man's back is toward you, and kill him (if you ^ould for
shame) when he lies under your feet. You are able (if you have the tokens of
deadly Ignorance, and Boldness at one time upon you) to breed more infection on
in Paul's Churchyard, then all the bodies that were buried there in the
Plague-time, if they had been left still above ground. You stand sometimes at a
Stationers stal, looking scuruily (like Mules champing upon Thistles) on the
face of a new Book be it never so worthy: and go (as il fauouredly) mewing
away: But what get you by it? The Booke-seller ever after when you pass by,
pinnes on your backs the badge of fools to make you be laughed to scorn, or
of silly Carpers to make you be pitted: Comadus Gesner never writ of the
nature of such strange beasts as you are: for where as we call you Lectores,
Readers, you turn your selves into Lictores, Executioners, and tormenters. I
would not have him that writes better than I, to Read this, nor him that cannot
do so well, to Rail, or if he cannot choose but Rail, let him do it to my
face: otherwise ^me being absent) it is done cowardly: for Leonem mortuum
mordent etiam Catuli: Cats dare scratch Lions by the face when they lie dead,
and none but Colliers will threaten a Lord Mayor when they are far enough
from the City. I have laid no blocks in thy way: if thou find Strawes,
(Vade, vale,) cave ne titubes.

The names of the Actors in this old Interlude of Iniquity.
1 Politic Bankeruptisme. 2 Lying. 3 Candlelight. 4 Sloth. 5 Apishnesse. 6
Shauing. 7 Cruelty.
Seven may easily play this, but not without a Devil.

The Induction to the Book.
I Find it written in that Book where no untruths can be read: in that Book
whose leaves shall out-last sheets of brass, and whose lines lead to
eternity: yea even in that Book that was pend by the best Author of the best
wisdom, allowed by a Deity, licensed by the Omnipotent, and published (in all
Languages to all Nations) by the greatest, truest, and only Divine, thus I
find it written, that for Sin, Angels were thrown out of heaven; for Sin,
the first man that ever was made, was made an outcast: he was driven ouf of his
living that was left unto him by his Creator: It was a goodlier living, than
the Inheritance of Princes: he lost Paradise by it (he lost his house of
pleasure:) he lost Eden by it, a Garden, where Winter could never have nipt
him with cold, nor Summer have scorcht him with heat. He had there all fruits
growing to delight his taste, all flowers flourishing to allure his eye, all
Birds singing to content his ear; he had more than he could desire: yet
because he desired more than was fit for him, he lost all. For Sin, all those
buildings which that great Worke-master of the world had in six days raised,
were swallowed at the first by waters, and shall at last be consumed in fire.
How many families has this Leuiathan devoured? how many Cities? how many
Kingdoms? Let us a while leave Kingdoms, and enter into Cities. Sodom and
Gomorrah were burnt to the ground with brinstone that dropped in flakes from
heaven: a hot and dreadful vengeance. Jerusalem has not a stone left upon
another of her first glorious foundation: a heavy and fearful downfall.
Jerusalem, that was Gods own dwelling house; the School where those Hebrew
Lectures, which he himself read, were taught; the very Nursery where the
Prince of Heaven was brought up; that Jerusalem, whose Rulers were Princes, and
whose Citizens were like the sons of Kings: whose Temples were paued with
gold, and whose houses stood like rows of tall Cedars; that Jerusalem is now a
dezert; It is unhallowed, and vnt^ odden: no Monument is left to show it was a
City, but only the memorial of the Jews hard-hartednes, in making away their
Savior: It is now a place for barbarous Turks, and poor despised Grecians; it
is rather now (for the abominations committed in it) no place at all.

Let us hoyst up more Sails, and lanch into other Seas, till we come in ken
of our own Country. Antwerp (the eldest daughter of Brabant) has fallen in
her pride, the Cities of rich Burgundy in their greatness. Those seventeen
Dutch Virgins of Belgia, (that had Kingdoms to their dowries, and were worthy
to be courted by Nations) are now no more Virgins: the Soldier has deflowred
them, and robbed them of their Maiden honor: War has still use of their noble
bodies, and discovers their nakedness like prostituted Strumpets. Famine has
dried up the fresh blood in their cheeks, whilst the Pestilence digd up their
Fields, and turned them into Graves. Neither have these punishments bin laid
upon them only; for blood has bin also drawn of their very next neighbors.
France lies yet panting under the blows which her own Children have given
her. Thirty years together suffered she her bowels to be torn out by those
that were bred within them: She was full of Princes, and saw them all lie
mangled at her feet: She was full of people, and saw in one night a hundred
thousand massacred in her streets: her Kings were eaten up by Civil wars,
and her Subjects by fire and famine. O gallant Monarchy, what hard fate had
thou, that when none were left to conquer thee, thou should triumph over thy
self! Thou have Wynes flowing in thy veins: but thou made thy self druncke
with thine own blood. The English, the Dutch, and the Spanish, stood aloof
and gave aim, whilst thou shotst arrows upright, that fell upon thine own
head, and wounded thee to death. Would thou (and the rest) know the reason,
why your bones have bin bruzed with rods of Iron? It was, because you have
risen in Arch-rebellion against the Supremest Sovereign: You have bin Traitors
to your Lord, the King of heaven and earth, and have armed your selves to fight
against the Holy Land. Can the father of the world measure out his love so
unequally, that one people (like to a man's youngest child) should be more made
of than all the rest, being more unruly than the rest? O London, thou art great
in glory, and envied for thy greatness: thy Towers, thy Temples, and thy
Pinnacles stand upon thy head like borders of fine gold, thy waters like
frindges of silver hang at the hemmes of thy garments. Thou art the goodliest
of thy neighbors, but the prowdest; the welthiest, but the most wanton. Thou
have all things in thee to make thee fairest, and all things in thee to make
thee foulest: for thou art attir'de like a Bride, drawing all that look upon
thee, to be in love with thee, but there is much harlot in thine eyes. Thou
sitst in thy Gates heated with Wines, and in thy Chambers with lust. What
miseries have of late overtaken thee? yet (like a fool that laughs when he is
putting on fetters) thou have bin merry in height of thy misfortunes. (...)
Eliza^eth^ death.
She (that for almost half a hundred of years) of thy Nurse became thy
Mother, and laid thee in her bosom, whose head was full of cares for thee,
whilst thine slept upon softer pillowes than down. She that wore thee always
on her breast as the richest Jewel in her kingdom, who had continually her eye
upon thee, and her heart with thee: whose chaste hand clothed thy Rulers in
Scarlet, and thy Inhabitants in roabes of peace: even she was taken from thee,
when thou were most in fear to lose her: when thou did tremble (as at an
earthquake) to think that blood should run in thy Channels, that the Canon
should make away through thy Portcullises, and fire rifle thy wealthy houses,
then, even then were thou left full of tears, King James his Coronation.
and becamst an Orphan. But behold, thou had not sat many hours on the banks
of sorrow, but thou had a loving Father that adopted thee to be his own: thy
mourning turned presently to gladness, thy terrors into triumphs. Yet, lest this
fullness of joy should beget in thee a wantonness, and to try how wisely thou
could take up affliction, Sickness was sent to breathe her unwholesome airs
into thy nosthrils, so that thou, that were before the only Gallant and Minion
of the world, had in a short time more diseases (then a common Harlot has)
hanging upon thee; thou suddenly becamst the by-talke of neighbors, the scorn
and contempt of Nations.

Here could I make thee weep thy self away into waters, by calling back
those sad and dismal hours, wherein thou consumedst almost to nothing with
shrikes and lamentations, in that A Book so called, written by the Author,
describing the horror of the Plague in 1602, when there dyed 30578. of that
disease.
Wonderful year, when these miserable calamities entered in at thy Gates,
slaying 30000. and more as thou heldst them in thine arms, but they are fresh
in thy memory, and the story of them (but half read over) would strike so
coldly to thy heart, and lay such heavy sorrow upon mine ( Namque animus
meminisse horret, luctuque refugit) that I will not be thine and my own
tormentor with the memory of them. How quickly notwithstanding did thou
forget that beating? The wrath of him that smot thee, was no sooner (in mere
pity of thy stripes) appeased, but howrely (again) thou were in the company
of evil doers, even before thou could find leisure to ask him forgiveness.

Ever since that time has he winckt at thy errors, and suffered thee (though
now thou art grown old, and look very ancient) to go on still in the
follyes of thy youth: he has ten-fold restor'de thy lost sons and daughters,
and such sweet, lively, fresh colors has he put upon thy cheeks, that
Kings have come to behold thee, King of England, and Christierne King of
Denmark.
and Princes to delight their eyes with thy bewty. None of all these favors
(for all this) can draw thee from thy wickedness: Graces have powrd down out of
heaven upon thee, and thou art rich in all things, saving in goodness: So that
now once again has he gone about (and but gone about) to call thee to the
dreadful Bar of his Judgment. And no marvel: for whereas other Cities
(as glorious as thy self,) and other people (as dear unto him as thine) have
in his indignation bin quite taken from the face of the earth, for some one
peculiar Sin, what hope have thou to grow up still in the pride of thy
strength, gallantnes and health, having seven deadly and detestable sins
lying night by night by thy lascivious sides? O thou beawtifullest daughter of
two united Monarchies! from thy womb received I my being, from thy breasts my
nourishment; yet give me leave to tell thee, that thou have seven Devils within
thee, and till they be clean cast out, the Arrows of Pestilence will fall
upon thee by day, and the hand of the Inuader strike thee by night. The Sun
will shine, but not be a comfort to thee, and the Moon look pale with anger,
when she gives thee light. Thy Lovers will disdain to court thee: thy Temples
will no more send out Divine oracles: Justice will take her flight, and dwell
elsewhere; and that Desolation, which now for three years together has
houered round about thee, will at last enter, and turn thy Gardens of
pleasure, into Churchyards; thy Fields that served thee for walks, into
Golgotha; and thy hye built houses, into heaps of dead men's Sculs. I call him
to witness, who is all Truth, I call the Citizens of heaven to witness, who are
all spotless, that I slander thee not, in saying thou nourishest seven
Serpents at thy breasts, that will destroy thee: let all thy Magistrates and thy
officers speak for me: let Strangers that have but seen thy behavior, be my
Judges: let all that are gathered under thy wings, and those that sleep in thy
bosom, give their verdict upon me; yea, try me (as thy brabblings are) by all
thy Petit and Graund Jurors, and if I belie thee, let my Country (when I
expire) deny me her common blessing, Burial, Lift up therefore thy head (thou
Mother of so many people:) awaken out of thy dead and dangerous slumbers, and
with a full and fearelesse eye behold those seven Monsters, that with extended
jaws gape to swallow up thy memory: for I will into so large a field single
every one of them, that thou and all the world shall see their ugliness, for
by seeing them, thou may avoid them, and by avoiding them, be the happiest
and most renowned of Cities.

Politic Bankruptisme, Or, The first days Triumph of the first Sin.
IT is a custom in all Countries, when great personages are to be entertained,
to have great preparation made for them: and because London disdaines to come
short of any City, either in Magnificence, State, or expenses upon such an
occasion, solemn order was set down, and seven several solemn days were
appointed to receive these seven Potentates: for they carry the names of
Princes on the earth, and wheresoever they inhabit, in a short time are they
Lords of great Dominions.

The first days Triumphs were spent in meeting and conducting Politic
Bankruptisme into the Freedom: to receive whom, the Master, the Keepers, The
manner how Bank^uptisme is entertained, and at what Gate.
and all the Prisoners of Ludgate in their best clothes stood most officiously
ready: for at that Gate, his Deadliness challenges a kind of prerogative by
the Custom of the City, and there loves he most to be let in. The thing they
stood upon, was a Scaffold erected for the purpose, stuck round about with a
few green boughs (like an Alehouse booth at a Fair) and covered with two or
three threed-bare Carpets (for prisoners have no better) to hide the
vnhandsomnes of the Carpenters work: the boughs with the very strong breath
that was pressed out of the vulgar, withered, and like Autumnian leaves dropped to
the ground, which made the Broken Gentleman to hasten his progress the more,
and the rather, because Lud and his two sons stood in a very cold place,
waiting for his coming. Being under the gate, there stood one armed with an
extemporall speech, to give him the onset of his welcome: It was not (I would
you should well know) the Clarke of a country parish, or the Schoolmaster of a
corporate town, ye every year has a saying to Master Mayor, but it was a bird
picked out of purpose (amongst the Ludgathians) that had the basest and lowdest
voice, and was able in a Term time, for a throat, to give any prisoner great
ods for ye bor at the grate: this Organpipe was ^unde to rore for the rest, who
with a hye sound and glib delivery, made an Encomiastick Paradoxicall Oration
in praise of a prison, proving, that captivity was ye only blessing yt could
happen ^o man, and that a Politic Bankrupt (because he makes himself for ever
by his own wit) is able to live in any common wealth, and deserves to go up
the ladder of promotion, when five hundred shallowp^ted feollwes shall be turned
off. The poor Orator having made up his mouth, Bankruptisme gave him very good
words, and a handful or two of thanks, vowing he would ever live in his debt.
At which, all the prisoners rending the air with shouts, the key was turned,
and up (in state) was he led into king Luds house of Bondage, to survey the
building, and to take possession of ye lodgings; where he no sooner en^red,
Solamen miseris socios habuisse doloris.
but a ^usty peale of welcomes was shot out of Kannes in stead of Canons, and
though the powder was exceeding wet, yet off they went thick and threefold. The
day was proclaimed Holiday in all the wards; every prisoner swore if he would
stay amongst them, they would take no order about their debts, because they
would lie by it too; and for that purpose swa^md about him like Bees about
Comfit-makers, and were drunk, according to all the learned rules of
Drunkenness, as Vpsy-Freeze, Cra^bo, Parmizant, etc. the pimples of this rank
and full-humord joy rising thus in their faces, because they all knew, that
though he himself was broken, the linings of his bags were whole; and though
he had no conscience (but a cracked one) yet he had crowns yt were ^ound. None
of all these ^ookes could fasten him to them: he was (like their clocks) to
strike in more places than one, and though he knew many Citizens hated him, and
that if he were encountered by some of them, it might cost him dear, yet under
so good a protection did he go (as he said) because he owed no ill will even to
those that most sought his undoing; and therefore took his leave of the house,
with promise, to be with them, or send to the^ once every quarter at the least.
So that now, by his wise instructions, Misery makes men cunning.
if a Puny were there amongst them, he might learn more cases, and more
quiddits in law within seven days, that he does at his Inn in fourteen
months.

The Politician being thus got into the City, caries himself to discreetly,
that he steals into the hearts of many: His qualities.
In words, is he circumspect: in looks, grave: in attire, civil: in diet,
temperate: in company affable; in his affairs serious: and so cunningly dooes
he lay on these colors, that in the end he is welcome to, and familiar with
the best. So that now, there is not any one of all the twelve Companies, in
which (at one time or other) there are not those that have forsaken their own
Hall, to be free of his: yea some of your best Shopkeepers has he entited to
shut themselves up from the cares and business of the world, to live a private
life; nay, there is not any great and famous Street in the City, wherein there
has not (or now does not) dwell, some one, or other, that hold the points of
his Religion. His disguises.
For you must understand, that the Politic Bankrupt is a Harpy that looks
smoothly, a Hyena that enchants subtly, a Mermaid that sings sweetly, and a
Cameleon, that can put himself into all colors. Sometimes he is a Puritan,
he swears by nothing but Indeed, or rather does not swear at al^, and
wrapping his crafty Serpents body in the cloak of Religion, he does those acts
that would become none but a Devil. Sometimes he is a Protestant, and deals
justly with all men, till he see his time, but in the end he turns Turk.
Because you shall believe me, I will give you his length by the Scale, and
Anatomize his body from head to foot. Here it is.

His policy.
Whether he be a Tradesman, or a Merchant, when he first sets himself up, and
seeks to get the world into his hands, (yet not to go out of ye City) or first
talks of Countries he never saw (upon the Change) he will be sure to keep his
days of payments more truly, then Lawyers keep their Terms, or than
Executors keep the last laws that the dead enjoined them to, which even
Infidels themselves will not violate: his hand goes to his head, to his meanest
customer, (to express his humility;) he is up earlier then a Sarieant, and
down later then a Constable, to proclaim his thrift. By such artificial
wheels as these, he winds himself up into the height of rich men's favors,
till he grow rich himself, and when he sees that they dare build upon his
credit, knowing the ground to be good, he takes upon him the condition of an
Ass, to any man that will load him with gold; and uses his credit like a
Ship freighted with all sorts of Merchandise by ventrous Pilots: for after he
has gotten into his hands so much of other men's goods or money, as will fill
him to the upper deck, away he sails with it, and politickly runs himself
on ground, to make the world believe he had sufferd shipwreck. Then flies he
out like an Irish rebel, and keeps aloof, hiding his head, when he cannot
hide his shame: and though he have feathers on his back pulled from sundry birds,
yet to himself is he more wretched, then ye Cuckoo in winter, that dares not
be seen. The troops of honest Citizens (his creditors) with whom he has
broken league and has thus defied, muster themselves together, and proclaim
open war: their bands consist of tall Yeomen, that serve on foot, commanded
by certain Sarieants of their bands, who for leading of men, are known to be
of more experience th^n the best Low Country Captains. In Ambuscado do these
lie day and night, to cut off this enemy to the City, if he dare but come
down. But the politic Bankrupt barricadoing his Sconce with double locks,
treble doors, invincible bolts, and pieces of ^imber 4. or 5. stories hye,
victuals himself for a month or so; and then in the dead of night, marches up
higher into ye country with bag and baggage: parlies then are summond;
compositions off^ed; a truce is sometimes taken for 3. or 4. years; or (which
is more common) a dishonorable peace (seeing no other remedy) is on both sides
concluded, he (like the States) being the only gayner by such civil wars,
whilst the Citizen that is the lender, is the loser: Nam crimine ab vno disce
omnes, look how much he snatches from one man's ^hea^e, he gleanes from every
one, if they be a hundred.

The victory being thus gotten by baseness and treachery, back comes he marching
with spread colors again to the City; aduances in the open street as he did
before; se^s the goods of his neighbor before his face without blushing: he
iets up and down in silks wouen out of other men's stock, feeds deliciously
upon other men's purses, rides on his ten pound Geldings, in other men's saddles,
and is now a new man made out of wax, that's to say, out of those bonds, whose
seals he most dishonestly has canceld. O veluet-garded Thieves! O
yea-and-by-nay Cheaters! O civil, o Grave and Right Worshipful Couzeners!

What a wretchedness is it, by such steps to clime to a counterfetted happiness?
So to be made for ever, is to be utterly undone for ever: So for a man to save
himself, is to venture his own damnation; like those that laboring by all
means to escape shipwreck, do afterward desperately ^rown themselves. But
alas! how rotten at the bottom are buildings thus raised! How soon do such
leases grow out of date! The Third House to them is never heard of. What slaves
then does money (so pur^hast) make of those, who by such ways think to find
out perfect freedom? But they are most truly miserable in midst of their
joys: for their neighbors scorn them, Strangers point at them, good men
neglect them, the rich man will no more trust them, the beggar in his rage
vpbrayde^ them. Yet if this were all, this all were nothing. O thou that on thy
pillow (like a Spider in his ^oome) weauest mischeuous nets, beating thy
brains, how by casting down others, to raise up thy self!

Thou Politic Bankrupt, poor rich man, thou ill-painted fool, when thou art
to lie in thy last Inn (thy loathsome grave) how heavy a load will thy wealth
be to thy weak corrupted Conscience! those heaps of Silver, in telling of
which thou have worn out thy fingers ends, will be a passing bell, ^olling in
thine ^are, and calling thee to a fearful Audit. Thou can not dispose of
thy riches, but the naming of every parcel will strike to thy heart, worse
then the pangs of thy departure: thy last will, at the last day, will be an
Indictment to cast thee; for thou art guilty of offending those two laws
(enacted in the upper House of heaven) which directly forbid thee to steal, or
to covet thy neighbors goods.

But this is not all neither: for thou lie on thy bed of death, and art not
card for: thou go out of the world, and art not lamented: thou art put into
the last linen y^ ever thou shall wear, (thy winding-sheete) with reproach,
and art sent into thy Grave with curses: he that makes thy Funeral Sermon,
dares not speak well of thee, because he is ashamed to belie the dead: and
upon so hate full a fyle do thou hang the records of thy life, that even
when the worms have picked thee to the bare bones, those that go over thee,
will set upon thee no Epitaph but this, Here lies a knave.

Alack! this is not the worst neither: thy Wife being in the heat of her
youth, in the pride of her beawty, and in all the bravery of a rich London
Widow, flies from her nest (where she was thus fledged before her time) the
City, to shake off the imputation of a Bankrupts Wife, and perhaps marries with
some Galla^t: thy bags then are emptied, to hold him up in riots: those
hundreds, which thou subtly tookst up upon thy bonds, do sinfully serve him
to pay Tavern bills, and what by knavery thou got^t from honest men, is as
villanously spent upon Pandars and Whores: thy Widow being thus brought to a
low ebb, grows desperate: curses her birth, her life, her fortunes, yea perhaps
curses thee, when thou art in thy everlasting sleep, her conscience persuading
strongly, that she is punished from above, for thy faults: and being poor,
friendlesse, comfortless, she finds no means to raise her self, but by
Falling, and therefore grows to be a common woman. Does not ye thought of this
torment thee? She lives basely by the abuse of that body, to maintain which in
costly garments, thou did wrong to thine own soul: nay more to afflict
thee, thy children are ready to beg their bread in that very place, where the
father has sat at his door in purple, and at his board like Dives, surfeting
on those dishes which were earnd by the sweat of other men's brows. The
unfortunate Merchant, whose estate is swallowed up by the merciless Seas, and
the provident Tradesman, whom riotous Servants at home, or hard-hearted
debtors abroad undermine and euerthrow, blotting them with the name of
Bankrupts, deserve to be pitied and relieved, when thou that have cozend even
thine own Brother of his Birthright, art laughed at, and not remembered, but in
scorn, when thou art plagued in thy Generation.

Be wise therefore, you Grave, and wealthy Citizens; play with these Whales of
the Sea, till you escape them that are deuourers of your Merchants; hunt these
English Wolves to death, and rid the land of them: for these are the Rats that
eat up the provision of the people: these are the Grasshoppers of Egypt, that
spoil the Corne-fields of the Husbandman and the rich man's Uineyards: they
will have poor Naboths piece of ground from him, though they eat a piece of
his heart for it. These are indeed (and none but these) the Forreners that
live without the freedom of your City, better than you within it; they live
without the freedom of honestly, of conscience, and of christianity. Ten
dicing-houses cheat not young Gentlemen of so much money in a years, as these do
you in a month. The thief that dies at Tyburne for a robbery, is not half so
dangerous a weed in a Commonwealth, as the Politic Bankrupt, I would there
were a Derick to hang up him too.

The Russians have an excellent custom: they beat them on the shinnes, that
have money, and will not pay their debts; if that law were w^ll cudgeld from
thence into England, Barbar-Surgeons might in a few years build up a Hall for
their Company, larger then Powles, only with the cure of Bankrupt
broken-shinnes.

I would feign see a prize set up, that the welfed Usurer, and the politic
Bankrupt might rail one against another for it: o, it would heget a riming
Comedy. The Challenge of the Germayne against all the Masters of the Noble
Science, would not bring in a quarter of the money: for there is not half so
much love between the Iron and the Loadestone, as there is mortal hate
between those two Furies. The Usurer lives by the lechery of money, and is Bawd
to his own bags, taking a fee, that they may engender. The Politic Bankrupt
lives by the gelding of bags of Silver. The Usurer puts out a hundred pound to
breed, and lets it run in a good pasture (that's to say, in the lands that are
mortgaged for it) till it grow great with Foale, and bring forth ten pound
more. But the Politic Bankrupt plays the Alchimist, and having taken a
hundred pound to multiply it, he keeps a puffing and a blowing, as if he would
fetch the Philosophers stone out of it, yet melts your hundred pound so l^ng in
his Crusibles, till at length to either melt it clean away, or (at the least)
makes him that lends it think good, if every hundred bring him home ^iue, with
Principal and Interest.

You may behold now in this Perspectiue piece which I have drawn before you,
how deadly and dangerous an enemy to the State this Politic Bankrupusme has
bin, and still is: It has bin long enough in the City, and for anything I
see, makes no great haste to get out. His triumphs have bin great, his
entertainment rich and magnificent. He purposes to lie here as Lucifers
Legiar: let him therefore alone in his lodging (in what part of the City
soever it be) tossed and turmoyled with godless slumbers, and let us take up a
standing near some other Gate, to behold the Entrance of the Second Sin: but
before you go, look upon the Chariot that this First is drawn in, and take
special note of all his Attendants.

The habit, the qualities and complexion of this Ambassador sent from Hell, are
set down before. He rides in a Chariot drawn upon three wheels, that run
fastest away, when they bear the greatest loades. The bewty of the Chariot is
all in-layd work, cunningly and artificially wrought, but yet so strangely, and
of so many seuerall-fashiond pieces, (none like another) that a sound wit would
mis^rust they had bin stolen from sundry worke-men. By this proud Counterfeit
ran two Pages; on the left side Conscience, raggedly attirde, ill-fac'd,
ill-coloured, and misshapen in body. On the right side runs Beggary, who if he
out-liue him, goes to serve his children. Hipocrisy drives the Chariot, having
a couple of fat well-colored and lusty Coach-horses to the eye, called
Covetousness and Cosenage, but full of diseases, and rotten about the heart.
Behind him follow a crowd of Tradesmen, and Merchants, every one of them
holding either a Shop-booke, or an Obligation in his hand, their servants,
wives and children strawing the way before him with curses, but he carelessly
runs over the one, and out-rides the other; at the tail of whom (like the
Pioners of an Army) march troopewise, and without any Drum struck up, because
the Leader can abide no noise, a company of old expert Sarieants, bold Yeomen,
hungry Baylifs, and other brave Martial men, who because (like the Switzers)
they are well paid, are still in Action, and oftentimes have the enemy in
execution; following the heels of this Citty-Conqueror, so close, not for any
love they owe him, but only (as all those that follow great men do) to get money
by him. We will leave them lying in Ambush, or holding their Courts of Guard,
and take a muster of our next Regiment.

The seven deadly 2. Lying. Or, The second days Triumph.
WHen it came to the ears of the Sinful Synagogue, how the rich Jew of
London, (Barabbas Bankruptisme) their brother, was received into the City, and
what a lus^y Reueler he was become, the rest of the same Progeny (being 6. in
number) vowed to ride thither in their greatest State, and that every one should
challenge to himself (if be could enter) a several day of Triumph; for so he
might do by their own Customs. Another therefore of the Brood, being
presently aptly accon^^red, and armed Cap-a-pe, with all furniture fit for such
an Inuader, sets forward the very next morning, and arriu'de at one of the
Gates, before any Porters eyes were vnglewd. To knock, he thought it no
policy, because such fellows are commonly most churlish, when they are most
entreated, and are key-cold in their coming down to Strangers, except they be
brybed: to stay there with such ^ confusion of faces round about him, till
light should betray him, might call his Arrival, being strange and hidden,
into question; besides, he durst not send any Spy he had, to listen what news
went amongst the people, and whether any preparation were made for him, or that
they did expect his approach, because indeed there was not any one of the
Damned Crewe that followed his tail, whom he durst trust for a true word. He
resolves therefore to make his entrance, not by the sword, but by some sleyght,
what storm or fair weather soever should happen: And for that purpose, taking
asunder his Chariot, (for it stood altogether like a Germane clock, or an
English, Jack or Turne-spit, upon skrewes and vices) he scatters his Troop
upon the fields and hye-way, into small companies, as if they had been Irish
beggars; till at last espying certain Colliers with Carts most sinfully
laden, for the City, and behind them certain light Country Horse-women
ryding to the Markets, he mingled his Footmen carelessly, amongst these, and
by this Stratagem of Coals, bravely through Moore-gate, got within the walls;
where marching not like a plodding Grasyer with his Droues before him, but like
a Citty-Captayne, with a Company (as pert as Taylours at a wedding) close at
his heels, because now they knew they were out of fear) he musters
together all the Hackneymen and Horse-courses in and about Colman-streete.

No sooner had these Sons and Heirs unto Horse-shooes, got him into their
eyes, but they wept for joy to behold him; yet in the end, putting up their
tears into bottles of Hay, which they held under their arms, and wyping their
slubberd cheeks with wispes of clean Straw, (provided for the nonce) they
harnessed the Grand Signiors Caroach, mounted his Cauallery upon Curtals, and
so sent him most pompously (like a new elected Dutch Burgomaster) into the
City.

He was looked upon strangely by all whom he met, for at the first, few or none
knew him, few followed him, few bid him welcome: But after he had spent here
a very little piece of time, after it was voyc'd that Monsieur Mendax came to
dwell amongst them, and had brought with him all sorts of politic falsehood and
lying, what a number of Men, Women and Children fell presently in love with
him! There was of every Trade in the City, and of every profession some, that
instantly were dealers with him: For you must note, that in a State so
multitudinous, where so many flocks of people must be fed, it is impossible to
have some Trades to stand, if they should not Lie.

How quickly after the Art of Lying was once publicly professed, were false
Weights and false Measures invented! and they have since done as much hurt to
the inhabitants of Cities, as the invention of Gunnes has done to their
walls: for though a Lie have but short legs (like a Dwarfes) yet it goes far
in a little time, Et crescit eundo, and at last proves a tall fellow: the
reason is, that Truth had ever but one Father, but Lies are a thousand men's
Bastards, and are begotten every where.

Look up then (Thou thy Countries Darling,) and behold what a devilish Inmate
thou have entertained. The Genealogy of Truth is well known, for she was borne
in Heaven, and dwells in Heaven: Falsehood then and Lying must of necessity come
out of that hot Country of Hell, from the line of Devils: for those two are as
opposite, as day and darkness. What an ungracious Generation will thou mingle
with thine, if thou draw not this from thee: What a number of unhappy and
cursed children will be left upon thy hand? for Lying is Father to Falsehood,
and Grandsire to Perjury: Frawd (with two faces) is his Daughter, a very
Monster: Treason (with hairs like Snakes) is his kinseman; a very Fury! how
art thou enclosed with danger? The Lie first deceiues thee, and to shoot the
deceit off cleanly, an oath (like an Arrow) is drawn to the head, and that
hits the mark. If a Lie, after it is molded, be not smooth enough, there is no
instrument to burnish it, but an oath: Swearing gives it cullor, and a bright
complexion. So that Oaths are Crutches, upon which Lies (like lame soldiers)
go, and need no other pasport. Little oaths are able to bear up great lies:
but great Lies are able to beat down great Families: For oaths are wounds
that a man stabs into himself, yea, they are burning words that consume those
who kindle them.

What fools then are thy Buyers and Sellers to be abused by such hell hounds?
Swearing and Forswearing put into their hands perhaps the gains of a little
Silver, but like those pieces which Judas received, they are their destruction.
Wealth so gotten, is like a tree set in the depth of winter, it prospers not.

But is it possible (Thou leader of so great a Kingdom) that heretofore so
many bonfires of men's bodies should be made before thee in the good quarrel of
Truth? and that now thou should take part wish her enemy? Have so many
Triple-pointed darts of Treason bin shot at the heads of thy Princes, because
they would not take Truth out of thy Temples, and art thou now in League with
false Witches ye would kill thee? Thou art no Traueler, the habit of Lying
therefore will not become thee, cast it off.

He that gives a soldier the Lie, looks to receive the stab: but what danger
does he run upon, that gives a whole City the Lie? yet must I venture to give
it thee. Let me tell thee then, that Thou do Lie with Pride, and though thou
art not so gaudy, yet are thou more costly in attiring thy self than the
Court, because Pride is the Queen of Sins, thou have chosen her to be thy
Concubine, and have begotten many base Sons and Daughters upon her body, as
Vainglory, Curiosity, Disobedience, Opinion, Disdain, etc. Pride, by thy Lying
with her, is grown impudent: She is now a common Harlot, and every one has
use of her body. The Tailor calls her his Lemman, he has often got her great
with child of Phantasticallity and Fashions, who no sooner came into the world,
but the fairest Wives of thy Tennants snatched them up into their arms, laid
them in their laps and to their breasts, and after they had played with them
their pleasure, into the country were those two children (of the Tailors) sent
to be nursed up, so that they live sometimes there, but ever and anon with thee.

Thou do likewise Lie with Usury: how often have thou bin found in bed with
her! How often has she bin openly disgraced at the Cross for a Strumpet! yet
still do thou keep her company, and art not ashamed of it, because you
commit Sin together, even in those houses that have painted posts standing at
the Gates. What ungodly brats and kindred has she brought thee? for upon Usury
have thou begotten Extortion, (a strong, but an unmannerly child,) Hardness of
heart, a very murderer, and Bad Conscience, who is so unruly, that he seems to
be sent unto thee, to be thy everlasting pain. Then has she Sons in law,
and they are all Scriueners: those Scriueners have base sons, and they are
all common Brokers; those Brokers likewise send a number into the world, and
they are all Common Thieves.

All of these may easily give Arms: for they fetch their descent from hell,
where are as many Gentlemen, as in any one place, in any kingdom.

Thou do lie with sundry others, and committest strange whoredoms, which
by use and boldness grow so common, that they seem to be no whoredoms at
all, Yet thine own abominations would not appear so vilely, but that thou
make thy buildings a Brothelry to others: for thou suffer Religion to lie
with Hypocrisy: Charity to lie with Ostentation: Friendship to lie with
Hollow-heartednes: the Churl to lie with Simony: Justice to lie with Bribery,
and last of all, Conscience to lie with every one. So that now she is full of
diseases: But thou know the medicine for all these Feauers that shake thee:
be therefore to thy self thine own Physician, and by strong Pills purge away
this second infection that is breeding upon thee, before it strike to the heart.

Falsehood and Lying thus have had their day, and like Almanackes of the last
year, are now gone out: let us follow them a step or two farther to see how
they ride, and then (if we can) leave them, for I perceive it grows late,
because Candlelight (who is next to enter upon the stage) is making himself
ready to act his Comicall Scenes. The Chariot then that Lying is drawn in, is
made al of whetstones; Wantonness and evil custom are his Horses: a Fool is
the Coachman that drives them: a couple of swearing Fencers sometimes lead the
Horses by the reins, and sometimes flourish before them to make room.
Worshipfully is this Lord of Limbo attended, for Knights thi^selues follow
close at his heels; Mary they are not Post and Poyre-Knightes but one of the
Post. Amongst whose train is shuffled in a company of scambling ignorant
Petti-foggars, lean Knaves and hungry, for they live upon nothing but the
scraps of the Law, and here and there (like a Prune in White-broth, is stuck
a spruice but a meer^ prating unpracticed Lawyer^ Clarke all in black. At the
tail of all (when this goodly Pageant is passed by) ollow a crowde of every
trade some, amongst whom least we be smothered, and be taken to be of the
same list, let us strike down my way.

Nam^ (...) Vulgus.

^. Candlelight. OR, The Nocturnall Triumph.
O Candlelight: and art thou one of the Cursed Crew? have thou bin set at the
Table of Princes, and Noble men? have all su^es of people ^oone reverence unto
thee and stood b^re (...) ^ey have seen thee? have Thieves, Traitors, and
Murderers been affraide to come in thy presence, because they knew thee just,
and that thou would discover them? And act thou now a harborer of all kinds
of Vices? nay, do thou play the capital Vice thy self?

Have thou had so many learned Lectures read before thee, and is the light of
thy Understanding now clean put out, and have so many profound scholars
profited by thee? have thou done such good to Universities, been such a guide
to the Lame, and seen the doing of so many good works, yet do thou now
look dimly, and with a dull eye upon al Goodness? What comfort have sickmen
taken (in weary and irksome nights) but only in thee? thou have been their
Physician and Apothecary, and when the relish of nothing could please them,
the very shadow of thee has been to them a restoritiue Consolation. The Nurse
has stilled her way ward Infant, showing it but to thee: What gladness have
thou put into Mariners bosoms, when thou have met them on the Sea? What Joy
into the faint and benighted Trauailer when he has met thee on the land? How
many poor Handy-craftes men by Thee have earned the best part of their living?
And art thou now become a Companion for Drunkards, for ^eachers, and for
prodigalles? Art thou turned Reprobate? thou will burn for it in hell, And so
odious is this thy Apostasy, and hiding thy self from ye light of the truth, ye
at thy death and going out of the world, even they y^ love thee best, will tread
thee under their feet: yea I yt have thus played the Herrald, and proclaimd thy
good parts, will now play the Crier and call thee into open count, to arraigne
thee for thy misdemeanors.

Let the world therefore understand, that this Tallowfacde Gentleman (called
Candlelight) so soon as ever the Sun was gone out of sight, and that
darkness like a thief out of a hedge crept upon the earth, sweat till he
dropped again, with bustling to come into the City. For having no more but one
only eye) and that ster^er^^ with drinking and sitting up late) he was ashamed
to be seen by day, knowing he should be laughed to scorn, and hoo^ed at. He
makes his entrance therefore at Aldersgate of set purpose, for though the
street be fair and spacious, yet few lights in mistie euenings, using there
to thrust out their golden heads he thought that the aptest circle for him to
be raised in, because ^here his Glittering would make greatest show. What
expectation was there of his coming? setting aside ye (...), there is not more
triumphing on Midsommer night. No sooner was he advanced up into the most
famous Streets, but a number of shops for joy began to shut in: Mercers
^olde up their silks and Ueluets: the Goldsmithes drew back their Plate, and
all the City looked like a private Playhouse, when the windows are clapped
down, as (...) some Nocturnal, or dismal Tragedy were presently to be acted
before all the Tradesmen. But Caualiero Candlelight came for no such
solemnity: No he had other Crackers in hand to which he watched but his hour
to give fire* Sc^rce was his entrance blown abroad, but the Banckrupt, the
Fello^, and all that owed any money, and for fear of arrests, or Justices
warrants, had like so many Snayles kept their houses over their heads all the
day before, began now to creep out of their shel^, and so stalk up and down
the streets as uprightly, and with as proud a gate as if they meant to knock
against the stars with the crowns of their heads.

The damask coated Citizen, that sat in his sh^p both fo^^noone and
afternoon, and looked more sowerly on his poor neighbore, th^n if he had
drunk a quart of Uineger at a draught, sneakes out of his own doors, and
slips into a Tavern, where either alone, or with some other that battles their
money together, they so plye themselves with penny pots, which (like
small-shot) go off, pouring into their fat paunches, that at length they have
not an eye to see withal, nor a good leg to stand upon. In which pickle if
any of them happen to be iustled down by a post (that in spite of them will
take the wall) and so reeles them into the kennell, who takes them up or leads
them home? who has them to bed, and with a pillow smothes this stealing so of
good liquor, but that brazen-face Candlelight? Nay more, he intices their
very Prentices to make their desperate sallyes out, and quick retyres in
(contrary to the Oath of their Indentures) which are seven years a swearing,
only for their Pintes, and away.

Tush, this is nothing: young shopkeepers that have but newly ventured upon the
pikes of marriage, who are every hour showing their wares to their Customers,
plying their business harder all day then Vulcan does his Anuile, and seem
better husbands than Fiddlers that scrape for a poor living both day and night,
yet even these if they can but get Candlelight, to sit up all night with them
in any house of Reckning (that's to say in a Tavern) they fall roundly to play
the London prize, and that's at three several weapons, Drinking, Dancing, and
Dicing, Their wives lying all that time in their beds sighing like widows,
which is lamentable: the giddie-braind husbands wasting the portions they had
with them, which lost once, they are (like Maiden-heades) never recouerable. Or
which is worse, this going a Bat-fowling a nights, being noted by some wise
yong-man or other, that knows how to handle such cases, the hush is beaten for
them at home, whilst they catch the bird abraode, but what bird is it? the
Woodcocke.

Never did any City pocket up such wrong at the hands of one, over whom she
is so jealous, and so tender, that in Winter nights if he be but missing, and
hide himself in the dark, I know not how many Beadles are sent up and down
the streets to cry him: yet you see, there is more cause she should send out
to curse him For what Uillanies are not abroad so long as Candlelight is
stirring? The Seruing-man dare then walk with his wench: the Private Puncke
(otherwise called one that boords in London) who like a Pigeon sits billing all
day within doors, and fears to step over the thresholde, does then walk
the round till midnight, after she has been swaggering amongst pottle pots
and Uintners boys. Nay, the sober Perpetuana suited Puritan, that dares not
(so much as by Moone-light) come near the Suburb-shadow of a house, where they
set stewed Prunes before you, raps as boldly at the hatch, when he knows
Candlelight is within, as if he were a new chosen Constable. When al doors
are locked up, when no eyes are open, when birds sit silent in bushes, and
beasts lie sleeping under hedges, when no creature can be smelt to be up but
they that may be smelt every night a streets length ere you come at them, even
then does this Ignis fatuus (Candlelight) walk like a Fire-drake into sundry
corners. If you will not believe this, shoot but your eye through the Iron
grates into the Cellers of Uintners, there you shall see him hold his neck in
a Iin, made of a clift hoope-sticke, to throttle him from telling tales,
whilst they most abhominably iumble together all the papisticall drinks that
are brought from beyond sea: the poor wines are rackt and made to confess
any thing: the Spanish and the French meeting both in the bottom of the
Cellar, conspire together in their cups, to lay the Englishman (if he euercome
into their company) under the board.

To be short, such strange mad music do they play upon their Sacke-buttes,
that if Candlelight being over come with the steeme of new sweet Wines,
when they are at work, should not tell them it is time to go to bed, they
would make all the Hogges-heads that use to come to the house, to dannce the
Cannaries till they reeld again. When the Grape-mongers and he are parted,
he walks up and down the streets squiring old Midwiues to any house,
(^e^e s^cretly) where any Bastards ^re to be brought into the world. From
them, (about the hour when Spirits wal^e, and Cats go a gossipping) he
visits the W^tch where creeping into the Beadles Cothouse (which hands
between his legs, that are lapt round about with pieces of Rugge, as if he
had new struck of Sh^ckles) and seeing the Watchmen to nodde at him, he
(...) himself presently, (knowing the token) under the slapp^ (...) and
teaches them (by instinct) how to st(...) into their heads, because he sees
all their Cloakes cannot one good nappe upon them and upon his warrant snort
they so loud, that to those Night walkers (whose wits are up so late) it
serves as a Watch-worde so keep out of the teach of their ^rowne (...): by
which means they never come to answer the matter b^^ore master Constable,
and the Benc^ upon which his men (that should watch) do sit: In that the
Coun^e^s are cheated of Prisoners, to the great ^amm^ge o^ these that should
have their mornings draught out of the Garnish.

O Candlelight, Candlelight! to how many costly Sacke-posse^s* and rea^s
Banquets have thou been musted by Prentices and (...)-maiden^? When the
Bell-man for anger to spy (such a Purloyner of Citizens goods) so many, has
bounced (...) the door like a mad man, At which (as if Robin Good Fellow had
been coniur'd up amongst them the We^ches have, fallen into the hands of the
Greene-sicknesse, and the young fellows into cold Agues, with very fear
least their master (like old Ieronimo and Isabella his wife after him)
starting out of his naked bed should came down (with a Weapon in his hand)
and this in his mouth: What outcryes pull us from our naked bed? Who calls?
etc. as the Players can tell you. O Candlelight, how have thou stuncke then,
when they have popt thee out of their compayne: how have thou taken it in
snuff, when thou have been smelt out especially the master of the house
exclayming, that by day that deed of darkness had not been. One Uennie more
with thee, and then I have done.

How many lips have been worn out with kissing at she street door, or in yt
entry (in a winking blind evening?) how many odd matches and uneven marriages
have been made there between young Prentises and there masters daughters,
whilst thou (O Candlelight) have stood watching at the stairs h^ade, that
none could come stealing down by thee, but they must be seen?

It appears by these articles put in against thee, that thou art partly a Bawd
to diverse loose sins, and partly a Coozener: for if any in the City have
badde wares lying dead upon their hands, thou art better than Aqua vitae to
fetch life into them, and to send them packing. Thou shall therefore be taken
out of thy proud Chariot, and be carted: yet first will we see what
workmanship, and what stoffe it is made of, to the intent that if it be not
dangerous for a City to keep any Relic belonging to such a crooked
Saint, It may be hung up as a monument to show with what dishonor thou were
driven out of so noble a lodging, to deface whose buildings thou have been so
envious, that when thou have been left alone by any thing that would take
fire, thou have burnt to the ground many of her goodlyest houses.

Candle lights Ceath is made all of Hor^e, shaven as thin as Changel^^yes ate.
It is drawn (with ease) by two Rats: the Coachman is a Chaundler who so s^ears
wi^h yea^king them, that he drops tallowe, and that f^eors them as prouend^r:
yet a^e the lashes that he gives the squeaking Vermin more deadly to them
then all the Ratsbane in Buckle^sb^rie. Painfulness and Studdy are his two
Lac^ey^s and run by him: Darkness, Conspiracy, Opportunity, Stratagems and
Fear, are his attend^nts: he is sued unto by Diggars in Mines, Grauers,
Scholars, Mariners, Nurses, Drunkards, Unthrifts and shrote Husbands: he
destroys that which feeds him, and therefore Ingratitude comes behind all
this, driving them before her. The next Devil that is to be commanded up, is a
very lazy one, and will be long in rising: let us therefore unbind this, and
fall to other Charms.

4. Sloth: OR The fourth days Triumph.
MAn (doubtless) was not created to be an idle fellow, for then he should be
Gods Vagabond: he was made for other purpose then to be ever eating as swine:
ever sleeping as Dormise: ever dumb as fishes in the Sea, or ever prating to no
purpose, as Birds of the air: he was not set in this Universal Orchard to
stand still as a Tree and so to be cut down, but to be cut down if he should
stand still. And to have him remember this, he carries certain Watches with
Larums about him, that are ever striking: for all the Enginous Wheels of the
Soul are continually going: though the body lie never so fast bownde in
Slumbers, the imagination runs too and fro, the fantasy flies round about,
the vital Spirits walk up and down, yea the very pulses show actiuitie, and
their hammers are still beating, so that even in his very dreams it is
whispered in his ear that he must be doing something.

If he had not these prompters at his elbowe, yet every member of his body
(if it could speak would chide him) if they were put to no use, considering
what noble workmanship is bestowed upon them. For man no sooner gets upon his
legs, but they are made so that either he may run or go: when he is weary,
they can give him ^ase by standing still, if he will not stand, the Knees le^ue
like Hindges to bow up and down, and to let him kneel His arms have
artificial cords and stringes, which shorten or fly ^ut to their length at
pleasure: They wind about the body like a silver Girdle, and being held out
before, are weapons to defend it: at the end of the arms, are two beautiful
Mathematical Instruments, with five several motions in each of them, and
thirty other moving Engines, by which they stir both. His head likewise
stands upon three Skrewes, the one is directly forward to teach him
Providence, the other two are on eather side one, to arm him with
Circumspection: How busy are both the eyes, to keep d^nger from him every
way.

But admit he had none of these Wonderful Volumes to read over, yet he sees
the clouds always working: the waters ever laboring: the earth continuallye
bringing forth: he sees the Sun have a hye co^our with taking pains for the
day. The Moon pale and sickly, with sitting up for the night: the Stars
mustring their armies together to guard the Moon. ^ll of them, and all that is
in the world, serving as Schoolemaisters, and the world it self as an Academ
to bring up man in knowledge, and to put him still into action.

How then dares this nastie, and loathsome sin of Sloth venture into a Ci^ie
amongst so many people? who does he hope will give him entertainme^t? what
lodging (thinks he) can be tame up, where he and his ^eauy-headed company may
take their afternoones nay soundly? for in every street, carts and Coaches make
such a thundering as if the world ran upon wheels: at every corner, men,
women, and children meet in such shoales, that posts are set up of purpose
to strengthen the houses, least with iustling one another they should shoulder
them down. Besides, hammers are beating in one place, Tube hooping in another,
Pots clincking in a third, water-tankards running at tilt in a fourth: here
are Porters sweating under burdens, there Marchants-men bearing bags of money,
Chapmen (as if they were at Leape-frog) skippe out of one shop into another:
Tradesmen (as if they were dau^cing Galliards (are iusly) at Legs and never
stand still: all are as busy as country Atturneyes at an Assizes: how then
can Idleness think to inhabit here?

Yet the Worshipful Sir, (that leads a Gentleman's life, and does nothing)
though he comes but slowly on (as if he trodde a French March) yet he comes
and with a great train at his tail, as if the country had brought up some
Fellon to one of our Gayles, So is he connaide by nine or ten drowsy
Malt-men, that lie nodding over their Sackes, and even a most sleepie and
still Triumph begins his entrance at Bishopsgate.

An army of substantial Householders (most of them living by the hardness of
the hand) came in Battle array, with spread Banners, bearing the Arms of
their several occupations to meet this Cowardly General and to beat him
back. But he sommoning a parlee, hammered out such a strong Oration in praise
of Ease* that they all struck up their Drums, flung up their Round-Cappes,
(and as if it had been another William the Conqueror came marching in with
him) and lodged him in the quietest street in the City, for so his Laziness
requested.

He then presently gave licenses to all the Uintners, to keep open house, and
to emptye their Hogsheades to all comers, who did so, dying their grates into
a drunkards blush (to make them known from the Grates of a prison) least
customers should re^le away from them, and hanging out new bushes, that if men
at their going out, could not see the sign, yet they might not loose
themselves in the bush. He likewise gave order that dicing-houses, and bowling
alleyes should be erected, whereupon a number of poor handy crafts-men, that
before wrought night and day, made stocks to themselves of ten groates, and
crowns a piece, and what by Betting, Lurches, Rubbers and such tricks, they
never took care for a good days work afterward. For as Letchery is patron
of al your Suburb Colleges, and sets up Vaulting-houses, and
Daunsing-Schooles: and as Drunkenness when it least can stand, does best hold
up Alehouses, So Sloth is a founder of the Almeshouses first mentioned, and is
a good Benefactor to these last.

The Players prayed for his coming, they lost nothing by it, the coming in of
ten Ambassadors was never so sweet to them, as this our sin was: their
houses smoakt every after noone with Stinkards, who were so glewed together in
crowdes with the Steames of strong breath, that when they came forth, their
faces looked as if they had been perboylde: And this Comicall Tearme-time they
hoped for, at the least all the summer, because it is given out that Sloth
himself will come, and sit in the two-pennie galleries amongst the Gentlemen,
and see their Knaueries and their pastimes.

But alas! if these were the sorest diseases (Thou noblest City of the
now-noblest Nation) that Idleness does infect thee with: thou have Physic
sufficient in thy self, to purge thy body of them. No, no, he is not
slothful, that is only lazy, that only wastes his good hours, and his
Silver in Luxury, and licentious ease, or that only (like a standing water)
does nothing, but gather corruption: no, he is the true Slothful man that
does no good. And how many would cry Guilty unto thee, if this were there
Indictment? Thy Maiestrate^ (that when they see thee most in danger) put up the
swords that Justice has guided, to their loins, and fly into the conntrie,
leaving thee destitute of their Counsel, they would cry guilty, they are
slothful.

Thy Physicians, that feari^g to die by that which they live, (sickness) do
most unkindly leave thee when y^ ^rt ready to lie upon thy death bed, They are
slothful, They would cry Guilty. Thy great men, and such as have been thy
Rulers* that being taken out of poor Cradles, and nursed up by thee, have filled
their Cofers with gold, and their names with honor, yet afterward growing
weary of thee, (like Mules having sucked their dammes) most ingratefully have
they stolen from thee, spending those blessings which were thine, upon those
that no way deserve them, Are not These Slothful? They would cry guiltye.
There is yet one more, whom I would not hear to Cry Guilty, because (of al^
others) I would not have them slothful. O you that speak the language of
Angels, and should indeed be Angels amongst us, you that have offices above
those of Kings, that have warrant to command Princes, and control them, if
they do amiss: you that are Stewards over the Kings house of heaven, and lie
here as Ambassadors about the greatest State-matters in the world: what a
dishonor were it to your places, if it should be known that you are
Sloathfull? you are sworn laborers, to work in a Uineyard, which if you
dress not carefully, if you cut it not artificially, if you underprop it not
wisely when you see it laden, if you gather not the fruits in it, when they
be ripe, but suffer them to drop down, and be eaten up by Swine. O what a
dear account are you to make him that must give you your hire? you are the
Beams of the Sun that must ripen the Grapes of the Uine, and if you shine not
clearly, he will eclipse you for ever: your tongues are the instruments y^
must cut off rank and idle Sprigs, to make the bearing-braunches to spread,
and unless you keep them sharp and be ever pruning with them, he will cast
you by, and you shall be eaten up with rust. The Church is a garden and you
must weed it: it is a Fountain, and you must keep it clear: it is her
Husbands Jewel, and you must pollish it: it is his best belooued, and you must
keep her chaste.

Many Merchants has this City to her Sons, of al which you are the most
noble, you traffic only for men's Souls, sending them to the Land of
Promise, and to the heavenly Jerusalem, and receiving from thence (in Exchange)
the ritchest Commodity in the world, your own salvation. O therefore be not
you Slothful: for if being chosen Pilots, you Sleep, and so stick upon
Reckes, you hazard your own shipwreck more then theirs that venture with you.

What a number of Colors are here grounded, to paint out Sloth in his vglines,
and to make him loathed, whilst he (yawning, and his Chin knocking nods into
his breast) regardes not the whips of the most crabbish Satyristes. Let us
therefore look upon his Horse-litter that he rides in, and so leave him.

A couple of vnshodde Asses carry it between them, it is all fluttishly
euergrowne with Moss on the outside, and on the inside quilted through out
with down pillowes: Sleep and Plenty lead the Fore-Asse; a pursie double
chind Laena, riding by on a Sump^er-horse with proua^der at his mouth, and she
is the Litter-Driuer: she keeps two Pages, and those are an Irish Beggar on
the one side, and One that says he has been a Soldier on the other side. His
attendants are Sickness, Want, Ignorance, Infamy, Bondage, Palenes, Blockishnes
and Carelesnes. The Retayners that wear his cloth are Anglers, Dumb Ministers
Players, Exchange-Wenches, Gamsters, Panders, Whores and Fiddlers.

Apishnesse: OR The fifth days Triumph.
SLoth was not so slow in his march, when he entered the City, but Apishnesse
(that was to take his turn next) was as quick. Do you not know him? It cannot
be read in any Chronicle, that he was ever with Henry the eight at Bulloigne
or at ye winning of Turwin and Turnay: for (not to belle the sweet Gentleman,)
he was neither in the shell then, no nor then when Paules-steeple and the
Weathercocke were on fire; by which marks (without looking in his mouth) you
may safely swear, that he is but young, for he is a feirse, dapper fellow, more
light headed then a Musician: as phantastically attyred as a Court Ieaster:
wanton in discourse: lascivious in behavior: iocond in good company: nice in
his trencher, and yet he feeds very hungerly on scraps of songs: be drinks
in a Glass well, but vilely in a deep French-bowle: yet much about the year^
when Monsieur came in, was he begotten, between a French Tailor, and an
English Court-Seamster. This Signior Ioculento (as the devil would have it)
comes prawncing in at Cripplegate, and he may well do it, for indeed all the
parts he plays are but could speeches stolen from others, whose voices and
actions he counterfestes: but so lamely, that all the Cripples in ten
Spittle-houses, sh^we not more halting. The Grauer Brows were bent against
him, and by the awful Charms of Reverend Authority, would have sent him
down from whence he came, for they knew how smooth soever his looks were,
there was a devil in his bosom: But he having the stronger faction on his
side, set them in a Mutenie, Saeu^que animis ignobile vulgus, the many headed
Monster fought as it had been against Saint George, won the gate, and then
with showtes was the Gaueston of the Time, brought in. But who brought him in?
None but ^ichmens sons that were left wel^, and had more money given by will,
then they had wit how to bestow it: none but Prentises almost out of their
years, and all the Tailors, Haberdashers, and Embroderers that could be got for
love or money, for these were pressed secretly to the service, by the young and
wanton dames of the City, because they would not be seen to show their love
to him themselves.

Man is Gods Ape, and an Ape is Zani to a man, doing over those tricks
(especially if they be knauish) which he sees done before him: so that
Apishnesse is nothing but counterfetting or imitation: and this flower when it
first came into the City, had a pretty scent, and a delightful color, has
been let to run so high, that it is now feeded, and where it falls there rises
up a stinking weed.

For as man is Gods Ape, striving to make artificial flowers, birds, etc.
like to the natural: So for the same reason are women, Men's She Apes, for
they will not be behind them the breadth of a Tailors yard (which is nothing to
speak of) in any newfangled vpstart fashion. If men get up French standing
collers, women will have the French standing collar too ^^ Dublets with little
thick skirts, (so sh^rt that none are able to sit upon them.) women's foreparts
are thick skirted too: by sur^etting upon which kind of fantastical
Apishnesse in a short time, they fall into the disease of pride: Pride is
infectious, and breeds prodigality: Prodigality after it has run a little,
closes up and ^ester^, and then turns to Beggerie. Witty was that Painter
therefore, that when he had limned one of every Nation in th^^r proper
attyres, and being at his wits ends how to draw an Englishman: At the
last (to give him a quipp^ for his folly in apparel) drew him stark naked,
with Sheeres in his hand, and cloth on his arm, because man's could cut out his
fashions but himself.

For an English-mans suite is ^ke a traitors body that has been hanged,
drawn, and quart, red, and is set up in se^erall places: his Co^peece is in
Denmark, the collor of his Duble and the belly in France: the wing and narrow
sleeue in ^taly: the short tras^^ hangs over a Dutch Botchers stall in Vtrich:
his huge stoppes speaks Spanish: Polonia gives him the Boots: the block for
his head alters faster then the Feltmaker can fit^e him, and thereupon we are
called in scorn Blockheades. And thus we that mock every. Nation, for
keeping one fashion, yet steal patches from every one of them, to piece out
our pride, are now laughing-stocks to them, because their cut so scuruily
becomes us:

This sin of Apishnesse* whether it be in apparel* or in diet, is not of
such long life as his fellows, and for seeing none but women and fools keep
him company, the one will be ashamed of him when they begin to have wrinckles,
the other when they feel their purses light. The Magistrate, the wealthy
commoner* and the ancient Citizen, disdain to come near him: we were best
therefore, take note of such things as are about him, least on a sudden he
slip out of sight.

Apishnesse ri^es in a Chariot made of nothing but cages, in which are all the
strangest outlandish Birds that can be gotten: the Cages are slucke full of
Parats feathers: the Coachman is an Italian Mownti-banck who drives a ^awne
and a Lamb, for they draw this Gew-g^w in Winter, when such beasts are r^rest
to be had: In Summer, it goes alone by the motion of wheels: two Pages in
light colored suites, embrodered full of Butterflies, with wings ^^at slutter
up with the wind, run by him, the one being a dancing boy the other a
T^^^bler: His attend^nts are Folly* Laughter, Inconstancy, Riot, Niceness,
and Vainglorie: when his Court remoues he is followed by Tobacconists,
Shittlecock-makers, Feather-makers, Cob-web-lawne-weauers, Perfumers, young
Country Gentlemen, and Fools. In whose Ship whilst they all are sailing, let
us observe what other abuses the Verdimotes Inquest do present on the land,
albeit they be never reformed, till a second Chaos is to be refined. In the
mean time, In nouafert Animus.

Shauing: OR The sixth days Triumph.
HOw? Shauing! Me thinks Barbers should cry to their Customers winck hard and
come running out of their shoppes into the open streets, throwing all their
Suddes out of their learned Latin Basins into my face for presuming to name the
Mystery of Shauing in so vil^anous a company as these seven are. Is that
Trade (say they) that for so many years has been held up by so many heads,
and has out-hearded the stowtest in England to their faces, Is that Trade, that
because it is evermore Trimming the City, has been for many years past made
up into a Society, and ^a^e their Guild, and their Privileges with as much
freedom as the best, must that now be counted a sin ((...) and one of the
Deadly sins) of the City? No, no^ be not angry with me, (O you that bandie
away none but sweet washing Balls, and cast none other then Rose-waters for
any man's pleasure) for there is Shauing within the walls of this Great
Metropolis, which you never ^reamed of: A shauing that takes not only away the
rebellious h^ltes, but brings the flesh with it too: and if that cannot
suffice, the very bones must follow. If therefore you, and Five companies
greater then yours, should choose a Colonel to lead you against this mighty
Tamburlaine, you are too weak to make him Retire, and if you should come to a
battle, you would loose the day.

For behold what Troops forsake the Standard of the City, and fly to him:
neither are they base and commo^n soldiers, but even those that have borne
arms a long time. Be silent therefore, and be patient: and since there is no
remedy but that* (this combatant that is so cunning at the sharp) will come in,
mark in what triumphant and proud manner, he is marshalled through Newgate: At
which Bulwark (and none other) did he (in policy) desire to show himself.
First, because he knew if the City should play with him as they did with Wiat,
Newgate held a number, that though they were false to all the world, would be
true to him. Couragiouously therefore does he enter: All of them that had once
served under his colors (and were now to suffer for the Truth, which they had
abused) leaping up to the Iron lattaces, to behold their General, and making
such a rattling with shaking their chains for ^oy, as if Cerberus had bin come
from hell to live and die amongst them. Shauing is now lodged in the heart of
the City, but by whom? and at whose charges? Mary at a common purse, to which
many are tributaries, and therefore no marvel if he be feasted royally. The
first that paid their money toward it, are cruel and covetous Landlords, who
for the building up of a Chimny, which stands them not above 30. s. and for
whiting the walls of a tenement, which is searce worth the daubing raise the
rent presently (as if it were new put into ye Subsidy book, assessing it at 3.
li. a year more then ever it went for before: fi^thy wide-mouthd bandogs they
are, that for a quarters rent will pull out their ministers throat, if he were
their tenant: And (though it turn to the utter undoing of a man) being rubd
with quicksiluer, which they love because they have mangyconsciences, they will
let to a drunken Flemming a house over his own cou^try-mans head, thinking he is
safe enough from the thunderbolts of their wives and children, and from curses,
and the very vengeance of heaven, if he get by the bargain but so many Angels
as will cover the crown of his head.

The next that laid down his share, was no Sharer among the Players, but a
shauer of young Gentlemen, before ever a hair dare peep out of their chinnes:
and these are Usurers: who for a little money, and a great deal of trash: (as
Fire-shouels, browne-paper, motley cloake-bags, etc. bring young Nouices into a
^ooles Paradise till they have sealed the Morgage of their lands, and then
like Pedlers, go they (or some Familiar spirit for them ra^zde by the Usurer)
up and down to cry Commodities) which scarce yield the third part of ye sum
for which they take them up.

There are like wise other Barbers, who are so well customed, that they shave a
whole City sometimes in three days, and they do it (as Banks his horse did
his tricks) only by the eye, and the ear: For if they either see no
Magistrate coming toward them* (as being called back by the Commonweal for
more serious employments) or do but hear that he lies sick, upon whom the
health of a City is put in haza^d: they presently (like Prentises upon
Shroue-tuesday) take the law into their own hands, and do what they list.
And this Legion consists of Market-folkes, Bakers, Brewers, all that weigh
their Consciences in Scales. And lastly, of the two degrees of Colliers, viz.
those of Char-coles, and those of Newcastle. Then have you the Shauing of
Fatherless children, and of widows, and that's done by Executors, The Shauing
of poor Clients especially by the Atturneyes Clearkes of your Courts, and
that's done by writing their Bills of costs upon Cheuerell. The Shauing of
prisoners by extortion, first, taken by their keepers, for a prison is builded
on such rank and fertile ground, that if poor wretches sow it with hand-fulles
of small debts when they come in if thery lie thee but a while to see the
coming up of them: the charges of the house will be treble the demand of the
Creditor. Then have you Brokers yt shave poor men by most jewish interest:
marry the diuils trim them so soon as they have washed* others. I will not
tell how Uintners shave their Guestes with a little piece of Paper not above
three fingers broad; for their rooms are like Barbars Chaires: Men come into
them willingly to be Shaven. Only (which is worst) be it known ^o thee ( O
thou Queen of Cities) thy Inhabitants Shave their Consciences so close, that
in the end they grow baloe, and bring forth no goodness.

We have been quick (you see) in Trimming this Cutter of Queen Hith,
because it is his property to handle others so, let us be as nymble in praising
his Household Stuff: The best part of which is his Chariot, richly adorned, It
is drawn by four beasts: the 2. foremost are a Wolf (which will eat till he
be ready to burst) and he is Coach-fellow to a she-Bea^e, who is cruel even
to women great with child: behind them are a couple of Blood-houndes: the
Coachman is an Informer. Two Pettifoggers that have been turned over the
bar, a^e his Lackies: his Household servants are Wit (who is his Steward)
Audacitie: Shifting: Inexorabilitie: and Disq^ietnesse of mind: The Meanie are
(besides some person, before named) skeldring soldiers, and begging schel^ces.

Cruelty: OR The seventh and last days Triumph.
WHat a week of sinful Reueling has here bin with these six p^oud Lords of
Miscu^e? to which of your Hundred parishes (O you Citizens) have not some one
of these (if not all) removed their Courts, and feasted you with them? your
Percuilises are not strong enough to keep them out by day your Watchmen are
too sleepy to spy their ^^ealing in by night. There is yet another to enter,
as great in power as his fellows, as subtle, as full of mischief: If I
should name him to you, you would laugh me to scorn, because you cannot be
persuaded that such a one should ever be suffered to live within the freedom:
yet if I name him not to you, you may in time, by him (as by the rest) be
undone. It is Cruelty, O strange! me thinks London should start up out of
her sollid foundation, and in anger be ready to fall upon him, and grind him
to dust that durst say, she is possessed with such a devil. Cruelty! the very
sound of it shows that it is no English word: it is a Fury sent out of hell,
not to inhabit within such beautiful walls, but amongst Turks and Tarta^s.
The other six Monsters transform themselves into Amiable shapes, and set
golden, enticing Charms to win men to their Circaean love, they have
Angelical faces to allure, and bewitching tongues to inchaunt: But Cruelty is a
hag, horred in form, terrible in voice, formidable in threats, A tyrant in
his very locks, and a murderer in all his actions.

How then comm^th it to pass that here he seeks entertainment? For what
City in the world, does more dry up the tears of the Widdowe, and gives
more warmth to the fatherless then this ancient and reverend Grandam of
Cities? Where has the Orphan (that is to receive great portions) less cause
to mourn the loss o^ Parents? He finds four and twenty grave Senators to
be his Fathers instead of one: the City it self to be his Mother: her
Officers to be his Servants, who see that he want nothing: her laws to
suffer none to do him wrong: and though he be never so simple in wit, or ^o
^ender in years, she looks as warily to that wealth which is left him, as to
the Apple of her own eye. Where have the Leaper and the Lunatic Surgery, and
Physic so good cheap as here? their payment is only than^es: large
Hospitalls are erected (of purpose to make them lodgings) and the rent is most
easy, only their prayers: yet for all this that Charity has her Arms full
of children, and that ^ender brested Compassion is still in one street or other
doing good works: off from the Hindges are one of the 7. Gates ready to be
lifted, to make room for this Giant: the Whiflers of your inferior and Chief
companies clear the ways before him, men of all trades with shoutes and
acclamations followed in thro^ges behind him, yea even the siluer-bearded, and
seuearest looked cittize^s have given him welcomes in their Parlors.

There are in Land and within the buildings, yt round about touch her sides,
and stand within her reach, Thirteen strong houses of sorrow, where the
prisoner has his heart wasting away sometimes a whole prentiship of years in
cares. They are most of them built of Freestone, but none are free within the^:
cold are their imbraceme^ts: vnwholsom is their chear^^ dispaireful their
lodgings, vnco^fortable their s^ocieties, miserable their inhabitants: O what a
deal of wretchedness can make shift to lie in a little room! ^f those 13
houses were built al together, how rich would Grief be, having such large
enclosures? Does cruelty challe^ge a freemans room in the City because of
these places: no, the politic body of the Republike would be infected, if such
houses as these were not maintained, to keep up those that are unsound. Claims
he then an inheritance here, because you have whipping posts in your streete^
for the Uagabond? the Stocks and the cage for the unruly beggar? or because
you have Carts for the Bawd and the Harlot, and Beadles for the Lecher?
neither. Or is it because so many mo^thly Sessions are held? so many men, women
and Children called to a reconing at the Bar of death for their lives? and so
many lamentable hempen Tragedies acted at Tiburne? nor for this: Justice should
have wrong, to have it so reported. No (you Inhabitants of this little world of
people) Cruelty is a large Tree and you all stand under it: you are cruel in
compelling your children (for wealth) to go into loathed beds, Against forced
Marriages.
for thereby you make them bond-slaues: what ploughman is so foolish to yoke
young hecfars and old bullocks together? yet such is your husbandry. In fitting
your Coaches with horses, you are very curious to have them (so near as you
ca^, both of a color, both of a height, of an age, of proportion, and will you
be careless in coupling your Children? he into whose bosom threescore
winters have thrust their frozen fingars, if he be rich (though his breath be
rancker then a Muck-hill, his body more dry than Mummi, and his mind more
lame than Ignorance if self) shall have offered unto him (but it is offered as
a sacrifice) the tender bossome of a Uirgin, upon whose forehead was never
written sixteen years: if she refuse this living death (for less than a
death it cannot be unto her) She is threatened to be left an outcast, cursd
for disobedience, raild at daily, and reuylde howerlye: to save herself from
which baseness, She desprately runs into a bondage, and goes to Church to be
married, as if she went to be buried. But what glory atcheiue you in these
conquests? you do wrong to Time, enforcing May to embrace December: you
dishonor Age, in bringing it into scorn for insufficiency, into a loathing
for dotage, into all men's laughter for jealousy. You make your Daughters look
wrinckled with sorrows, before they be old, and your sons by riot, to be
beggars in midst of their youth. Hence comes it, ye murders are often
contrived, and as often acted: our country is woeful in fresh examples Hence
^omes it, yt the Courtiers gives you an open scoff, ye clown a secret mock,
the Citizen yt dwells at your threshald, a ieery fru^p: Hence it is, yt if you
go by water in the calmest day, you are driven by some fatal storm into ye
unlucky and dangerous haven between Greenewich and London. You have another
cruelty in keeping men in prison so long, til sickness and death deal mildely
with them, Against cruel Creditors.
and (in despite of al tyranny) bail them out of all executions. When you see
a poor wretch that to keep life in a loathed body has not a house left to
cover his head from the tempests, nor a bed (but the common bed which our
Mother the earth allows him) for his cares to sleep upon, when you have (by
keeping or locking him up, robbed him of all means to get, what seek you to
have him loose but his life? The miserable prisoner is ready to famish, yet
that cannot move you, the more miserable wife is ready to run mad with
despair, yet that cannot melt you^ the most of all miserable, his Children
lie crying at your doors, yet nothin^ can awakenin you compassion: if his debts
be heavy, the greater and more glorious is your pitt^ to work his freedom,
if they be light, the sharper is the Vengeance that will be heaped upon your
heads for your hardness of heart. We are most like to God that made us, when
(...) one to another, and do most look like the Di^ell that would destroy
us, when we are one another st^rme (...) If any have so much flint growing
about his bosom, that he will needs make D^ce of men's bones. I would the^e
were a law to compel him to make drinking bowls of their Sculs too: and that
every miserable debtor that so dies, might be buried at his Creditors door,
that when he strides over him he might think he still rises up (like the
Ghost in Ieronimo) crying Revenge.

Against vnconsionable Masters.
Cruelty has yet another part to play, it is acted (like the old Morralls at
Maningtree) by Tradesmen, marrye several companies in the City have it in
study, and they are never perfect in it, till the end of seven years at
least, at which time, they come off with it roundly. And this it is: When your
servants have made themselves bondmen to enjoy your fruitful hand-maides,
that's to lay, to have an honest and thriuing Art to live by: when they have
fared hardly with you by Indenture, and like your Beasts which carry you have
patiently borne al labors, and all wrongs you could lay upon them.

When you have gathered the blossoms of their youth, and reaped the fruits of
their strength, And that you can no longer (for shame) hold them in Captivity,
but that by the laws of your Country and of conscience you must undo their
fetters, Then, even then do you hang most weightes at their heels, to make
them sincke down for ever: when you are bound to send them into the world to
live, you send them into the world to beg: they served you seven years to pick
up a poor living, and therein you are just, for you will be sure it shall be a
poor living indeed they shall pick up: for what do the rich cubs? like foxes
they lay their heats together in conspiracy, burying their leaden consciences
under the earth, to the intent that all waters that are wholesome in taste, and
have the sweetness of gain in going down, may he drawn through them only,
being the great pipes of their Company, because they see it is the custom of the
City, to have all waters that come thither, conveyed by such large vessels,
and they will not break the customs of the City. When they have the
fulness of wealth to the brim, that it runs over, they scarce will suffer
their poor Servant to take that which runs at waste, nor to gather up the
wind-fals, when all the great trees, as if they grew in the garden of the
Hesperides, are laden with golden apples: no, they would not have them gleane
the scattered ears of corn, though they themselves carry away ye full sheafes:
as if Trades that were ordaind to be Communities, had lost their first
privileges, and were now turned to Monopolyes. But remember ( o you Rich men)
that your Servants are your adopted Children, they are naturalized into your
blood, and if you hurt theirs, you are guilty of letting out your own, than
which, what Cruelty can be greater?

What Gallenist or Paracelsian in the world, by all his water-casting, and
mineral extractions, would judge, that this fairest-fa^^^e daughter of Brute,
(and good daughter to King Lud, who gave her her name) should have so much
corruption in her body? unless (that being now two thousand and seven hundred
years old) extreme age should fill her full of diseases! 2700 and odd yee^es
since London was first builded by B^ute.
Who durst not have sworn for her, that of all loathsome sins that ever bred
within her, she had never touched the sin of cruelty? It had wont to be a
Spanish Sickness, and hang long (incurably) upon the body of their Inquisition;
or else a French disease, running all over that Kingdom in a Massacre; but
that it had infected the English, especially the people of this now once-againe
New-reard-Troy, it was beyond belief. But is she clearly purged of it by
those pills that have before bin given her? Is she now sound? Are there no
dregs of this thick and pestilenciall poison, eating still through her bowels?
Yes: the vgliest Serpent has not vncurld himself. She has sharper and more
black inuenomed stings within her, than yet have bin shot forth.

Against want of places for Burial in extremity of sickness.
There is a Cruelty within thee (fair Troynouant) worse and more barbarous then
all the rest, because it is half against thy own self, and half against thy
Dead Sons and Daughters. Against thy dead children were thou cruel in that
dreadful, horrid, and Tragical year, when 30000. of them (struck with
plagues from heaven) dropped down in winding-sheets at thy feet. 1602.
Thou did then take away all Ceremonies due unto them, and haledst them
rudely to their last beds (like drunkards) without the dead man's music (his
Bell.) Alack, this was nothing: but thou tumbledst them into their everlasting
lodgings (ten in one heap, and twenty in another) as if all the rooms upon
earth had ^in full. The gallant and the beggar lay together; the scholar and
the carter in one bed: the husband saw his wife, and his deadly enemy whom he
hated, within a pair of sheets. Sad and unseemly are such Funerals: So
felons that are cu^ down from the tree of shame and dishonor, are covered in
the earth: So soldiers, after a merciless battle, receive unhandsome
burial. But suppose the Pestiferous Deluge should again drown this little
world of thine, and that thou must be compeld to break open those caves of
horror and gastlinesse, so hide more of thy dead household in them, what rotten
st^nches, and contagious damps would strike up into thy nosthrils? thou could
not lift up thy head into the air, for that (with her condensed sins) would
stifle thee; thou could not dine into the waters, for that they being teinted
by the air, would poison thee. Art thou now not cruel against thy self, in
not providing (before the land-waters of Affliction come down again upon
thee) more and more convenient Cabins to lay those in, that are to go into
such far countries, who never look to come back again? If thou should
deny it, the Graves when they open, will be witnesses against thee.

Nay, Against want of provision for those that dye in the fields.
thou have yet Another Cruelty gnawing in thy bosom; for what hope is there yt
thou should have pity over others, when thou art unmerciful to thy self!
Look over thy walls into thy Orchards and Gardens, and thou shall see thy
servants and apprentises sent out cunningly by their Masters at noone day upon
deadly errands, when they perceive that the Armed Man has struck them, yea
even when they see they have tokens delivered them from heaven to hasten
thither, then send they them forth to walk upon their graves, and to gather
the flowers themselves that shall stick their own Hearse. And this thy
Inhabitants do, because they are loath and ashamd to have a writing over their
doors, to tell that God has bin there, they had rather all their enemies in
the world should put them to trouble, then that he should visit them.

Look again over thy walls into thy Fields, and thou shall hear poor and
forsaken wretches lie groaning in ditches, and traualling to seek out Death
upon thy common hye ways. Having found him, he there throws down their
infected carcases, toward which, all that pass by, look, but (till common
shame, and common necessity compell^ none st^p in to give them burial. Thou
setst up pos^s to whip them when they are alive: Set up an Hospital to comfort
them being sick, or purchase ground for them to dwell in when they be well, and
that is, when they be dead.

The Conclusion.
Is it not now hye time to so^nd a Retreat, after so terrible a battle fought
between the seven Electors of the Low Internal Countries, and one little
City? What armies come marching along with them? What bloody ^^^lors do they
spread? What ^rtillery do they mount to batter the walls? How valiant are their
seven Generals? How expert? How full of fortune to conquer? Yet nothing sooner
overthrows them, than to bid them battle first, and to give them defiance.

Who can deny^ now, but that Sin (like the seuen-headed Nylus) has
ouerflowed thy banks and thy buildings ( o thou glory of Great Britain) and
made thee fertile (for many years together) in all kinds of Vices? Volga,
that has fifty streams falling one into another, never ran with ^o swift
and vnreststable a current as these Black-waters do, to bring upon thee an
Inundation. If thou (as thou have done) kneelest to worship this Beast with
Seven Crowned Heads, and the Whore that sits upon it, the fall of thee (that
have out-stood so many Cities) will be greater then that of Babylon. She is
now gotten within thy walls; she rides up and down thy streets, making thee
drunk out of her cup, and marking thee in the forhead with pestilence for her
own. She causes Violls of wrath to be powered upon thee, and goes in triump^
away, when she sees thee falling. If thou will be safe therefore and recover
health rise up in Arms against her, and drive her (and the Monster that bears
her) out at thy Gates. Thou see how prowdly and impetuously six of these
Centaures (that are half man, half beast, and half devil) come thundering
along thy Habitations, and what rabbles they bring at their heels; take now
but note of the last, and mark how the seventh rides: for if thou find but
the least worthy quality in any one of them to make thee love him, I will write
a Retractation of what is inucyd against them before, and pollish such an
Apology in their defense, that thou shall be enamored of them all.

The body and face of this Tyrannous Commander, that leads thus the Reareward,
are already drawn: his Chariot is tramed all of ragged Flint so artificially
bestowed, that as it runs, they strike one another, and beat out fire that
is able to consume Cities: the wheels are many, and swift: the Spokes of the
wheels, are the Shinbones of wretches that have bin eaten by misery out of
prison. A couple of unruly, fierce, and untamed Tigers (cal^ Murder and
Rashness) drew the Char^ot: Ignorance holds the reins of the one, and
Obduration of the other: Self-will is the Coachman. In the upper end of the
Coach, sits Cruelty alone, upon a bench made of dead men's sculls. All the way
that he rides, he sucks the hearts of widows and father-lesse children. He
keeps neither foote-men nor Pages, for none will stay long with him. He has
only one attendant that ever follows him, called Repentance, but the Beast
that draws him, runs away with his good Lord and Master so fast before, that
Repentance being lame (and therefore slow) it is always very late ere he comes
to him. It is to be feared, that Cruelty is of great authority where he is
known, for few or none dare stand against him: Law only now and then beards
him, and stays him, in contempt of those that so terribly gallop before him:
but out of the Laws hands, if he can but snatch a sheathed sword (as
oftentimes he does) presently he whip^ it out, smiting and wounding with it
every one that gives him the least cross word. He comes into the City,
commonly at All-gate, being drawn that way by the smell of blood about the
Bars, (for by his good will he drinks no other liquour:) but when he finds
it to be the blood of Beasts (amongst the Butchers) and not of men, he flies
like lightning along the Causey in a madness, threatening to overrun all whom
he meets: but spying the Brokers of Hownsditch shuffling themselves so long
together (like a false pair of Cards) till the Knaves be uppermost, only to
do homage to him, he stops, kissing all their cheeks, calling them all his
dearest Sons; and bestowing a damnable deal of his blessing upon them, they
cry, Room for Cruelty, and are the only men that bring him into the City: To
follow whom up and down so far as they mean to go with him, -- Dii me
terrent, and Jupiter hostis.


FINIS.
Tho. Dekker.

Wars.
THe purple whip of vengeance, (the Plague having beaten many thousands of me^,
women, and children to death, and still marking the people of this City,
(every week) by hundreds for the grave, The miseres that a Plague brings to
Men.
is the only cause, that al her Inhabitance walk up and down like mourners
at some great soleme funeral, the City her self being the Chief mourners.
The poison of this Lingering infection, strikes so deep into all men's hearts,
that their cheeks (like cowardly Soldiers) have lost their colors? their
eyes, (as if they were in debt, and durst not look abroad,) do scarce peep
out of their heads; and their tongues (like physicians ill paid) give but cold
comfort. By the power of their Pestilent Charms, all mercy meetings are cut
off. All frolic assemblyes dissolved, and in their circles are raised up, the
Black, Sullen and Dogged spirits of Sadness, of Melancholy, and so
(consequently) of Mischief. Mirth is departed, and lies dead and buried in
men's bosoms, Laughter dares not look a man in the face; Jests are (like
Music to the Deaf, not regarded: Pleasure it self finds now no pleasure,
but in Seghing, and Bewailing the Miseries of the Time. For (alack) what string
is there (now) to be played upon whose tench can make us merry? Play Houses,
Play Houses stand empty.
stand (like Tauernes, that have cast out their Masters) the doors locked up,
the Flagges (like their Bushes) taken down, or rather like Houses lately
infected, from whence the affrited dwellers are fled, in hope to live better in
the Country. The Players themselves did never work till now, there Comodies
are all turned to Tragedies, there Tragedies to Nocturnals, and the best of
them all are weary of playing in those Nocturnall Tragedies. Poets walk in
me^ancholy.
Think you to delight your selves by keeping company with our Poets? Proh
Dolor! their Muses are more Sullen then old Monkeys, now that money is not
stirring, they never Plead cheerfully, but in their Term times, when the
Two-peny Clients, and Penny Stinkards swarm together to here the Stagerites:
Ne^ dant proceres ^eque histriones.
Playing vocations are Diseases now as common and as hurtful to them, as the
Foul Evil to a Northen Man, or the Pox to a French man. O Pitiful Poetry,
what a lamentable prentiship have thou served, and (which is the greatest
spite) can not yet be made Free! no, no, there is no good doings in these
days but amongst Lawyers, amongst Vintners, in Bawdy houses and at Pimlico.
There is all the Music, (that is of any reckning) there all the meetings,
there all the mirth, and there all the money. To walk every day into the fields
is wearisome; to drink up the day and night in a Tavern, loathsome: to be
ever ryding upon that Beast with two Heads, Letchery) most damnable, Ignauum
corrumpunt otia corpus.
and yet to be ever idle, is as detestable.

What merry Gale shall we then wish for? unless it be to Ferry over the
Hellespont, and to cross from Sestus to Abidus, that is to say, from London to
the Bear Garden? The company of the Bears hold together still; The Bears are
hardly put down.
they play their Tragi-Comaedies as lively as ever they did: The pide Bull here
keeps a tossing and a roaring, when the Red Bull dares not stir. Into this I Will
of Dogs did I therefore transport my self, after I had made trial of all
other pastimes.

No sooner was I entered but the very noise of the place put me in mind of Hell:
Paris garden an Image of hell.
the bear (dragd to the stake) showed like a black rugged soul, that was
Damned, and newly committed to the infernal Charle, the Dogs like so many
Devils, inflicting torments upon it. But when I called to mind, that al their
tugging together was but to make sport to the beholders, I held a better and
not so damnable an opinion of their beastly doings: for the Bears, or the Bulls
fighting with the dogs, was a lively represe^tation (me thought) of poor men
going to law with the rich and mighty. The dogs (in whom I figured the poor
creatures) and fitly may I do so, because when they stand at the door of
Dives, they have nothing (if they have the^ but bare bones thrown unto them,
Poor men co^tending with rich men, are as dog^ fighting with Bears.
might now and then pinch the great ones, and perhaps vex them a little by
drawing a few drops of blood from them: but in the end, they commonly were
crushed, and either were carried away with ribs broken, or their skins torn
and hanging about their ears, or else (how great so ever their hearts were at
the first encounter) they (stood at the last) whining and barking at their
strong Adversaries, when they durst. not, or could not bite them. At length a
blind Bear was tied to the stake, and in stead of baiting him with dogs, a
company of creatures that had the shapes of men, and faces of christians (being
either Colliers, Carters, or watermen) took the office of Beadles upon them,
and whipped monsieur Hunkes, till the blood ran down his old shoulders: It was
some sport to see Innocence triumph over Tyranny, Innocence punished.
by beholding those unnecessary tormentors go away with scratchd hands, or torn
legs from a poor Beast, armed only by nature to defend himself against
Violence: yet me thought this whipping of the blind Bear, moved as much
pity in my breast toward him, as y^ leading of poor starued wretches to the
whipping posts in London (when they had more need to be relieved with food)
ought to move the hearts of Citizens, though it be the fashion now to laugh at
the punishment.

The last Chorus that came in, was an old Ape dressed up in a coat of changeable
cullers (on horseback) and he rode his circuit with a couple of curres muzled,
No slave like the soothing up of fools in their vices.
that like two footmen ran on each side of his old Apes face, ever and anon
leaping up toward him and making a villainous noise with their chappes, as if
they had had some great suites to his Apishnes, and that he by the haste he
made had no leisure to hear such base and bashful Petitioners.

The hunny that I sucked out of this weed, was this: That by seeing these, I
called to mind the unfortunate condition of Soldiers* and old seruitors, who
when the storms of troubles are blown over, being curbd of means* and so
burying that courage and worth that is in their bosoms, are compeld (by the
vileness of the tune) to follow y^ heels of Asles with gay trappings, not
daring so much as once to open their lips in reprehension of those apish
beastly and ridiculous vices, upon whose monstrous backs they are carried up
and down the world, and they are flattered only for their greatness, whilst
those of merit live in a slavish subjection under them.

No pleasure thus, nor any place being able to give perfect contentment to the
mind: I left swimming in those common sensual streams, Nulla est sincera
^ai^^ta^.
wherein the world has been so often in danger of being drowned, and waded
only in those clear brooks, whose waters had their currents from the springs
of learning. I spent my hours in reading of Histories, and for the laying out
of a little time, received larger interest then the greatest usurers do for
their money. By looking on those perspectiue glasses. I beheld kingdoms and
people a far off, Excellence of Histories.
came acquainted with their manners, their policies, their government, their
risings, and their downefalles: was present at their battles, and (without
danger to my self) unless it were in greeuing to see States so overthrown by
the mutabilitie of Fortune, I saw those Empires utterly brought to subversion,
which had been terrors and triumphers over all the nations upon earth. The
back of Time which was next to mine eye, (because he was gone from me) was
written full of Tragical wonders: but the hinder part of his reverend head was
bare and made bald by men's abusing it, O Histories! you sovereign balmes to
the bodies of the dead, that preserve them more fresh then if they were alive,
keep ye fames of Princes from perishing, when marble monuments cannot not save
their bones from being rotten, you faithful entelligensers, between Kingdoms
and Kingdoms, your truest counselors to Kings, even in their greatest
dangers! Have thou an ambition to be equal to Princes! read such books as are
the Chronicles of Ages, gone before thee: there may thou find lines drawre
(if virtue be thy guide) to make thee parallel with the greatest Monarch: Et
quae mox imitere legas. Discitur hinc nullos mer^tis obsifiere casus.
would thou be above him* there is ye scale of him ascending Huntst thou
after glory? mark in those paths how others have run, and follow thou in the
same course. Art thou sick in mind? (and so to be diseased, is to be sick
even to ye death) there shall thou find physic to cure thee. Art thou sad?
where is sweeter music then in reading? Discitur hinc quantum pau^ Pertas
sobre^ possit.
Art thou poor? open those closets, and inualuable treasures are powered into
thy hands.

Whilst I dwelt upon the contemplation of this happiness, the dreams of
Infants were not more harmless then my thoughts were, nor the slumbers of a
conscience that has no sting to keep it waking more delicate then the music
which I found in reading; but the sweetest flower has his withering, and every
pleasure his ending. This full Sea had a quick fall, and the day that was
warm and bright in the morning, had frosts and gloomy darkness to spoil the
beauty of it ere it grew to be noone: for on a sudden all the air was filled
with noise, as if heaven had bin angry, A Commotion.
and chid the earth for her Villainies, people rush headlong together, like
torrents running into the sea, full of fury in show, but loosing the effect of
doing violence* because they know not how to do it, their rage and madness
burning in them like fire in wet straw, it made a great stinking smoke, but
had no flame. Wildness and afrightment were ill fauouredly drawn in every
face, as if they had all come from acting some fresh murder, and that at every
step they were pursued, Arm was cried, and swords were drawn, but either they
had no hearts to strike, or no hands, for (like so many S. Georges on
horseback) they threatened, but gave not a blow, every one fearing to smite
first, least the rest should make that an occasion to kill him for beginning
the quarrel. But at the last drums were heard to thunder, and trumpets to
sound alarums, murmr ran up and down every street, and confusion did beat
at the gates of every City, men met together, and ran in herds like Dear
frighted, or rather like Bears chased, or else seeking for prey. But what wild
beasts (think you) were these that thus kept such a roaring? O quantum cogit
egestus
it was a people savage and desperate, a nation patchd up (like a beggars
cloak of ye worst pieces) that could be gathered out of all nations and put
into one. They were more scattered then the Jews, and more hated; more
beggarly then the Irish, and more uncivil; more hardy then the Switzers, and
more brutish: given to drink, more then the Dutch, to pride more then the
French, to irreligion more then the Italian. They were like the Dunkirkes, a
mingle mangle of countries, What vices are companions (for the most part) with
poverty.
a confusion of languages, yet all understanding one another. Such as the
people were, such was the Princess whom they followed, she had all their
conditions, and they all hers, seeming to be made for no other purpose then to
govern them, because none else could be bad enough to be their governor. They
obeyed her not for love, nor fear, but made her only great amongst them,
because it was their will to have it so, she (amongst a number of vices, that
reigned in her) having only this virtue of a Prince, not to see her people
take wrong.

The quarrel between money and poverty.
Into arms therefore as well for her own chastity* as defense of her subjects
does she determine to put her self presently. A faithful and serious
inquisition made I to understand the cause of this sudden and universal
uproar, and by true intelligence (from persons of either side) found that ye
quarrel was old, the enmity mortal, the enemies puissant and fierce, Diuitis
hoc viti^^^ e^t auri.
many leagues had been made, and all were broken, no conditious of peace would
now be looked upon, open war must be the the sword to stricke open wrong.

The fires (kindled by Guizian Leagues) set not France in hotter combustions
then these are likely to prove, if the flames in time be not wisely quenched.
Ciuell wa^res of France.
The showers of blood which once rained down upon the heads of the two kingly
families in England, never drowned more people, Division of the two Houses.
not that brave Roman tragedy acted in our time, at ye battle of Neuport, not
the siege of Bommell, where heads flew from sholders faster then bullets from
the Cannon. No, nor all those late acts of war and death, commenced by
Hispaniolized Netherlanders, able to make up a Chronicle to hold all the world
reading: Low country wars.
did ever give rumor cause to speak so much as the battles of these two
mighty enemies (so mortally falling out) will force her to proclaim abroad,
unless they grow to a reconcilement, to which, by the conjecture of all
strangers, that have travailed into both their dominions, and know the hot and
ambitious spirits of the quarrellers, they cannot easily be drawn: for no one
pair of scales being able to hold two Kings at one time: and this law being
engraven on ye very inside of every Kings crown (because it is the wedding
ring of his Empire to which he is the Bridegroom) that, Nulla fides socijs
Regni* omnisque potestas,
Impatiens Consortis erit.


At the stern of a kingdom, two Pilots must not sit, nor principality endure
a partner, and again, that Non capit Regnum duos,


A Kingdom is heaven, and loves not two suns shining in it. How is it
possible, or how agreeable to ye politic grounds of state, that two such
potentates should be united in firm friendship, sithence their quarrel is
derived from an equal claim of soueraignety.

Over Cities is there ambition to be Superiors, The chief Cities of
Christendom.
yet not together but alone. and not only over London (the great Metropolis of
England) but also over Paris in the kingdom of France; over Civil, and Madril
in Spain; over Rome in Italy: Francfurt and Colin in high Germany: Antwerp in
Brabant, Elsinor in Denmark, Prage in Bohemia; Craconia in Poland: Belgrad in
Hungary, and so over all the other Capital Cities, The Princes that raise
these wars.
that bewtifies the greatest Kingdoms of Europe. For Signority in these do
they contend.

Have you not a longing desire, to know the names of the generals that are to
command these expected armies; and from what countries they come? what forces
march with them? Poverty and her Army.
and what warlike Stratagems they stand upon?

I have a little before roughly drawn the picture of one of them; the
Princess her self being barbarous, needy, of great power by reason of her
people, but far unable to keep them in pay, or in order, they themselves (how
valiant soever they be) being likewise all together, untrained and
indisciplinable, yet full of courage, and desire to set upon the Enemy.

Money and her Army.
Whose Army though it consist not of such multitudes, (number being oftentimes
the confusions of battles) yet is the Empress, under whose colors they
fight, full of riches (which are the sinews of War) of great command, feared
and loved, yea adored as a Diety, of a Maiesticall presence of incomparable
bewty. Auri sacra ^ames quid non mortalia cog^s Pectora.
Such a one, that even the very sight of her is a Charm strong enough to make
me^ venture their lives in the quarrel of her right.

Kings are to her beholden, for she often sends them suplies, and therefore pay
they homage unto her. Her Captains are pollitik and fight rather upon
advantages, then upon equality, her soldiers brave and resolute, hardly drawn
to venture into dangres, but when they are in, a thousand Stratagems use they
to save themselves: what they get they keep, which is one of ye noblest points
belonging to a soldier, for it is more hard to use a victory well after it is
gotten, then it is to get it. The name of this latter Princess, is ye renowned
Empres Argurion (Money) The name of the former, is that warlike Virago famd over
all ye earth, for her hardines, called Poverty. Now to the intent that ye whole
world (as an indifferent Judge may arbitrate the wrongs done by between these
two states, and by that means find out which of them both come into the field
with unjust arms: you shall understand ye Poverty being sundry ways deeply
indebted to ye kingdom of Money, as having been from time to time relieved by
her* and not being well able to maintain herself in her own dominions, but
that Money has sent her in provision, it had been neither policy, neither
could it stand with her honor, that Poverty should first break the league,
Poor men fall not first out with the rich, but the rich with them.
neither indeed has she, but has ever had a desire to be in amity rather
with ye excellent Princess, then with any other Monarch whatsoever. But ye
golden mines of the west and east Indies, (over which the other Empress is
sole Sovereign, swelling up her bosom with pride, covetousness, and
ambition, as they do her coffers with treasure, Rich men hate poor men.
made her to disdain the miserable poor Queen, The poor may beg.
and in that height of scorn, to hate the holding of any confederacy with her,
that she on the soddaine, (most treacherously and most tyrannously) labored by
all possible courses, not only to drive the subjects of Poverty from having
commerce in any of her rich and so populous Cities, O nosiri infami^ (...).
but also wrought (by the cruelty of her own ministers, and those about her) to
root the name, not only of that unfortunate and dejected Princess, from the
earth, but even to banish all her people to wander into deserts, and to perish,
she cared not how or where.

Hereupon strict proclamation went thundering, up and down her dominions,
charging her wealthy subjects, not to negotiate any longer with these beggars,
that flock daily to her kingdom, strong guards were planted at every gate, to
bar their entrance into Cities, whipping-postes and other terrible engines,
were advanced in every street to send the^ home bleeding new, if they were
taken wandering (like sheep broken out of lean pastures into fat) out of their
own liberties, Onites Diomedi^ Equi Eusidis ^ra.
Constables were chosen of purpose that had Marble in their hearts, thorns in
their tongues, and flintstones like pearls) in their eyes, Clementes.
and none could be admitted into the office of a Beadle, unless he brought a
certificate from Paris Garden, that he had been a Beare-ward, and could play
the Bandog bravely in baiting poor Christians at a stake, better then curres
(there) bait the Bull, or then Butchers Mastiues, when they worry one another.

These peales of small shot, thus terribly going off, the poor Hungarians
(with their pennilesse Princess) did not only not show a foul pair of
heels, Sors vbi pe^^i^^ ri^um sub pedibus timor est.
to fly to save themselves (as it was to be feared they would have done, like
cowardly peasants) but rather they grew desperate, and sticking closly, (like
Prentises upon Shrouetwuesday one to another, they vowed (come death), come
devils) to stand against whole bands of brown rusty bille-men, though for
their labors they were sure to be knocked down like Oxen for the slaughter;
Qui nil potest sperare desperet nihil.
but a number of ^ack-strawes being amongst them, and opening whole Cades of
council in a cause so dangerous, they were all turned to dry powder, took fire
of resolution, and so went off with this thundering noise, that they would die
like men, though they were but poor knaves, and counted the stinkards and scum
of the world: and yet as rash as they were they would not run headlong upon the
mouth of the Canon* No, but like snailes pulling in the horns of their fury,
they hid their heads for a time, either (like spies to watch for advantages,
or to try if this rotten wheel of Fortune would turn, and that the broken
world could mend, but all the waters of chastity and goodness being poisoned,
Money hard to be spoken with.
of which they both thirsted, and hoped to drink: and all the ways to come to
the presence of Money, at whose feet they would have fallen, and complained of
their wrongs, being likewise cut off, and none of their threed-bare company,
upon pain of death, daring to stand within ten miles of her Court gates, for
fear they should either lift them off the hinges and steal them quite away,
(being all of beaten gold) or else cunningly in the night time, should file off
handfuls (like pin-dust, thereby to enrich themselves, she being their vowed
enemy. It was therefore by a general voice concluded, that they would all put
themselves into arms, and for that purpose went in swarms to the Court of
Poverty, (their good Lady and mistress) and never gave over balling in their
ears, till she had sworn by her crown, though she had scarce two shillings
in her purse, that open war should presently be proclaimed against that
arrogant haughty, Open war.
ambitious Tyrant Money. Hereupon poverty summoned her council for war,
together they came, and being set, she at large laid open what wrongs and
dishonors her enemy had done to her and her subjects, Pouerties speech to her
council.
withal declaring how willing her poor people were to venture their lives in
her quarrel, and that their very fingers itched to be doing with the rich
chuffes, and Usurers, and others that were servants, or rather slaves to Money,
adding moreover, that a number of her enemies subjects too well known by the
name of Banck-rupts (being a great and ancient family in her greatest City)
have of late gotten other men's goods into their hands, The villainy of
Bank-routes.
spending them basely and villanously in prisons, coloring this their
politic theft, by giving out, that they are subjects to Poverty, albeit they
were never suffered to harbor in her dominions. To clear herself of these,
and such like imputations and dishonorable scandals, as also to let Money know,
that she has more right to those towns and Cities to which she pretends
sole claim then Money has her self, Dum ciuitas erit, pauperes er unt.
and that like a Prince, though her coffers be not so full, nor he^ forces so
able, she purposes to defend her own title, and not to loose one foot of
that which was left to herby her Ancestors, all of them coming out of old and
ancient houses, Poverty brings any man on his knees.
it is therefore her resolution, to send defiance to her insolent enemy, and to
that end (for their aid and Advice, has she those called them before her.

Her counselors applauded ye courage of their Princess, and (being first
brought on their knees) g^ue her reasons to go forward in so just a war. All
of them for the most part being glad, that the Golden age should now come
amongst them, and proudly rejoicing that they should bid battle to so rich an
enemy as Money and her (...) to have about with whom, they have for a long time
had both a desire, and waited for advantage to pick a quarrel.

Those that were at this time of Pouerties counsel, were then well beaten to
the world* all of them great (...), such as had seen many countries: As hardy
as they were wise, i^ shall not be amiss in this place, to draw the lively
pictures of them, because if any of their own countrymen happen to behold them
their report may co^^irme the truth of all that is h^re related. Their names
are these: ^
Counselors to Poverty.
Discontent. Hunger. Sloth. Industry. Despair. Carelessness. Repining.
Beggary. Misery.


Discontent described.
DIscontent had a grave coun^enance, somewhat inclining to melancholy,
temperate of speech, and sparing in diet, not caring either for pleasures, or
greedy of honors: but (as a man that is weary of the world for the impieties
in it) wishing rather to die then to live. One thing was noted in him more then
in any other Courtier, that in all his life time, A^^^ic^^^ga^dereget.
he had never been a teuellor, nor ever courted Lady, he seemed indifferent
whether the wars went forward or not: yet inwardly more grieved at the wrongs
of his Prince, then at any injuries that could be done to himself.

Despair.
Despair and Carelessness were brothers, and in great favor with Pouety
(their Princess^) she never was well but when one of them was in her company,
yet the wiser sort thought that they did much mischief to the State. Despair
was not bel^ued by reason of his cruelty: for if he got any man into his
hands, he hung him up presently.

Hunger was one of the best commanders for war, Hunger.
that was in all the Land: a man of almost an invincible stomach, he had
euerthrowne many armies, and sped most fortunately at the besieging of a Town
or City, where continually he uses to behave himself so valiantly that no
stone w^ll (of what height or strength whatsoever) is able to hold him out: yet
is he not accounted so ^ound a common wealths man as some of the rest, for
that it is imagined, he loves the enemy better then his own country, and if
occasion were offered, would rather fly to Money then serve Poverty (his
Sovereign.) A great transporter of corn he has been from time to time: for
which cause the people hate him in their hearts, and dee now and then openly
cry out against him with such clamor^, that he has been glad to stop their
mouths. The only good that he does, and indeed the only cause for which the
kingdom loves him, is that when he leads men on in any hot piece of service,
they get such stomachs by seeing ho^^ bravely he lays about him, that they
never come off still they be satisfied, (...) being as good to them as meat
and ^rinke.

Sloth, Sloth.
by reason that he is troubled with the gout, bu^ies himself little with State
matters, he has lain bed-^id for many years, and greeues that any stir should
be made in the common wealth he was never either ^ilter or trauellor, his body
being weak and subject to diseases, which made him unapt for both.

Repining was the only man, Repining.
that whetted on both his Prince and her subjects to go forward in these
wars: for he could by no means abide either Money or her followers, it
fretted him more to see any of them prosper, then if himself had fallen into
the lowest misfortune. He dealt altogether in Monopolies: for which the people
gave him many bitter curses, and those (I think) keep his body so lean.

Industry, Industry.
was a goodly personage, a faithful friend to his Prince, and a father to his
country, a great Lawyer, and a deep scholar, stout in war, and provident in
peace. Poverty (whom he served) did often say, that two such counselors (as
Industry) were able upon their shoulders only to support any State in the
world. In dear years, when the Land had been ready to sterue, has he
relieved it, and turned dearth into plenty: his head is ever full of cares, not
for himself so much as for the people, whom he loves and tenders as dearly
as if they were his kindred: yet stand they not so well affected to him,
because he compelles them to take pains, when it is their natural inclination
(like Drones) to live basely, and to feed upon the bread that the sweat of
other men's brows do earne. A good States man he is, and a lover of peace,
seeking rather to draw Money to be still in league with Poverty, then to have
them thus at defiance one against another.

Beggary. Misery.
Beggary, and Misery, are so well known to us, I shall not need to draw
their faces.

These counselors, after many arguments, weighed out to prove the necessity
either of war or peace* at the last concluded upon the former. The drum was
therefore struck up, to ^ry what voluntaries would offer themselves: but few
uoluntaries (or none at all) came in. A press for soldier^ to serve Poverty.
Then went forth a uery straight command, to press not only all masterlesse
men, but all others of what condition or profession soever, that lived under
the subjection of Poverty.

Low country soldiers come from thence to fight under Poverty here.
The Captains Lieftenants, Corporals, Serieants, and the companies that were
casheard and cast, upon concluding of the late league in the low Countries,
hearing of these new wa^res, threw up their old weather-beaten hattes with torn
feathers in them, fetched capers above ground, danced, swear, drunk tobacko, and
Dutch beer, and after they had fallen on their knees cursing for half an
hour together, all truces, leagues, confederacies, and combinations of peace,
they bitterly cried out upon the proud and tyranous government of Money: some
of them damning themselves to the pit of hell, if ever they could but finger
her, they would see an utter confusion and end of her: because for her sake,
and upon her golden promises they had ventured their lives, spent their blood,
lost legs and arms, had been pinched with cold parched with heat* fed upon
cabbage, upon roots, and upon Christmas day (in stead of minched pyes) had no
better cheer then prouant (moldy Holland chief, and course brown bread) not
a rag to their backs, yes, rags more the^ they cared for: but not three
sti^ers among five of them. They therefore uowed to serve Poverty, to live and
dye with her, and with all their forces to set upon Money, who had made them
slaves to the world, not rewarding the^ to their merit: and thereupon striking
up their drum, and spreading their tottered colors which hung full of honor,
because it was full of holes, and was indeed no bigger, nay scarce so big, as
the flagge of a Playhouse, away they came (troopewise) with bag and baggage
marching, and were received (as old soldiers should be) at the hands of
Poverty, she sweating by her birth, and the fame of her Ancestors (who were
well known far and near) that she would never forsake their company, but
stick to them even to the death.

The business thus successefully thriuing at the first, gave encouragement to
all to have it set forward, Hals of every company furnish men on both sides.
so that precepts were forthwith directed to the Hals of every Company, who
albeit they had furnished the Queen of silver and gold ( Money) with certain
voluntary hands of sound approved soldiers: Yet (because they themselves, that
were old grown oaks, cared not how many paltry low bushes that nestled under
their shadows were cut down) they pressed ten times more of every trade, to
fight under the banner of Poverty, than those were that went to serve her
enemy. Yet was it a long time ere the Handicrafts men could be mustred
together: Carelessness
for Carelessenes (one of the former councillors) whose ambition consisted in
popular greatness, and had stolen the hearts of the common people, gave them a
pr^uy inck^^ng of the press before it ca^^ ^orth, and wished them to shut for
themselves, by being dispersed, ^or a time abroad, whose counsel they
following, threw by their tools, neglected their trades fled from their shops,
and spent both their gettings and their goods in common bowlingallies, dicing
houses and alehouses. But proclamation being made, That upon pain of death
they should all (by such an hour) be ready to come into the field, and fight
for Poverty (their sovereign Lady and mistres.) It is incredible to be spoken,
what infinite multitudes of all occupations, (some young, some old, were in a
short time assembled together.

Scholars hearing of this, fled from the Uniuersities, and made such have to
be in pay with Poverty (whom they had known a long time) that some of them had
scarce put shoes to their seete: Learning held ^n contempt.
The Queen bestowed very good words upon them, because Scholars had always
been favored by her progenitors, and (upon her bare command) they took such
place under her in the Army, as was suitable to their professions.

Young Gentlemen, that neither durst walk up and down the City, for fear of
Ravens and Rites, that houered to catch them in their tallons, and could get no
entertainment in the court of Money, because they were younger brothers, and
condemned by the verduict of Silkemen and Mercers to be most Desperate
fellows: yet were they all welcome to Poverty.

These younger Brothers were appointed to stand Insans perdus (or the Forlorn
hope) because though they had little to loose but their lives: Younger brothers.
yet they should wi^ne honor, nay perhaps knighthood, which in these days are
better then lands: is fat widdewes can be but drawn to nibble at that
worshipful ba^te. And for that purpose did a goodly troop of knights put them
selves (as knights errant) into Arms, in defense of ye innocent wronged Lady,
( Poverty) which Cheualiers, though they durst not (as some ill-tongd people
gave out) show their heads in the City: yet were they appointed Masters of
the field, and had the charge of the most resolute troops that were to scale
the City (If the enemy should cowardly happen to fly thither) and to
ransacke all the Mercers and Goldsmiths shops, not so much to set free the
silks, veluets, plate and jewels imprisond most cruelly in them, as to undo
the old Citizens, and then to marry their young wives, and so to raise them up
to honor in their most knightly posterity.

A regiment of old seruingmen were sworn the guard to Pouerties person, Old
Seruingmen the gaurd to Poverty.
of whom there was great hope, that they would both stand stiffly to her in any
danger, and if ye maine battles did ever join, would be the only Canoneeres
to break their ranckes, because they had such excellent skill in charging and
discharging of the great Bombard.

There came in some seven thousand Banckrouts, Banckrowtes come to Pourty but
as spies.
offering their service to the distressed and wronged Princess, who gave them
thanks for their love: yet was she fearful to trust them, because a number
in her own army exclaimed upon them, as the ranckest villains in a common
wealth, and that they had undone them, their wives and children: But the
dangers wherein they now all stood, requiring rather hands to punish the
wrongs done by an enemy, then to rip up old wounds of their own. Those seven
thousand had the ordering of all fire-workes, Mines, and countermines, as
being the only rare fellows for damnable and speedy blowing up of men in any
assault.

The vanguard being filled up thus with their troops before named, Masters
undone by servants, serve in the Rareward.
a stout company of honest Householders, (whose servants like Acteons dogs, had
with whoring, dicing* and drinking eaten up their Masters) came bravely up in
the Rear: their wings consisted of schoolemasters, husbandmen, fencers,
Knights of the Post, and such like, who had all vowed by the cross of their
swords, and by the honor of a soldier to die at Pouerties feet.

It was in the middle of a Term, when the fire of these civil broiles first
began to kindle: but Law having with many hard words on both sides taken up a
number of brabling matters, and for her healths sake being rid into the
country, whereby a great crew of her followers, that were not able with bag and
baggage to march after her in that progress) were ready to give up their
cloakes, (the summer was so hot for them) and because all their practice was
but to set people together by the ears, Poor Attorneys.
a number of them therefore upon their bare knees, begd that they might serve
Poverty in her wars, whereupon certain broken-heeld, gowtie-legd,
durty-hamd pettifoggers, with some lack-latine prowling pennurious country
Attorneys, were promoted to be Clerks of Bands, Pandors ever poor.
Pandors, Pimpes, and Applesquires came thick and threefold, and had the
leading of ye Pioners, because they had deepest skill in digging of Trenches.

The victualers to the Camp, were a company of doublechind polt-footed, Baudes
seldom rich.
stincking-breathd Bauds, who with pewter bottles of Aqua vitae at their
girdles, rings with deaths heads on their fore fingers, and old stitchd hats,
out of fashion on their heads, came along with the bag and baggage, and were
ready if any poor soldier fainted, to put life into him again by a sip from
their bottles, and to lift up his spirits.

The whole Army being thus leuyed, Poverty was found to be one hundred thousand
strong in the field, whom martialling in the best order of war, they marched
forward with full resolution, either to take Money and her subjects prisoners, or
else never to come out of the field, so long as they and Poverty (their
mistress and powrefull commander) could be able to hold life and soul
together.

The Preparation, strength, and stratagems of the second Army.
NO treason was ever so secretly contrived, so cunningly carried, nor so
resolutely attempted: but either in the very growing up it has been
discovered, or the head of it cut off, where it was at point to come to the
full ripeness. The works of Princes are great, and require many hands to
finish them, and a number of engines cannot be set, going so closely, that no
ear shall hear them: Jove may talk in his big voice of thunder as soon and
not be understood, as a kingdom may call up her own subjects with the iron
tongue of war, and not awaken those people that are her neighbors. The eyes
of a true State do never sleep, Princes are quickest of hearing, the blows
that foreign enemies give, are broken for the most part: because the weapon is
always seen and put by, otherwise they would cut deep, and draw blood, where
(by such prevention) they scarce give bruises.

This merciless tyrant therefore ( Poverty) could not kindle such fires of
vprores, and civil mischiefs, but that the flames (like burning beacons)
armed her enemies with safety, even as they put them into fear. Her ragged
troops were more apt to betray themselves and their proceedings, then
polliticke to betray the foe into any danger. With swift wings therefore did
the news of this invasion fly abroad into all countries, and at last alighted
before that glorious and most adored Empress ( Money) whom nearest it
concerned, because all the arrows of their envy and intended malice were shot
at her bosom.

The drom of war beat in her ear, not in the dead of night, when her
glories and beauties were darkened and eclipsed, but when she was seated in the
throne of all her pleasures (which a whole world was rifled and travailed over
to maintain in height and fullness) when her palate surfeited on the variety
of dishes and delicacy of feeding, The life of a sensual man.
when her body shone brighter then the sun it self, who (in his lusty heat
begot her) struck an amazement into those that beh^ld her, by the splendour of
those maiesticall roabes which she wore: when music went into her ear in ten
thousand several shapes, when her walks were perfumed, her sports varied
every hour, when her cheeks were dimpled with laughters at her iesters her
Parasites, her Pandors, and all the rest of those servile soothing Apes, that
in pide colors wait upon and show tricks to sat the appetite of that Lord
of flesh and blood, the black Prince of the world, her husband. Then, even
then, in the full sea of all these iollities, pompes, and whorish ceremonies,
the only bewitchers of mankind, came sailing in, the news of a sudden
insurrection, and an unexpected invasion, by that common, fatal, and barbarous
spoiler of so many kingdoms, infamous amongst al nations by that beggarly name
of Poverty.

These news (upon the first arrival) did no more move the great Indian
Empress ( Money) then the bleating of a sheep terrifies the king of forests
(the Lion.) Money was rich, strong in friends, held league with Princes, had
whole countries at her beck, nations were her slaves, no people but did love
her. On the contrary side, Poverty (her enemy) had small revenues, fewer
friends, a world of followers, but none of any reckoning, except a few
Philosophers, Alchemists, etc. She held many towns, and was obeyed in most
kingdoms, but how? as thieves are obeyed by true men, for fear, and because
they cannot otherwise choose, her own strength therefore being so good, and
her enemies fuller of spite then of power, she only laughed at the thunder of
her threats, and resolved that her pleasure should spread larger sails.

But her council being provident, careful, and jealous of their own estates,
wisely considering the dangers that a weak enemy (being desperate, Riches make
men cowards.
and having little to loose) may put the best fortefied kingdom to, and the
most valiant nation did in the end, with one consent fall on their knees, most
humbly entreating their Sovereign Mistress to give over her reuellings,
maskes, and other Court-pleasures for a time, and that as well for the safety of
her own royal person (to take heed of them: for many plots were now, and had
oftentimes bin laid) as also for themselves, whose lives and liberties wholly
depended on her, either to leuy present forces, which should meet this
beggarly Monarch in the field, and so utterly to drive her out of the kingdom,
or else to give the rich men of her Empire leave to make strict and severe
laws to take away the lives of that wretched and scattered people that follow
Poverty in these commotions, wheresoever or whenever they take them meddling
in any of her wealthy dominions.

These words brake forth with such lighning, that Money stampd for very anger,
that so base an enemy should put her subjects into fear. Their vigilance
awaked her, and like a good Prince that would loose her life rather then her
subjects should perish, she began (with the Eagle) to shake her royal wings,
and to be roused out of her late golden slumbers, and securities, that lay upon
her like enchantments.

To their requests she yielded, and thereupon to fortify her kingdom against
all the shot of Villainy and Vengeance, she summoned those of her council
together, Counselors to Money.
whom she know to be most faithful and most serviceable in a business of this
nature, state and importance. Her counselors names were these.

Counselors to Money.
Covetousness. Parsimony. Deceit. Providence. Monopoly. Violence. Usury.
Covetousness
Covetousness was an old wretched lean faced fellow, that seldom sleep'd:
for his eyes (though they were great, and suncke at least two inches into his
head) never stood still, but rolled up and down, expressing a very envious
longing greediness to enjoy every thing that they looked upon. He never pared
his nails, and being often asked the reason why, he always answered, that he
saved them for his heir, for being cut off, after he himself was dead, they
might be put to sundry good thrifty purposes, as to make horns (being thinly
scraped) for a Scriueners lantern to write by a nights, or to nocke arrows,
etc. He kept not so much as a Barber, but shaued his own head and beard
himself, and when it came to wey a pound, he sold it to a Frenchman to stuff
tennis balls. Money (his Sovereign) cared not so much for him, Covetous men
are slaves to that which is a slave to them.
as he did for her, she could make him do any vile office how base soever; but
because he was saucy, and would often check her for taking her pleasures,
seeking to restrain her of her liberties, she hated him, and was never more
merry then when one brought her news once that Covetousness lay a dying. Yet
was he well beloved af the best Citizens, and never rode through the city but
he was staid, and feasted by many Aldermen, and wealthy Commoners, few
Courtiers loved him heartily, but only made use of him, because he was great,
and could do much with Money (their empress.)

Providence.
Providence was but of mean birth, the ladder by which he climbd to such high
fortunes, as to be a councellor to Money, being made by himself, much given to
study, yet no great scholar, as desiring rather to be free of the City, then
to serve a long threed-bare Prentiship in the Uniuersities. He is rarely seen
in Minerals, and distillations, and will draw Aurum potabile, or fetch
quicksilver out of horsedung, he will grow rich, and be in time the head
warden of a company, though he were left by his friends but three shillings
three pence stock to set up, such another he was as Whittington, a very cat
shall raise him if he be set vpon^, He is the best that writes Almanackes in
these times, and where the rest write whole Calenders of lies for bar^ forty
shillings a year, (seruingmens wages) he foreseeing what will happen, buies up
all the commodities of one or two Countries at one bargain, when he knows
they will be dear, and so makes up his own mouth, and for it, gets much
favor at the hands of Covetousness his elder brother.

Parsimonie is kinsman to those two that go before, Parsimonie.
he is not up yet: for he uses to lie a bed till afternoon, only to save
dinners, when he rises (which will be presently) the motion shall be shown and
interpreted to you.

Monopoly is a very good man where he takes, Monopoly.
that is to say, 9. manner of ways.

Deceit looks a little a squint, Deceit has many great friends in the
City.
yet is of deeper reach then any of the rest: for he does oftentimes fetch over
Covetousness himself. He is great in Lawyers books, and tradesmen not only
love him, but their youngest wives, think themselves highly happy, if at a
running at Tilt, at a mask or a play at Court, or so (as he often does) he
will but voutchsafe to place them (and the sports done) he commonly sends them
home lighted. He has more followers then the 12. Peers of France, he studies
Machiauell, and has a french face.

Violence has borne many great offices, Violence. Might ouercomes right.
and Money has done much for him. He purchases lands daily: but loses: men's
hearts, some of the richer sort follow him and love him: yet he cannot go
thorough the streets, but the common people curse him, he reads Law as men
read Hebrew (backward) and never makes one Law, but he breaks two. Of all
men, he cannot abide a Justice of Peace, yet oftentimes is he seen at the
Sessions: many of his Ancestors have been Traitors, and by that means were
still cut off before they were old men, Nullum violentum perpetuum.
the Nobility hate him, he is a mere martial man.

Usury was the first that ever taught Money to commit Usury.
incest with Gold and Silver, her nearest kinsmen Brokers are now their Baudes,
A Broker is an V^^^ers Baude.
and keep the doors till the letchery of ten in the hundred be sated: he has
made many a man, but how? to be damned, he is a great housekeeper, for
thousands in the City live upon him* and would hang themselves but for his
saving them. There is no more conscience in him then in Tavern faggots, yet
young gentlemen pray for him daily that he may be fetched quick to hell. He is
an insatiable feeder: for a Scriuener and he will eat up four men at a
breakefast, and pick them to the bare bones. He loves not a Preacher, because
he frights him out of his wits: for he never hears any of them talk to him
but he thinks himself damned. He has no skill in Arithmeticke, but only in
the rule of Interest. He is the Devils Tole-taker, and when he dies, lies
buried with his ancestors in the widest vault of hell.

These were the counselors whom Money assembled together, to consult upon hers
and their own safeties, from the base assaults of their wild and desperate
enemy: who being solemnly set in their due places and the Queen of Riches her
self being advanced up into her imperial chair, Parsimonie (who by this time
was gotten up and ready) took upon him to be speaker for all the rest.

Parsimony.
This Parsimonie is a nasty batcheller of fourscore, one that never went
trussed (to prevent hanging) to which end he will not be at charges of a pair
of garters (though they were but woollen lists) for fear of temptation, his
breches once were velvet, when his great grandfather wore them, and
three-piled, but the pox of any pile can be seen there now, unless between
the clifts of his buttocks, to save a penny, he will damn half his soul,
he wears clothes long, and will sooner alter his religion ten times, then
his doublet once, his hatte is like his head, of the old block, he buies no
gloves but of a groat a pair, and having worn them two days he quarrels
with the poor Glouer that they are too wide, or too ill stitched, and by base
scolding and lorldly words gets his money again, and the wearing of so much
leather for nothing. He will be known by a pair of white pumpes some 16. or
20. years, only by repairing their decayed complexion with a piece of chalk.
This whining Parsimonie (that for a supper of 16. pence will budge and slip his
neck out of the collar from his own father) and that vows never to marry,
because he will not spend so much as may keep a child, stood up so well as he
could stand with his crinckling hammes, and knowing that it was high time for
him to be stir his ^tumps, thus shot his bolt after much stammering, coughing
and hemming, silence being first cried, which accordingly was given him.

The Oration which Parsimonie made before his Empress.
O Sacred Money! Praises of Money.
Queen of Kingdoms, Mistres over the mines of Gold and Silver, Regent of the
whole world: Goddess of Courtiers, Patroness of Scholars, Protectresse of
Soldiers, Fortress of Citizens, and the only comfort to Saylors. Me seems
good and fit, (brightest-facde Lady) sithence that bold and saucie beggar, with
her pennurious sunneburnt troops, armed only with short troncheons under
their arme-pits, and most commonly walking in threadbare Plimoth cloakes, have
made their impudent and contagious insurrection, that you (at whose feet lie
Crowns to tread upon) being Queen Mother of the west and east Indies, do
presently give over your needless expenses and open houshkeeping in the
Country, where your swarming enemies lie in ambushes to attach you upon the
least issuing forth, and betake your self to the close safety of the City,
where your seame-rent and white bitten foes dare not (within gunshot approach,
to be further sure of which, and least any spies should be sent to look into
the strength and wealth of that your principal and most secure fortress, we
have ordained that through every ward (for your happy safety, and their utter
terrifying) there be erected one sound, sufficient, and well painted whipping
post, the very sight of which will not only scarre them, worse then the
scowting face of a Serieant being seen peeping through a red lettice, frights a
young gallant, but also in time drive the whole band of Tatterdemalions from
post to pillar. Dixi.

No sooner was Dixi sounded, but the maine points of this Parsimonions oration,
came back again like an echo from all the rest of the voices there present.
All their breath blew one way, all their councels were directed and went only
by this compass. Money weighing (in the upright scales of her judgment) their
wise and thirsty opinions, found them not half a grain too light, and
therefore very royally y^elded to whatsoever they consulted upon, whereupon
sudden order was given, and all speedy preparation made for the entertainment
and receiving of Money into the City, whose presence all the Citizens day and
night thirsted to behold.

To set down all the devices, the intended merriments, the sh^wes, the
ceremonies, the diligence of workmen for standings and scaffoldings, the
inexplicable joy of Poets, who did nothing but pen encomious Gratulatorie to
bid her welcome, (...)mana(...). paren^.
drinking healths in rich malago to the honor of her, and their mistresses,
(the nine Muses) and on the other side, to point to the life, the several glad
faces, gestures and action of the players, who had pined for her absence a long
and tedious vacation: or to t(...) what dressing up of howses there were, by
all the neat dames and Ladies within the freedom, what starching of ruffes,
what poaking, wha^ stiffning of falls, what painting of cheeks and lips, as
if they had been y^ two leaued gates of a new chose^ Alderman, are able (if
they were set down at large) to add a third volume to our English Chronicles.
Time at length turned up his Glass, and the Holliday (so gapingly looked for
(was come.

Diuisum imperium cum Jove, Money entertained into the City.
Nummus habet, had Jove been hidden to dinner to the Guyld hall on Simon and
Iudes day, he could not have had more welcomes given him then Money had. And by
whom^ Mercers.
Oh! with what iocund hearts did the Citizens receive her? The Mercers swore
by their maydenhead, that all their polliticke pent-houses should be clothed
in cloth of silver, Silkemen.
and so they were. The silkemen guarded their very posts with gold lace, and
thereupon ever since, the fashion of larding suites with so much lace is come
up: But above all, Goldsmiths.
the Company of the Goldsmiths received her with the greatest honor, and she
again to pay their loves home, did as much or more honor them: for they
spread all their stalles with green cotton, and so adorned their shoppes, that
they looked like a spring garden, in which grew flowers of gold, set in such
order, and comely equipage, it would have ravished any poor man's eye to behold
them. Here (in the very midst of the row) she allighted from her Chariot,
staid a pretty space, and enriched both the shopkeepers and their wives with her
presence, cheapning of 2. or 3. of them some of their fairest jewels, the
beauty of their faces being of far richer value then the costliest jewels
there, and more worth (being rightly estimated) then the best stone in the
whole row, and by this her staying at their stalles, heaped on their heads
this grace besides. All her chosen Courtiers came hereby acquainted with their
delicate wives, and ever after their husbands had of them perpetual custom.
At last mounting again into her Chariot she rode on: being as richly attended
as her self was glorious, Desert and Learning ran by her side as her footeme^,
Bounty guided the horses that drew her, He is wise enough that has wealth
enough.
Lust, Epicurisme, Pride, and Folly, were 4. Querries of the Stable, and had
much ado to lead a goodly-coloured fat beast called Sensuality, that (for
more state) went empty by, Money never riding on the back of that spotted
Panther, but only for speed and to ride away.

Beauty, Honesty, Youth and Pleasure, came in a Caroach behind her, Any
thing to be had for money.
as her waiting women.

Old Age (her Treasurer) rode bare-headed before her: Thrift carried the privy
purse: Riot (a smooth-faced Ganimed) slept in her lap, whose cheek she would
so often ki^^e, that he grew proud and careless of her favors. Old men most
greedy of money when money and they are upon pa^ting for ever.
What a world it was to see men (whose back bones were almost grown compass,
because their eyes should still be fixed upon their graves) running more
greedily after her, then after Physicians, to take off those diseases that hang
most spitefully upon Age.

Some ran out of the Church to see her, with greater devotion following her all
the way that she went, Some for money will sell religion.
then the former deity they worshipped.

Young men did only cast a glaunce at her, and staid not long in her ^^ght,
other women pleased them better, if they we^e young Courtiers, Riches are young
men's Har^ots.
they had their Mistresses, if Merchants men, their masters maids, that go
fine by weight and measure, imitating in dark corners, their masters
profession: if Seruingmen, the waiting wenches do commonly fit them a
peniworth, in this state Magnificence and royalty this Empress arriues in the
very heart of the City, a strong guard being planted about her, Trenches,
Bulwarks and Fortifications (invincible as walls of Iron) being cast, raised
up, and manned against the assaults of her tottred enemies, who brake like so
many wild Irish, and are left without the City* only to rub their backs
against the walls. Presently (for more defense) were all the gates shut, How
careful rich men are of their wealth.
the Porcullises let down, double locks put to making, thick bars to
hammering, and all ye subtilties which the wit of man could possibly find out,
were put in practice to keep Money safe within the City. To second which
provident courses proclamations went presently forth to banish all those that
were like to be of Pouerties company, for fear they should revolt in time of
most need, whereupon many thousands, with bag and baggage, were compelled to
leave the city, and cling only to the Suburbs. In whose rooms Money
entertaines rich strangers of al nations, Strangers.
having those (that should be) these she puts into office, and trains them up
for Soldiers, to be nearest about her, because she sees they come well
provided and armed out of foreign countries: and therefore dares trust their
diligence against those her halfe-shirted enemies, ye rather because they
cannot abide to see a beggar amongst them, especially if he be of their own
nation.

The fires of this dissension growing hotter and hotter on both sides, Poverty
lays siege to the City.
were more likely to flame more fiercely then to be quenched by the aproach of
Poverty and her ragged regiments, who by her scoutes understanding that the
golden Idol (which so many fools kneel to) was carried and kept close within
the walls of the City, being as the Pollodium was to Troy, thither she marches
with all speed, but perceiving all places of entrance barred up, she pitcheth
her tents round about the Suburbs, planteth her artilery against the walls,
leuelleth her great ordnance upon the very wickets of the City gates, and by
the sound of trumpet, did often summon Money to appear in her likeness, and
not to hide her proud and cowardly head. Rich men are deaf, and cannot hear
poor men's cries.
Parlies were nine or ten times called on the Forreners part that dwelt
without, but no answer returned from those yt slept within the Free-dome.

Which scornful disdain being taken in snuff by the poor snakes (who
already began to shiuer with cold) Poverty, (their Ringleader) quickened the
chillness of there frozen spirits, by the heat of a brave resolution newly
kindled in her own blood: for calling Scatter-good her own Herald, that still
rides before her, Scatter good ^ent to money.
when any tempest of war is toward, him she charge upon his life and
allegiance, to go to the walls, and boldly to throw in her name, a proud
defiance in the very face of Money, telling her, that for the safety of lives
(which ly in the balance of war) she desires that two only may arbitrate
the quarrel in a Monarchy, They that have nothing en^y (...) that are wealthy.
and that therefore Poverty challenges Money to leave the City if she dare,
and hand to hand to grapple with her. Scatter-good (because he was known to be
an Herald) was admitted to have a sight of Money, and upon first presenting
himself, very stoutly delivered his Ladies defiance.

Money was no^ed to change color, and to look exceeding pale, all the while
the challenge was breathing forth, either for very anger, or extreme fear,
but those that knew her qualities swore it was with anger, Money gives men
courage.
and the conclusion justified their oath, for on a soddaine shaking her golden
tresses with a maiesticall bravery, she defied that base defiance in regard the
sender was of slavish and beggarly condition. Her self being high-borne, of
blood royal, of Noble descent, the other a penurious fugitive, a mere canting
Mort, traitor to all kingdoms, corrupter to all learning, and mother of none
but such as are ^urdensome to every Commonwealth. They both standing therefore
upon so unequal bases, Money may by the law of Arms, refuse the combat, and
in plain terms did so, disdaining to defile her glorious hands upon so
wretched and infamous an enemy, but with a full oath swore and vowed to weary
Poverty and all her lank-bellied army, by driving them quite from the gates of
the City, or else to hold her and them play within so long, till she and her
suncke-eyed company, famish and dye under the walls. And for that purpose,
albeit she her self swim in pleasures and in plenty, and though ye earth opens
her womb liberally, pouring forth her blessing to all thankful creatures, yet
will she (only to undo them and punish their carkases with pennury and famine,
send her precepts into every shire, to all rich Farmers, Landlords, and
Graziers, How scarcity of victuals gro^^^ in the Land.
that they (by exprrsse commandment from her and her Lords, upon their
allegiance and love they owe to Money, and as they are her slaves, vas^^iles
and subjects, cause hard times to be made, only to pinch the poor Hungarians,
and to disable their sallow facd Empress from once approaching the walls.
These words she vttred with indignation, and high color in her cheeks, and
having eased the greatness of her wrath, commanded the messenger away: yet ere
he went (to show that a true Prince when he wrastleth hardest with his own
passions, should be careful still of his renown, fame and honors, she
bestowed a golden chain on Scatter-good, which Poverty took from him, as
scorning to see any favors (given by her enemy) worn by any of her subjects,
especially her household servants.

Scarce was the Herald turned out at the City gates, but the glorious mother of
Plenty, checking her own great spirit, for giving her enemy so much cause to
triumph over her as to proclaim her a coward, was half mad with rage at her
own folly, and in that heat of blood, charged her droms to strike up, her
colors to be spread, her armies to be put in array, and the gates of the City
to be set wide open for (in a brauado) she vowed to issue forth, and bid
battle to the beggarly Tartarians that beleagerd her. But her council (wiser
then so) kept her in perforce, doubling the guards about her, and inchaunting
her ear with all the bewitched tunes of music to cast her into a slumber
till these storms in her were at quiet, which if they had not done, but had
pitched the field, as she once determined, it is* by many probabilities)
thought, that Poverty had had a great hand over her, and would have put her to
the worst. They therefore locked her up, as it were by Iron force, compelling
her against her freeborn nature and condition, to be directed by them, and to
lie close for a time, till noble advantage should call her into action: and
making present use of her own former speeches, a common council was called:
where by the general head it was ordered that Hard-heartednesse should have
the keys of the City in keeping, his office and charge being, not to suffer
Money to go out of the gates, though she her self in proper person commanded
it, and was further ordained that precepts should presently be drawn, into all
Shires, Countries and Cities. The tenor of which precepts follows.

By the Queen of Gold and Silver.
TO all and Singular our Shires, Countries, Cities, Corporations, Towns,
Villages Hamblets, etc. by what name or title soever, to whom these presents
shall come, and to all you our obedient Subjects, Slaves and Vassailes,
commonly styled by the names of Money-mongers, viz. rich Farmers, young
Landlords, Engrossers, Graziers, Forestallers, Hucksters Haglers, etc. with
all the residue of our industrious, hearty and loving people, in all or any of
these our shires or places formerly recited, either now resident, or at any
time or times hereafter to be resident, greeting.

Covetousness of ^^ch Farmers makes the country poor, and the people to pine.
These are to will and require you upon especial and express commandment
delivered in our own person, and as you will answer the contrary at your
utmost perrils. First that you (the said rich Farmers) by your best power,
means, sleights, policies, by-waies, and thrifty endeavors, cast all the nets
you can, to get all manner of grain that grows within your reach, and being
so gotten to advance, raise, and heighthen the prices of them, work upon the
least inch of advantage, make use of all seasons, hot, cold, wet, dry, foul or
fair, in one rainy week your wheat may swell from four shillings the
bushel, How corn rises in prise, and makes dear the markets.
to six shillings, seven shillings, nay eight shillings. Sweep whole markets
before you, as you pass through one town, if you find the corn (like men's
consciences, and women's honesties) low-prized, and sell the same in other
towns when the price is enhanced. Let the times be dear, though the grounds
be fruitful, and the Markets kept empty though your barnes (like Cormorants
bellies) break their butten-holes, and rather then any of Pouerties soldiers,
who now range up and down the kingdom, besieging our Cities, and threatening
the confusion, spoil and dishonor both of you and us, should have bread to
relieve them. I charge you all upon your allegiance, to hoord up your corn
till it be musty, and then bring it forth to infect these needy Barbarians,
that the rot, scuruy, or some other infectious pestilent disease, may ^un
through the most part of their enfeebled army: Ori^ I, who may command, may
persuade you, let mice and rats rather be feast^d by you, and fare well in
your garners, then the least and weakest amongst Pouerties starued infantery,
should get but one mout^full, let them leap at crusts, it shall be sport
enough for us and our wealthy subjects about us, to laugh at them whilst they
nibble at the bait, and yet be choked with the hook.

Next, Cruelty of Landlords in ^acking of (...) is the undoing of many
^ousholders.
we will and command, that you the young Landlords, who have cause to go
dancing to Church after your old rotten fathers funerals, with all might and
main stretch your rents, til the heart strings of those that dwell in them be
ready to crack in sunder. Rack your poor neighbors, call in old leases, and
turn out old tenants, those which your forefathers have suffered quietly to
enjoy their livings, and thereby to raise fat commodities to themselves, and
beggar families: Change you their copy, cancel their old evidences, race out
all works of charity, undo them in a minute, that have stood the storms of
many an Age, make the most of your riches, and the least of such poor snakes.
When you let your land, carry many e^es in your head, look into every acre,
into every bush, every ditch, every turfe, wey every blade of grass to the
full, that those who take it, may save nothing by it, no not so much as shall
keep a blackbird, or a sparrow, turn forty pence an acre, into forty
shillings, and laugh at the simplicity of your forefathers, make bitter jests
upon your dead Gaffers, now you are made gentlemen of the first head, though it
be by their digging in muck-hils, and in your Queanes company pity the
capacity of the kerzy stockingd VVhoresons, for not having so much wit to raise
profit as you their sons have, nor had ever the means to spend it so fast.

How (...) and chee^e grow dear.
Thirdly our high pleasure is, that all you Engrosers of what name soever, buy
up the prime and pride of all commodities, that done, keep them in your hands,
to cause a dearth, and in the time of deerenes, mark them with what price you
list. First and principally, I charge you, as you love me, and for my only
sake, who have ever been good Lady to you all, that in times of plenty you
transport your corn, butter, cheese and all needful commoditiess into other
countries, of purpose to famish and impouerish these hated whining wretches,
that lie upon the hands of your Own. Hire warehouses, Vaults under ground,
and cellers in the City, and in them imprison all necessary provision for the
belly, till the long nails of famine break open the doors, but suffer not you
those treasured victuals, to have their free liberties till you may make what
prey you please of the buyers and cheapners. At which time I will prepare a
certain people that shall give you your own asking, and buy up all you bring
by the great, who shall afterward sell it deerer then it was bought, by three
parts, of purpose to choke this starueling scallion-eaters, whose breath is
stinking in my nosthrils, and able to infect a quarter of the world. The people
whom thus I promise to have in a readiness* are well known what they are, some
call them Huksters or Haglers, Hagglers.
but they are to me as honest Purueyers and Takers, and these politic smooth
faced Harpyes, shall out of a dearth raise a second deerenesse.

These and such like omitting my precepts, to Bakers, Bakers.
whose upright dealing is not now to be weied, no, nor stood upon, are the
effects of my pleasure, which on your allegiance to me your Empress, I
strictly command you to observe and put in practice.

No sooner was this precept drawn, but it went post into ye country, Every man
pin* (...) the (...).
no sooner was it read there* but the world was new molded, yet some say it
never looked with a more ill-fauoured face. The Farmers clapped their hands,
(...) went up and down shrugging their shoulders, Landlords set all the
Scriueners in the country to work to draw leases, conueiances, defeisances,
and I know not what, in three market days, dearth was made Clearke of the
maket, the rich Curmudgeons made as though they were sorry, but the poor
Husbandman looked heavily, his wife wrang her hands his children pined, his
hyndes grumbled, his lean ouer-wrought Iades bit on the bridle. They, who were
in favor with Money, and were on her si^e sp^d well enough but Pouerties people
were driven to ye wall, or rather down into the kennell: for corn skipt from
four to ten shillings a bushel, from ten to twelve shillings, stones of boose
began to be precious, and for their price had been w^^re in rings but that the
stone cutter spoiled them in the grinding. Mutten grew to be doere, two crowns
a buttocke of pee^^, and half a crown a wholesome breast of mutton, every
thing (to say truth) riz, except desert and honesty, and they could and nothing
to rise by.

Poverty was somewhat grieved, (but little dismayed) at these tyranous,
Godless and base proceedings of her enemy, because she herself and most of
her army, have been old Sernitors to the wars, and been familiarly
acquainted with Emptiness and Necessity, casting therefore all her troops
into several rings, she went from one to one, and in the midst of each,
councelled them all not to be disheartened, but with her to endure what
miseries soever, sithente she would venture foremost and fardest in any danger
that could come upon them. She told them by way of encouragement, that where as
Money (their daring enemy) brags that she is the daughter to the Sun, Poverty
comfort her followers.
and Queen of both the Indies. It is not so: for she is but of base birth
bred, and begotten only of the earth, whom she cannot deny to be her mother:
and albeit it cannot be gainsayed, but that by her gripping of riches into her
hands, she is owner of many fair buildings, parkes, forests, etc. Yet does
she oftentimes so far forget her high birth, (whereof she vainly boasts
and those beauties of which a company of old Misers, Churles, and penny-fathers
are with dotage enamoured, that now and then (like a base common harlot) she
will lie with a Cobbler, a Car-man, a Collier, nay with the Devils own son
and heir, a very damned broker, with these will she ly whole years together,
they shall handle her, embrace her, abuse her and use her body after any
villainous manner to satisfy their insatiable lust, whereas on the contrary
part, quoth she, I that am your leader, famous over all the world, by my name
and style of Poverty, under whose enfignes, full of rents, as tokens of service
and honor, you are all now come to fight, am well known to be a Princess,
neither so dangerous nor so base as Money shows herself to be. Money makes
all service done to her a very bondage in them that do it: those whom she
fanours most, are her only slaves; but Poverty gives all her subjects liberty
to range whither they list, to speak what they list, Paupertatemque ferendo,
^ffe^ere le^em nec iniqua mente ferendo.
and to do what they list, her easist impositions are burdens, but the burdens
which I throw upon any, grow light by being bor^e. Who has been the
Foundresse of Hospitals but I? who has brought up Charity but I? am not I the
mother of Almes-doedes, and the only nurse of Devotion? do not I inspire Poets
with those sacred raptures that bind men, how dull and brutish soever, to
listen to their powerful charms, Et laris et sundi paupertas mapulet a^dax vt
versus face. em.
and so to become regular? do not I sharpen their invention, and put life into
their verse? And whereas Money vaunts and bears her head high, by reason of
her glorious and gallant troops that attend her, you all know, and the whole
world can witness with you, that Kings, Lords, Knights, Gentlemen, Aldermen,
with infinite others that were her dearest and wantonnest minions, have utterly
forsaken her and her lascivious pleasures, only to live with Poverty (your
Queen) though now she be a little dejected in the eye of the world, though not
in her own worth.

Thus she spoke, and her speeches kindled such fi^es of resolution in the
hearts of her soldiers, that the Allarum was struck up, Ordnance planted for
Battery, sealing Ladders made ready, and all the instruments of terror and
death put in tune, which were set to be played upon at the assault of a City.
They that kept their dens like Foxes in their holes, slept not, hearing such
thundering: but armed themselves with as brave resolution to defend, as the
other had to invade.

It was excellent music (considering how many discords there were) to hear
how every particular regiment in Pouerties Camp, No trade loves one another.
threatened to plague the Gold-finches of the City, and to pluck their
feathers, if ever they made a breach. Tailors swore to tickle the Mercers, and
measure out their Sattins and velvets without a yard before their faces, when
the prowdest of them all should not dare to say Bo to a Tailors Goose.
Shoomakers, had a spite to none but the rich Curriers, and swore with their
very awle, to flea off their skins (and the Tanners) over their ears, like old
d^ad rabbets. Every soldier pricked down one Goldsmiths name or another, or
else the sign in stead of ye name, as the Goat, the Unicorn, the Bull, the
Heart. etc. swearing damnable oaths to piss in nothing but silver, in meers
scorn, because he had oftentimes walked by a stall, when his teeth has watered
at the golden bits lying there: yet could not so much as lick his lips after
them. There was one little dwarfish Cobbler with a bald pate, and a nose
indented like a scotch saddle, who took bread and salt, and praid God it might
be his last, if he ran not over all the fine dames that withstoode him, in
black revenge that he never had their custom in his shop, because it could
never be found out or seen, that any of them did ever tread her shoe awry.
And thus as they without shot their terrible threatenings into the air, The
City besi^ged.
so did those within, laugh to think how they should domineere over the
shake-rags, if ye wars might but cease.

All this while were trenches cast up of a great height by the Poldauies to
save them from shot of the walls, whilst Pouerties Pioners had digd at least a
quarter of a mile under the earth, and the mine with gun powder to blow up one
quarter of the City: But this being quickly descryed, was as speedily
prevented by a countermine, so that all that labor took not such fire as was
expected: yet went the Artillery off on both sides, wild fire flew from one
to another, like squibs when Doctor Faustus goes to the devil, arrows flew
faster then they did at a catte in a basket, when Prince Arthur, or the Duke of
Shordich struck up the drum in the field, many bullets were spent, but no
breach into Moneys quarters could be made: they that fought under her cullers
were very wary, Tutum carpit inanis Iter
polliticke strong, and valiant, yet would they not venture forth but on great
advantages, because they had something to loose, but Pouerties wild Bandetti,
were desperate, careless of danger, greedy of spoil, and durst have torn the
devil out of his skin to have had their wills of Money, but Night (like a
surly constable) commanding them to depart in peace, and to put up their
tools. This assault (which was the first) gave over, every Captain retyring
to his place, Prodigal heirs meet soonest with Poverty.
the Desperueines (on Pouerties side) coming off at this time with the most
loss.

Few attempts were after made to any purpose: only certain young prodigal
Heirs, who (as voluntaries) maintained themselves in service under Money, were
appointed to be light-horsemen for discovery of the enemies forces (as she lay
encamped) who now and then in a few light skirmishes had the honor to issue
forth, and to set upon the Assailants that beleagured the City: but Poverty
still drove them either in to their own shame, or else had them in execution
(even in despite of the City forces) and put them ever to the worst.

The Gold-beaters (who knew themselves on a sure ground within the walls)
lingered of purpose, and would never bring it to a battle, only to weary the
adversary, whom they meant to undo by delay, because she could not hold out
long for want of victuals. They within cared not though ten thousand devils
amongst them, so Money (their mistress) whom they worshipped as a God, would
not leave their company, and the rascoll Dear that (without the walls) were
every hour hunted out of breath, vowed to eat up one another, before they
would raise ye Seige, and be hanged up like Dogs (at the C^ttie gates) for they
were now accounted no better then dogs, but they would have their peniworths
out of Money for a number of wro^gs which by her means they had endured, when
she has seen them and their children ready to starve, yet scornd to relieve
their necessities. Thus both their stomachs being great, and as well the
defendants as the assailents resolutely confirmed to stand upon their guard,
and to stay the utmost of any misery that could wait upon a lingering war*
behold the rich-plumde estridges, who had most feathers on their backs, Dead
terms and times that are cold in doings pinch the rich as well as ^he poor.
and least cause to murmr, began to mutiny amongst themselves, the
imprisoning of Money (their sole sovereign) so close within stony battlements,
did not show well: they were loyal^ subjects to her and would free both her and
themselves, unless she might use her sports and princ^ly pleasures as she had
wont Mercers had their shops musty, and their silks moldie for want of
customers, Goldsmiths had t^eir plate hid in cellors, where it lay most richly,
but looked more pitifully and with worse color, then prisoners lying in the
hole. Haberdashers had more hats then they could find heads to wear them, if
they had been such arrant blocks themselves to have given their wares away,
trades had no doings, all the men were out of heart by being kept in, and all
the women ready to be spoiled for want of walking to their Gardens: Every one
spent and spent, but who tasted the sweetenes? In stead of selling their wares,
they plied nothing now but getting of children, and scowring of pieces. In
stead of what do you lack? was heard Arm, Arm, Arm. This geere was to be
looked into, and therefore they desi^ed their gracious Empress ( Money) not to
lie lasing thus in a chamber, but either that she would be more stirring, that
they (her Subjects might have better stirrings too, and (opening the City
gates) to fight it out bravely, or else they vowed there were at least ten
thousand (whose names stood now in her Muster book) that shortly if this world
lasted, would shut up their doors, show her a fair pair of heels, and from
her fly into the hands of Poverty their enemy.

Upon the neck of this, came likewise a supplication from certain troops of
Uintners without the Bars, Inkeepers, common Uictuallers and such like, who
played y^ iackes on both sides, and were indeed Neuters, a linsey-wolsey
people, that took no part, but stood indifferent between Money, and Poverty,
the tenor of which petition presents it self thus to the world.

The pitiful Petition of Vintners, Victuallers, Inkeepers, etc. without the
Bars: To the great Empress of old men's hearts, and young men's pleasures,
yclipped Money.
HVmbly sueth to you^ current Excellency, A supplication from the inhabitants
of the Suburbs.
your vncustom'd drooping Suppliants, the Vintners, and Innekeepers, and others
of the Ale-draperie, that are bard out of the City: Whereas through the
extreme deadness of time and term, we all run backward in our condition,
having great rents to pay, and greater scores, which will never be paid,
guests now being glad if they can make us take chalk for cheese, our wines
lying dead upon our hands, and complaining for want of good doings: we our
selves making many signs to passengers, but few coming at us, and hanging up
new bushes, yet having only beggars hansell, trimming our rooms for no better
men then Barbers and Tailors, a rapier scarce being seen in a velvet scabert
within 40. yards of our precincts. -- Quis talia fando,
Myrmidonum, Dolopumi^e, aut duri miles Vlissi Temperet a lach^imis!
O Neither the Mermaide, no^ the Dolphin, not he at mile-end green, can when
he list be in good temper when he lackes his mistres (that is to say Money.)

May it therefore please thee (O thou pay-mistresse to all the fiddlers that
should haunt our howses, if thou would put them in tune) to send (at least)
some of thy Harpers to sound their nine-penie music in our ears, but we
rather humbly beg it, that thou would enrich us with thy Angellike-presence,
be no longer percullized up in the City, visit the subburbes, against thy
coming all her cawseies shall be paued and made even, how broken soever her
conscience be left and vnmended. Our houses stand empty, as if the plague were
in them, only for want of thee, our Drawers cannot be drawn to any goodness,
nor our Hostlers to deal honestly with horse or man, only by reason of thee:
Issue therefore forth amongst good fellows, that will sooner fight for thee,
then those snudges and miserable cormorants that now feed upon thee.

This lamentable supplication (together with the fear of a mutiny amongst her
soldiers) so wrought with the Empress, that (clean against the persuasion of
her council) she determined to leave the City, and to march into the field:
hereupon her Army Royal was set in order, to the intent she might take a full
view of all her Colonels, Generals, Captains and men of war. She went from
squadron to squadron, not so much delighting her own eyes with beholding so many
thousands ready to fight in her defense, as they were greedy to enjoy her
presence, which with brave encouragement lifted up the deadest spirit, all
swore to follow her, none to leave her, or if any did, a curse was laid upon
him to die a beggar.

The first regiment consisted of Courtiers, some of them being Lords (who came
very well provided) some Knights, Money takes a view of all her army. Lords,
Knights, Lawyers.
(but most of the valiant knights that were true soldiers indeed, served in the
other army (Counselors at Law gave directions where to encampe, what ground
was best to defend themselves and annoy the foe, by what tricks and stratagems
to circumuent her, how to lead the Troops on, how to come off, and by plain
demonstration showed how easy it was to put Poverty to her shifts, and to
have her and her troops in execution, if Money would be pleased to say the
word, and for that purpose they made orations to set the armies together by the
ears, which accordingly took effect, Aturnies.
Attorneys were very busy, and served as Clerks to the Bands, running up and
down from one rank to another expressing a kind of puzzled and dizzie
distraction in all their businesses.

But that which made the best show of all, Brokers come well armde.
was a lane of Brokers, who handled their Pieces passing well, and were old dog
at a mark, they had skill in any weapon, Musket, Caliuer, Petronel,
Harguibusse, a Crock, Pollax, Holbert, Browne-hill, Pike, Dimilance, sword, Bow
and arrows, nothing came amiss to them, and which was most strange they
fought by the Book, at a breach none so forward as they, they had been at the
ransacking of many a house, and would undertake to undo all the troops that
were led by Poverty. These Brokers were armed with thrumd cappes, (but they
should have had Murrions) and those they wore to keep their wits from taking
cold: for they had all devilish heads, and were suited in spark of velvet
Iackets with out sleeves, tuft taffatie breeches, close to them like Irish
Stroozes, Satin doublets with sagging bellies, as if ^agpuddins had bumbasted
them, and huge dutch Aldermens sleeves, armed strongly with back pieces of
canuas, dugeon daggers instead of Pistols hanging by their sides, fine p^^d
silk stockens on their legs, tied up smoothly with caddis garters, all which
had been taken as spoils from the other Army.

The Inuader understanding that the quarrel would be decided in a pitched
field, and that cracked crowns would be both given and taken on either side,
grew exceeding joyful: and therefore calling for Sharker (one of her boldest
and wittiest Heralds) him she sent to Money, to know where the Rendeuous should
be made for both armies to meet in, and what piece of ground should be best
famous to posterities by their battle. Money took advice upon this, most of
her old beaten Captains, labored earnestly to have it at Bagshot, but all the
gallants cried baw waw at him that named Bagshot, so that for a quarter of an
hour, none could be heard to speak, there was such a Baw wawing. The Herald
Sharker, in name of his Mistress, who sent him, requested it might be at
beggars bush. But every soldier swore that was a lowzy place, and so for a day
or two, it rested uncertain and undetermined.

In which Interim, a murmuring went up and down that not only Poverty had
maintained this terrible Siege against the City, Famine and the plague come
along with Poverty to besiege the City.
but that Dearth also, Famine and the Plague, were lately joined with the same
Army, besides many strange and incurable diseases were crept into the camp,
that followed Money: for Riot her minion, was almost spent, and lay in a
consumption. A hundred in a company were drowned in one night in French bowls:
five times as many more were tormented with a terrible gnawing about their
consciences. All the Usurers in the Army had hung themselves in chains, within
less then three hours, and all the Brokers, being their Bastards, went crying
up and down, The Devil, the Devil, and thereupon because they should not
disquiet the rest of the Soldiers, they were fetched away. These and such other
unexpected mischifes, Nulla salus b^ll^ pacem to poscimus omnes.
put Money into many fears, doubts and distractions, so that she inwardly
wished that these unlucky wars had either never been begun, or else that
they were well ended* by the conclusion, if it might be, of some honorable
peace.

And as these storms of misery fell upon Money and her troops, so was the
army of Poverty plagued as much, or more on the other side: nothing could be
heard amongst the Soldiers but cries, complaints, cursings, blasphemies,
Oaths, and ten thousand other black and damned spirits, which ever hawnted
them and their General herself. Want pinched them in the day, and wildness
and rage kept them waking and raueing all the night. Their souls were
desperate, their bodies consumed, they were weary of their lives, yet compelled
to live for further miseries, and nothing did comfort them but a foolish hope
they had to be revenged upon Money. So that so many plagues, so many diseases,
so many troubles and inconueniencies following both the armies (by means of
the tedious Siege) a perpetual truce, A Truce.
league and confederacy was confirmed by Money and Poverty, and the counselors
on either part: that in every Kingdom, every Shire, and every City, the one
should have as much to do as the other: that Pouerties subjects should be ever
in a readiness (as the Switzers are for pay) to fight for Money, if she craved
their aid, and that Money again should help them whenever they did need:
and that sithence they were two Nations so mighty and so mingled together, and
so dispersed into all parts of the world, that it was impossible to sever them.
A (...) presently enacted, that Fortune should no longer be blind, but that
all the Doctors and Surgeons should by waters, and other (...) help her to
eyes, that she might see those upon whom she bestows her blessings, because
fools are served at her doale with riches, which they know not how to use, and
wise men are sent away like beggars from a misers gate with empty wallets.

The Siege is raised.
The Armies hereupon brake up, the Siege raised, the City gates set wide open.
Shop keepers fel^^^ their old, What do you lack: The rich men feast one
another (as they were w^nt) and the poor were kept poor (...) in policy,
because they should do no more hurt.

FINIS.

