GENERAL AND RARE MEMORIALS pertaining to the Perfect Art of NAVIGATION:
Annexed to the PARADOXAL Cumpas, in Plain: now first published: 24. years,
after the first Invention thereof.



A BRIEF NOTE SCHOLASTICAL, FOR THE better understanding of the Decorum
observed, (or, at the least, regarded) in this present Twofold Treatise,
written under the Names of Three diverse Proprieties, States, or Conditions of
MAN: Whereby yt may appear, that they are not Scopae dissolutae: or, Du Coq a l'
Asne: But, by the will, and Grace of the Highest, thus^ Recorded.
First, yt was needful, for the Unknown Friend, to declare his Sensible grief,
conceived, to see, and perceive an honest Ientleman, and Philosopher, by the
malice and ignorance of sundry his Cuntrymen, to be almost oppressed, utterly
defaced, and by dangerous reports, grievously and dammageably discredited. And
secondly, to make a mournful, and doleful Supplication general, to all his
Cuntrymen, to help the said Ientleman to have Justice, and due amends, now at
the end of his days. And all this, is the rather thus endited, that God his
great Graces bestowed on him, should (to God his great glory) be acknowledged
thankfully, and not be suffered any longer to be so craftily, wilfully, and
violently trodden under foot, or barbarously despised. And it is likely, that,
vnleast this Unknown Friend, have favorable audience, and Credit, (in those
things, which in this Aduertisment he declares: being Sensible, both past, and
present: pertaining to the foresaid Ientleman,) that the Mechanicien his
industry, and great zeal, (used in collecting, and penning, from the said
Philosopher his mouth, the Hexameron Plat Political, of the Brytish
Monarchy,) shall be but slenderly, and slightly regarded or wayed: and thereby,
the same to be found, finally, to les Commodity Publik, auailable. But, if the
same Advertisement, be earnestly, speedily, impartially, and charitably
examined, and considered, good hope may arise, that Omnia cooperabuntur ad
Vtilitatem Salutemque Publicam procurandam, ac promouendam, expeditissime and
potentissime. Which, God grant, Amen.

Trinitas Humana^ Homo Dei -- (...) -- M^ns Anima M^d^a -- (...) -- Dianoea
^omo Animalis (...) -- S^nsus. (...) (...) -- S^nsus. R^^ormatus. (...) --
S^nsus.
HOMO Philosophus -- The In^^^uct^r. -- (...) the BRYTISH MONARCHY Mech^ni^us.
The Mechani^ien o^ the Plat Poli^i^all. (...) the BRYTISH MONARCHY Siu^. The
Mechani^ien o^ the Plat Poli^i^all. (...) the BRYTISH MONARCHY Philosophicus.
The Mechani^ien o^ the Plat Poli^i^all. (...) the BRYTISH MONARCHY Vulga^^ter
Iustus -- The unknown Fre^nd. His Ad^^^tisemen^ Introduc^ory.

The Epistle in Meter, (annexed in the end of this Book,) was by the
Mechanicien sent, after that the unknown Friend had (at his own charges, and
with his careful Trauail concurrent,) put the foresaid two Treatises, in Print:
and delivered again into the hands of the said Mechanicien, the whole
Impression thereof. The diverse Intents and purposes of which Epis^le, are easily
to be perceived. Therefore, if to have said thus much, was necessary, the same
also may suffice.

A necessary Advertisement, by an unknown friend, given to the modest, and
godly Readers: who also carefully desire the prosperous State of the Common
wealth, of this BRYTISH KINGDOM, and the Political SECVRITIE thereof.
LAmentable and irksome, Veritas (vt fertur) Odium parit. A^l ^antum id fit,
apud Veritatis ^sores: ipsi etiam Omnipotenti ex^sos Deo.
(my well-beloved Cuntriman) Seeing the conditions of to to many, are become
such, as, to be to to curious of other Cur quidem ^ide^ (...) quae es^ ^n oculo
fratris tui, Trab^m a^tem, quae es^ in oculo ^^o, non a^^mad^^^tis? Math. 7
Men's doings: As though, they them selves, were superhabundantly perfect: or
dwelt in Security, of not being at any time, hereafter, either surueyed, or
controlled for their own.

Nay, seeing the subtilty and impudency of Legas and relegas librum Quintum
Politicorum Aristotelis.
some,

And thirdly, Seeing, some are so doggedly violent, like, consent, or well
suffer any od Man, beside them selves: or, otherwise, then by them selves, to
receive due Salary, either of Credit, Commendation, or liberal Consideration:
where, their word or working (directly or indirectly) may hinder the same.

As, (...).

(...). etc.


diverse, of sundry states, have, (of Late,) become so shameless liars, and to
some private men's lives, (thereby) so dangerous, That, if Credit had bin given
to them, (by other, than the light hedded sort) of such Murders and Treasons,
as (most devil like) they have imagined, and reported to be: and withal,
(wholly, of their own hellish minds, without any spark or drop of Verity,)
have fathered the same upon the very Innocent (yea, so much an Innocent, as for
any such thought, in his heart, at any time, embracing or ^ostering): It had bin
greatly to have bin douted that the mighty wrath of God, would not so long have
forborne the just revenge (of so heinous abhominacions) taking, upon, as well
such wicked and principal Forgers, as on other the fickle favorers, or
careless sufferers of the same, any whit to prevail.

(...).
other kind, more wicked and abominable, than the rehearsed: which are such,
as not only, they them selves, commi^ Devilish horrible facts, but also
practice other very fraudulent feats: And all, to their private Lucre only:
Chiefly ayding and furnishing up their own shameful Credit herein, with the
(...).
Cownterfeting of other honest and learned Men their letters: as, written unto
them, in such their ungodly and unlawful affairs: (...)^ Coo^. etc^
Or, as falsely, reporting their Conferences had with them, to the behoof (say
they) of such, as are become their miserable and Cosened Clients.

And Sixthly, how, (almost, without remedy,) has A good Name is more to be
desired, than great riches. Proverb. 22.

A good Name is mo^e worth then precious ointment. Eccles. 7.


Name and Fame, of one extraordinary Studious Ientleman, of this land, within
his Claws: that, diverse his mere Malicious, and wilful Enemies, do verily
hope, that it is impossible, that this Ientleman, shall, with this English or
Brytish State, either (during his life) be counted a good Subject, or a
Commendable, (nay, scarce a Tolerable) If you will Read his Digression
Apologeticall, con^eyned in his Mathematical Preface, to the English Euclide
(Imprinted A^^ 1570.) you may the better understand this point of this brief
Advertisement.
Christian: or, any his Acts or Travails, all ready past: or, other his
intended exploits, of great Importance, shall be, in this Land, acceptable: or,
of the people, of this kingdom, received: as, by the favor, light, and Aid
of the Blessed Trinity undertaken, invented, Compassed, and achieved: but,
rather, by wicked and ungodly Art, to be framed: and, by the help of Satan,
or Beelzebub, to be finished: vnleast, the wise, or the peculiarly chief
Authorized, will use due Careful, and Charitable Discretion, From henceforth,
to repres, abolish, and utterly extinguish this very Injurious Report, (for
these xx. years last past, and somewhat longer,) Spread and Credited, all this
Realm over: Oh, A damnable sklaunder: utterly untrue, in the whole, and in
every word and part thereof: as (before the King of Kings) will appear at the
dreadful day.
it is to wete, That the Forsaid Ientleman, is, or was, Not only, a 1.
Coniurer, or Caller of Devils: but, 2. A Great doer therein: Yea, The Great
Coniurer: and so, (as some would say,) 3. The Arche Coniurer, of this whole
kingdom.

Before, that the (mentioned) Devilish Cosening was used: this sklanderous
untruth was recorded, publis^ed, and Credited: But, by these new devised
Cosening forgeries, the same, may (with some) seem to be undoubtedly confirmed.
Oh Lord, with how tickle and strong Snares, and with how wily Laberinthes, has
the most envious Traitor, to the honor of our God and Christ, bewrapped and
Daunted many a thousand of simple and honest Men's fantazies: inducing them, to
Credit this Infamous Report? To Credit it, (I say) in respect of the honorable
Seat, wherein, it was, (very unadvisedly) set down. In deed, even he: who, at
the beginning, Esaiae. 14.
said, Ascendam in Coelum, and similis ero Altissimo: even he, has settled this
intolerable sklander of the virtuous, among the glorious Renown of the
Righteous: to so great hurt, and damage of the Ientleman (who, to all other
Men, is harmles) as, never to him, by any one Mortal Man, the just Amends, can
duly be made. I would to God, this foresaid sklander, and other Disgracing
Reports, to to rashly, and even then Esaiae. 14.
recorded, when this Courteous Ientleman was also a prisoner himself: (and
bedfellow, with one Master Barthelet Green) had bin, in due time espied, and
utterly cancelled, and razed out of all Records, wherein they were unduly, and
unadvisedly (first) admitted.

Nerer to pres this Matter in particular, it is nedeles. But, by this, and such
like foul oversight of Man, and Cruel despite of the hellish Enemy, it is
come to pas (among many other great Inconveniences) that, whereas the said
Studious Ientleman, has at God his most merciful hands, received a great
Talent of knowledge and Sciences: (after his long, painful, and Costly
Trauails, sustained for the same:) and both by God, being warned, and, of his
own disposition, desirous, not only to enlarge and multiply the same, but
also to communicate to other: He finds himself, (now, at length), partly
forced, somewhat to yield to the wickedness of these times, (being not possible
to sail against the winds eye): And partly demeth himself (in Gods Judgment,)
excusable, not to bestow any more of his Talent and Careful Travails, upon
the Ungrateful and Thankles: Nay, upon the skorners and Disdainers of such his
faithful enterprises: undertaken chiefly, for the Advancement of the
wonderful Verity Philosophical: And also, for the State Publik of this
BRYTISH MONARCHY, to become flourishing, in HONOR, WEALTH, and STRENGTH: as
much, as any thing in him, might have bin thereto, (by any means,) found
seruisable.

But, who would have Solomon in Ecclesias^es cap. 4. So, I turned me, and
considered all the vi^lent wrong, that is done under the Sun: and Behold, the
teare^ of such as were oppressed: and there was No Man to comfort them: Or,
that would deliver and defend them, from the violence of their Oppressors.
thought, that they, who are (in deed) of the honester sort, and more
charitable: yea, of the wiser, and (by Office) mightier (and some of them,
taken for his especial great friends) would, so many years, have bin so Solomon
in Ecclesias^es cap. 4. So, I turned me, and considered all the vi^lent wrong,
that is done under the Sun: and Behold, the teare^ of such as were oppressed:
and there was No Man to comfort them: Or, that would deliver and defend them,
from the violence of their Oppressors.
Careless, or slack, to Aid, and procure the Innocent, to be Solomon in
Ecclesias^es cap. 4. So, I turned me, and considered all the vi^lent wrong,
that is done under the Sun: and Behold, the teare^ of such as were oppressed:
and there was No Man to comfort them: Or, that would deliver and defend them,
from the violence of their Oppressors.
delivered, from the grievous, and most Injurious spoil of his good Name and
Fame: and all the inconveniences, depending thereon? Or, who would have thought,
that so great, and so uncharitable Untruths, should so indiscreetly have bin
published: by those Men especially, who, otherwise, in word and life, were
very modest, and Circumspect?

I thought it good, Therefore (my honest friend and Cuntryman) to advertise
thee, The chi^f occasi^^ of thi^ Adu^^tisement giving.
of some part of the Cause, of the strange manner, of this Treatise coming to
thy sight, or reading: As, without the Name, of any certain Author thereof: And,
without the Name, of the zealous Artificer, who first did solicit, and
collect such matter (by Dic^ata, as it were) from this Ientleman. And Thirdly,
without my own Name: into whose hands, the said Artificer, has delivered all
the matter, that he could get of this Brytish Ientleman: to the Title of this
book, answerable: yea, and other rare Instructions, also.

For (undoubtedly) this BRYTISH PHILOSOPHER, is not 1. only discouraged to
labor, or * pen any more Treatises, or books, him self, in ARTIFICIAL METHOD,
for his unkind, unthankful, disdainful, and sklanderous Cuntrymen, to use
(nay abuse:) but, 2. also, is loath (and has great reason, so to be) to have
his Name, any more, prefixed, or subscribed, to any Treatises, passing from
him, either by writing, or by speech.

And, both these Inconveniences, are purposely committed: to avoid, or, somewhat
to prevent hensforward, the farther grief and offense, that might grow to him,
and his true friends: to perceive the former sundry sorts of Caterpillars, and
great hinderers of the prosperous Estate, of any Commonwealth, to know upon
the leaf, or flower, of his Commendable Fame: who, would take very quickly an
Occasion (by the forefronts of books, garnished with his BRYTISH NAME,) to
fall to a fresh pang of envious busiosity, impudent arrogance, and dogged
malicious speeches using and vttring against the Ientleman: who (undoubtedly)
wishes evil to none. And (perhaps) though it were very good matter, that
should, by him, be contrived and written, and under his Name, be published:
yet, they would (in perusing it), either pervert their own Judgments of it,
through their unquieted, and mere malicious fantazie, wilfully bent against
him: or, rather, in deed, through their own great Ignorance, would verify the
Proverb: Scientia non habet Inimicum, nisi Ignorantem: as, they did by his
Monas Hieroglyphica: Ao. 1564.
dedicated to the late Emperor Maximilian: wherein, the Queen her most
Excellent Majesty, can be a sacred witness (as I have heard) of the Strange and
undue speeches, devised of that Hieroglyphicall writing:

Or, if they liked the matter: then, they would say, that such a Treatise,
(under his Name, published) is not, or was not, of his own compiling and
ordring, as Author thereof: but that, some other Man, now living, or long since
dead, was the only and first Author, of such a good Treatise. And, that m^n^r
of malicious Injury, has bin very notably d^n^ unto him, for these many years
past, about his Book Entitled Propaed^umata Aphorislica: and is, yet, searse
ceased in all corners (for, it is backbiting work, and seeks Corners.) For,
some men, (And they such, who ought to have bin honest and discreet, as they
are, or were accounted learned) have, very enuiously, fathered it, upon the
excellent G^rardus Mercator Rupelmundanus, (yet living at Duysburgh,) as, to be
the only and true Author of those Aphorisms. But, afterward, when that was
found a peui^h fable: Then, upon one Vrso (who lived many hundred years since)
was all the Commendation bestowed, for that Aphoristicall work contriuing. And
then, again, after that, upon one Alkabitius: And at length, with shame enough
(but more will follow) being driven from these mere envious, and spiteful
false devises: yet (most obstinately and impudently) they still avouch to
diverse Ientlemen, and certain Noble Men, that some other, or (in effect) any
Man else, was the Author thereof: rather, than they would honestly acknowledge the
Truth, of only this Ientleman his peculiar Industry, and no small skill, used
in the contriuing and framing of that Ao. 1558. In July. First printed.
Book: containing the chief Crop and Root, of Ten years his first Outlandish
and Homish Studies and exercises Philosophical: as, partly in the preface
thereof, to the Reader, is specified: but more habundantly and purposely, has
that point bin Ao. 1574. In August. At Mortlack.
proved and testified to some, who were (before) fowly infected, with the
sklaunderous Opinion, that one Vrso, was the Author of it, and not this honest
Brytish Ientleman: as, at an other time, will be made more evident: When, a full
declaration, in more convenient place, may be made, of the mere malicious, very
rash, and Brutish Censure, of a certain Doctor, (yet living.) Who, lately,
endeavored him self, to persuade some right worshipful Ientlemen, that it were
good, and behoofull for this Common Wealth, If the said Philosopher, were
Banished this land, for ever. Because, said this Doctor (but most untruly: as
is now very evident, to Thousands of Men, of this Kingdom, and other) That, to
no Man of this Realm, he did at any time, or yet does, or will, communicate any
part, of his learned Talent, by word or writing: But is wholly addicted, to his
private commodity only auancing, by his own Studies and practices very secret.
That Doctor, his name, shall not, here, by me, be disclosed: for that, he has
(upon honest Repentance, for his so injurious and dammageable Intent) received
his Ao. 1575. In March. At Mortlack.
Sentence of free forgiveness: in the presence of worshipful witness, yet alive.

And when, likewise, the perfect declaration may more aptly be had, of the most
Judas like pranke, of an other Doctor: who (in the time of this Brytan Innocent
his Captivity: and somewhat, before the day of his enlarging, by The true Copy
of these Letters sent to D. Boner Bishop of London.
AFter our hearty Commendations to your good L. the King and Queens Majesty's
pleasures is, you shall cause John Dee, committed to your L. Custody, to be
brought before some Master of the Chauncery: and there bound to be of good
abearing, and forth coming, when he shall be called for, betwixt this and
Christmas next^ And thereupon to set him at liberty. Whereof we pray you not to
fail. And so we bid the same heartily Farewell.

From Grenewich, the xxix. of August, 1555. Your L. loving friends. Ste.
Winton, Cancel. W. Rochester. Thomas Ely. Io. Bourn. John Baker. Francis E.
Waldegraue. Engerfeld.




letters, sent to his keeper, from the Right honorable Privy Counsel, to KING
PHILIP and QVEENE MARY) did, very ernestly solicit with the Lord Chauncelor,
(with whom he could do very much) And with the Bishop of London, (whom, also,
he could half persuade) that it were requisite, and Justice, that the said
Brytan Captive, were not set at liberty at all: but, should be forthwith
committed to PERPETVAL PRISON: And that, upon such respects, as he, most
unchristianlike and maliciously, had devised: and very impudently, upon his
Credit with them (such as it was) would have forced, to prevail. But, God
would not suffer the said Courteous Captive, his great freendship and humanity,
a few years before, used toward that Doctor (in Paris) so, to be requited, with
worse, then Ingratitude. Besides, that the said Captive, could never (nor yet
can) be duly charged, with any word or deed, vttred or done, contrary to the
performance of his duty toward his Sovereign and the higher Powers.

And though I here omit many other great Injuries, done unto him, about the
bereauing him, of the true and due Title and Interest, in and to his own works,
writings and Inventions, in other places recorded (And among that sort,
omitting that foul Injury, done to him by one Ioannes Franciscus Offhuysius,
whose book De Diuina Astrorum facultate, was of this Brytan Philosopher, his
Invention, chiefly: As, may be made evident, both by the matter therein
contained, being compared to his Propaedeumata Aphoristica: And also, by the
said Franciscus his daily familiar As may sufficiently appear by these few
places taken out of some of his letters.

Doctissimo probaeque Indolis Dno. Ioanni Deeo, suo Intimo.
OCcupatiuncula me hactenus domidetinuere, etc. Quas de Aeris mutatione,
concepisti causas, ne relinquas, ore. etc.

Ex Diuersorio, raptim: 30. October. 1553. Tuus, si su^s: I-F van Offhuysen.


And again.

Suo charissimo Dno. Ioanni Deeo.
H^is proximis diebus, etc. Hypothesibus ad Astrologiam confirmandam, quaso,
serio Des (vt caepists) operam. Syderum seeds, spero te vteunque certas a me
accepturum, saltem eorum qua per nos obseruata fuere quandoque, etc.

Vale. 6. Nouemb. 1553. Tuus Offhuysius.


And again.

DOmine, si non queas incommode carere Ephemeridibus prasentis anni, obsecro,
mitte: Et de tuis intelligamus studijs. Ego diligenter planto sydera. Spero,
dum tuae creuerint, quas concepisti Hypotheses, aliquid boni seminis nos
collecturos. Vale f^elix.

Tuus Offhuysius.



Letters soliciting and requesting those and such like Hypotheses
Astrologicall, at the said Philosopher his hands: he being, moreover here
conversant with, and depending upon this our Brytan Mathematicien, above a
whole year.) Yet I must Note unto you, even here, that one of those Injuries,
was above all the rest, so Notorious: and withal, so notably well M. Steven
and M. William Borowgh, two of the chief Moscouy Pilots (after the incomparable
M. Richard Chancellor his death) can be sufficient witnesses, also^
known, to be an Injury, that the last year, a certain Mechanicien, (being
busied about matter of Navigations), calling to his Remembrance the same Injury:
being a foul and Impudent An Injurious Brag.
brag, that an English Mariner, (now, above, 20. years sins, had made, to
diverse honest men: ^of the new Sea Instrument, newly also, called the
Paradoxall Cumpas: As, to have bin of his Invention.) was so inflamed with
Indignation against this arrogant Mariner, his abominable Impudency, (so long
time, by this Ientleman, very patiently suffered,) that he made very earnest
request to this Ientleman (the true Inuentor, of this Instrument Paradoxal)
that, although, all the Injuries received at their hands, who were deemed
learned, he would not very sharply reprove: and, but at leisure: yet, that it
should be an Act, mete and needful for him to do, (being also behoofull for
the Common Wealth) speedily to detect, such shameless Braggers and Crakers:
only sophistically furnished, to outward show: and that, with other Men's rare
Inventions: but, of them selves, utterly unable to Invent any worthy
Conclusion, to be profitably practiced, on Sea or Land.

Which Mechanicien his ernest request, (by the foresaid Ientleman) being
granted, was the very chief and first occasion, of these Rare Memorials
(concerning The perfect Art of Navigations) so coming in Record: The volumes
of Rare Memorials, by what ^ccasion they became to be written first.
after a Mechanical and vulgar Artificer his blunt manner of penning, and
collecting the same. Who, about the Entrance into the matter of Navigations,
finding good The brief Argument of the P^ef^ce, or first book of the Gene^al
and Ra^e Memorials.
Opportunity, to speak First of a PETY-NAVY-ROYALL, continually to be
mainteyned, for manifold great Commodities procuring to this BRYTISH MONARCHY:
(which, no other way, can be brought to pas:) and among them all, Perpetual
Politik Security, is to be so^ght for: but not ^luggi^h and r^chle^ Security:
which is the overthrow of many a noble Kingdom.
the PERPETVALL POLITIK SECVRITIE and better preservation of this famous
Kingdom, from all Foreign danger, or Homish disorder, to be the chiefest: and
most needful Publik Benefit: (and undoubtedly, likely, to ensue thereof:) he was
dutifully willing, rather to follow some brief discussing of that very weighty
matter,
(and especially in these dangerous days, and Incredible peevish practices,
full often devised against the GOOD PEACE, AND PROSPEROVS TRANQVILLITIE of this
INCOMPARABLE ILANDISH MONARCHY:) then, to fall to the foresaid General and
Rare Memorials recording, of THE PERFECT ART OF NAVIGATION: which, he,
(thereupon) set aside, a while. And whereof, now, only the Second Volume
entreats: under this proper Title: The Title and brief Argument of the Second
Volume.
THE BRYTISH COMPLEMENT, OF THE PERFECT ART OF NAVIGATION. For, no vulgar
doctrine, or practice, is therein contained: But rather the GENERAL COMPLEMENT,
and (almost in particular,) all that, which hitherto, was wanting: or, which
might be most needful to so excellent an Art, and (to this kingdom) most
beneficial of all other Mechanical exercises:

And such is the foresaid Brytish Complement, (as I do right well know) that
the Contents thereof, are above the most part of the best learned men's
expectations, (yea, or hope) of being brought to pas: and all that, in rare,
general, and excellent Conclusions of Gubernautik, chiefly. And so great, is
the Volume thereof, that, to have it fairly and distinctly printed, with all
the Appertenances, it would be, (in bulk) greater than the English Bible, of
the greatest volume: And yet, the plat of Invention, Disposition, and recording
thereof, was finished in les, than 4. months space: it is to wete, of
September, October, November, and December last. Due Laud and Glory, be,
therefore, ascribed to the free geuer of all good and perfect Gifts.

The Third Book, suppressed.
The third Book, I neither will, or may (as yet) say any thing of. The
Ientleman his desire was, that it should be utterly suppressed, or delivered to
Vulcan his Custody.

The Fourth Volume.
But, the fourth Volume, I may Judge it, to be as an Earthly Paradise: A Book,
of as great godly pleasure, as worldly profit and delight: A Book, for the
BRYTISH HONOR and WEALTH (And that, in diverse manner) such an one, as never,
King Ptolomaeus, or Prince Abilfada Ismael, or any Geographicall or
Hydographicall Discouerer did write, or Collect: as I (for my simple Capacity)
do verily Judge of it. The Title whereof, is, OF FAMOVS, and RICH DISCOVERIES:
The Discourse thereof, not only contains the General Survey Hydrographicall,
of all the whole world, (and chiefly the rare Evidences for all the parts
thereof, most Septentrionall) but also, a particular and ample examination, of
King Solomon his Ophirian three years voyage: And also, the lawful and very
honorable Entitling of our most gracious and Sovereign Lady, QVEENE ELIZABETH,
(and so, this BRYTISH SCEPTER ROYAL) to very large Foreign Dominions: such, as
in, and by the same, duly recovered and used, the Course of the Divine
providence general,
in this present Age, will bring to light and life, matter of great Importance
and Consequency, both to the Glory of God, and the benefit of all Christendom,
and Heathenes. The greatness of this Volume, is not much les, than of the
Second. And one way, it far passes the Second: For, in the Secret Center
thereof, is more bestowed, and stored up, than I may, or (in this place) will
expres.

The same Volume, was, chiefly, of the Ientleman his own very speedy
collecting: And (by his will, and order) has this Inscription, or Dedication,
TO THE MOST WORTHY: And the same Inscription, to be written, or printed in
letters of Gold.

And had not the Incredible, and manifold Injuries, and undue Disturbances bin,
which have happened to him (by sundry parcels of time) for the space of three
Months, and more, (in Total sum), within the time of all these Collections,
most speedily and Carefully heaping up together, since August last: I am
rightwell assured, that, never, in so small time, so much matter, of so great
Importance, with such sincere and dutiful zeal to pleasure his Native Cuntry:
had by any Subject (BRYTISH or ENGLISH) bin delivered from him, by Invention of
his own, or by Circumspect Collection, or discrete Application, out of former
or present writers, and Authors.

What is than (I pray you) in all his life time, to be thought likely, or
possible, and in times more commodious, to have bin Invented: Or, converted to
better Method of Knowledge, or use of practice: or notably reformed, by the
said Ientleman? Especially, for the space of these In which space of time he
has advisedly spent above Thirty Hundred pounds, for learning of worthy
Knowledges and Sciences: to the Honor of God advancing, (far and nere,) and the
better enhabling of himself to pleasure his Native Cu^try above all other^
Thirty years, last past? In which long time of his Tyrocinie, he has,
incessantly, to the uttermost of his power, and hability, followed an
extraordinary, and most painful, and very costly Course of Philosophical
Enquiries making, after the best Verities: The Fruit, and end of Natural
Philosophy, being used, as Christen men ought to use it.
which, may yield, (by due Considerations of the Creatures, their virtues and
properties) to their Creator and ours, Glory, Praise, and Honor unspeakable:
for his Infinite Goodness, Wisdom and Power: the evident print, and Demonstrable
proof, whereof, the same, (our God), has bestowed most abundantly, in his own
handyworke, of all his Creatures Creating: all the whole, and universal world
over, dispersed: nay, rather Filling the whole Cosmographicall frame,
and Orb: from the Center thereof, to the uttermost Circumference of the same:
being, to Mortal man's outward eye, utterly insensible.

It will appear, hereafter, in due time, that, greater, further, and of longer
Continuance, has bin his doings, and very well liked of, Aduertisements and
Instructions, in sundry affairs Philosophical, and Cosmopoliticall, FOR
VERITY, JUSTICE, AND PEACE FVRDERING, than has, of any Three, of his nearest
friends, and most familiarly acquainted Cuntrymen, bin (as yet) perceived.

And this also, I may say of the same Ientleman (without seeming to flatter
him, or any whit to abuse thee, my honest friend and Cuntryman:) or, he him
self, with great Modesty, and no arrogance, might (to God his high Glory) say:
That, if in the foresaid whole course of his time, he had found a Constant and
Assistant CHRISTIAN ALEXANDER: BRYTAN, should not have bin, now, destitute of a
CHRISTIAN ARISTOTLE. Alexander. Aristotle.


Any farther, is nedeles, to be disclosed of this Ientleman: whose grievous The
words of a sklander^r, are very wound^ and go through unto the innermost
parts of the Body. Proverb. 18.
wounds, (by dedly sklanders, upon devilish Envy, only: and the same, privily
slasht, and hewed into his Sides: and nere unto his Heart) are not, yet, in the
perfect and charitable Chirurgiens, curing. The more Lamentable, will the case
be found: and the remedy, to late, thought upon, I am greatly afraid.

In the mean space (my loving friend, and impartial Reader) I am, to advertise
thee, that, as concerning the publishing of the other two great Volumes:
though, the Inventions, and Collections be such, as I said, and of great Value:
both for the HONOR AND WEALTH OF ENGLAND, and no little furderance of the GLORY
OF GOD: yet, (by Order, taken by him, who has the chief Interest therein:) the
same, are not to be printed, UNTIL THE PROOF BE PAST, How, this Mechanicien,
his zealous, dutyfull, and humble Advertisement Political, (for the Perpetual
Guard, and further Service, of a PETY-NAVY-ROYALL, A PETY NAVY ROYAL
continually to be mainteyned without the Queens Majesty, Charges, or any
unpleasant Burden to the Commons.
to be maintained, without any Cost or Charge to the Queen her most excellent
Majesty, or any unpleasant burden to the Commons, and faithful Subjects, of
this BRYTISH MONARCHY) shall be liked of, and accepted: (for the zeal, and
matter, I mean, rather, than for any Rhetorical polishing bestowed on it.)
Seeing, the same, contains in it, such Fragments of Instructions, received
from the foresaid Philosopher: being, hitherto (almost) a Exceptis,
Excipiendis: a^t illis quidem pa^cissimis.
Freendles friend. Why say I, Exceptis, Excipiendis: a^t illis quidem
pa^cissimis.
freendles? Seeing, a Ientleman, of great Experience in this world, said unto
him, in my hering, within these few days:

Tu certe Infoelix, at multos inter Amicos. Whereby, it might seem, that he has
many friends. But, for all that, between a cold friend, and a faint hearted
Enemy, is small diversity. And undoubtedly, a feigned, hollow hearted or
Hypocritical friend, is worse, ten times, than an open Enemy: And, in very
deed, is not to be counted a friend. And, so, may the outward repugnancy of
these two sayings, aptly be reconciled.

But, proceeding in my former purpose, you may understand this, moreover: that
the Second Book or Volume, (to this Preface apperteyning) will be of more
hundred pounds, Charges, to be prepared for the print (in respect of the
Tables, and Figures thereto requisite): than you would easily believe. Therefore,
though there were no warning, of Attendance to be given, to understand the
issue of liking or misliking the foresaid, (zealously collected, and as humbly
presented) Political Advertisement: yet, this matter of Charges, so far
passes my slender hability: and, withal, is so dreadful to the Printers, for
fear of great los thereby susteining (So rare, and few men's Studies, are in
such matters employed) that, delay, on my part, is rather, that way,
Constrained: And,
therefore, no Order is to be thought upon, by me, for the printing thereof: Till
than,
TILL, A COMFORTABLE AND SVFFICIENT OPPORTVNITY OF SVPPLY, DOES VERY WELL
SERVE THERETO.

And before, I bid thee Farewell (my Cuntryman) I may yet advertise thee, of
one point more (whither the said Second Volume, be ever printed, or no) That,
therein, is one parcel contained: so, contrived and Dedicated unto the
AEternall, Royal, and Heroical Honor, and Renowm of our Incomparable Gracious
QVEENE ELIZABETH: that, all the whole world over, A strange Monument, Dedicated
to the AEternall, and Heroical Renowm of our Queen her most Excellent Majesty.
yea, among the Heathen, as well as Christen: what language so ever they
speak, that have to deal with Hydrography, or Dangerous and long voyages by
Sea: even they, will, most thankfully, and for ever, sing and extol her
marvelous Princely Benefit herein: as, to them, chiefly for her Majesty's sake
and Merits, imparted: who, has bin so constantly favorable, and so gracious a
Soueraign Lady, unto the Inuentor thereof, her most faithful and obedient
Subject. The richest Pyramid at Memphis, did never so far, and so durably spread
the Fame and Commendation of the Builders thereof, as these TABLES GVBERNAVTIKE,
will win, and procure the large love, and good liking of our Elizabeth, all the
world over, and while the world endures, to flourish. The English Title thereof,
is, A Treasor incomparable for the Art Guberna^tik: and for very many other
Experiences.
THE BRYTISH QVEENE ELIZABETH, HER TABLES GVBERNAVTIK. And the same, is of many
Quires of Paper, containing.

Now, have I sufficiently (for this place and time) given unto you (my
courteous Cuntryman) Aduertisements: which (I trust) you will take in good part
and thankfully: if, in your own Conscience, you plainly perceiue^ that all my
zealous speech, herein bestowed, tends to the Advancement of virtue, and to
the great Benefit and Commodity Publik. At an other time, I hope to have
Comfort, and convenient Opportunity, to impart unto you, other matter: for
your exceeding good Contentation, and great delight also.

And, in the mean space, I trust that this my sincere, blunt, and simple
Advise, shall be some Occasion, that hensforward, this honest Ientleman, shall
be fully restored to the Integrity of his duly deserved honest Da operam vt
Famatua integra sit. Haec enim durabilior quam Mill Thesauri. Vita quam vis
bona, ad breue exiguunique te^pus durat: Bonum ver) Nomen, ad perpetuitatem
stabile est. Jesus Sir^cida. cap. 41.
Name and Fame: And, also receive great Publik Thanks, Comfort and Aid of the
Whole Brytish State. To the Honor, Welfare, and Preservation whereof (next unto
his duty doing unto God) he has directed all the course of his manifold
Studies, great Travails, and incredible Costs. As, both, by these his
Hexameron Lessons (First, here, for Security of the same) spedily Dictated: and
also, by very many other his words, works, and writings else: both, in
England, and other where, spoken, done, communicated, and published, will, or
may abundantly be testified. And, so, Fare you well in Christ, my Courteous,
and impartial Cuntryman: And, for a Remembrance, at this our most freendly
Farewell, take this heavenly Counsel with thee: Math. 7.
Omnia quaecunque volueritis vt faciant vobis homines, sic and vos facite
illis: haec enim est Lex and Prophetae.

Which kind of skantlin, and Measure divine, being, before hand, and in due
time, laid unto all our thoughts, words and deeds, may be as a good and
familiar Angel unto us: to help us to shonne, and fly from all sklandrous
speeches using: all malicious, or seditious Libels skattring: and all other
unjust, and uncharitable dealings: yea, and from consenting or suffering of the
same, where we can, or ought, to redres the Cause.

And, Then, the Glory, and Peace of God, will flourish in this BRYTAN MONARCHY.
Over which, (so reformed) that our most Gracious and Soueraign QVEENE
ELIZABETH, may, very many years, most prosperously and Triumphantly Reign, it
is (undoubtedly) our bounden duty, fervently and full often, by Prayer, to request
at his hands, who is the King of Kings, Almighty. To whose Protection, and
furderance also, most heartily, and dutifully, I commend the very weighty Case,
of this Common Wealth: not utterly unduly, or, (yet) out of season (I hope) in
this first book ensuing, somewhat Considered of: as, in a The first Book here
following, is but (as it were) a Preface: To the Second, containing in it the
Art, to this kingdom most beneficial, if it might be duly used.
Preface, very needful, to the BRYTISH COMPLEMENT, OF THE PERFECT ART OF
NAVIGATION. And herewith, (once more), I say, Adieu: and well motest thou Fare,
my Christian Brother, and syncerely beloved Cuntryman.

Anno, Stellae (Coelo Demissae, rectaque Reuersae) Quinto: Iulij vero, Die. 4.
ET Anno Mundi. 5540.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful, M. Christopher Hatton Esquier: Capitain of her
Majesty's Guard, and Ientleman of her privy Chamber.
NOt only my dutiful good will toward your Worship, and my great desire, to
do some thing beneficial to this my Native Cuntry: But also, a certain
stinging Indignation, against the Impudent Attempt of such, as use, wrongfully
to challendge to them selves, other men's Travails, (and not hable to yield any
Ingenious Invention of their own) have, at this An. 1576 Augusti. 1.
present, forced me, to do my Endeavor, for the publishing of this strange
Instrument, with the name of the true Inuentor thereof, annexed: And humbly to
dedicate my simple Industry herein, to your worships protection. Trustyng you
will the rather accept the same, being (as it were) a Crum, to my great
Contentation, fallen from his plentiful Table, whom (I am assured) you do
derely and sincerely, both love and esteem: as well, of your own most courteous
disposition toward all men, with whom your worship has to do: as also, for
sundry his virtues, and excellent Skill, in many Arts, and Sciences, Wherewith
the highest has very graciously blessed him. For which his ability, and
Talent, he is all ways most humbly thankful, to the only Author, and giver,
of all goodness and wisdom. Verily, for these 24. years (at the least) I have
had the Ientleman in great admiration: As well for his foresaid excellency in
good learning (so judged of, long sins, by the learned, in sundry Nations) As,
for his most ready Courtesy in Communicating or conferring to and with such, as
duly require his Advise, Opinion, or Judgment, in any Science, Art or
Practice, wherein he has had any speculation or exercise. Such Commendations,
as these, allthough they be great, (and rare, in any Studious Ientleman of this
Kingdom, else:) Yet, neither the same, nor ten times as great (sownding loud
about his ears, for these many years past) have at any time, or yet do, any
one pyns point, puf up his heart, vayngloriously: but have, and do make him
more Joyfully thankful, to the kingly and free giver, of such his great
Talent: So great, as, Quibus Res notae sunt, and qui illi been volunt,
existimant orationem non esse parem Magnitudini Rerum gestarum, (As that
prudent Atheniensien Governor, Pericles, said, In oratione Funebri: Commending
them, that manfully had spent their lives, in the late wars, then:
Thucidides, Lib. 2.
) Alij, ignari, iudicant lauds esse immodicas: quia inuident excellenti
virtuti. Lauds enim eo vsque tolerabiles sunt, donec ea dicuntur, quae
Auditores se quoque facere posse arbitrantur: Si Maiora dicuntur, Inuident, non
credunt.

Therefore, pardon me (I beseech your worship) If in rehearsing here, and there
(glaunsingly) some points of his due Commendation, I speak far short of that,
which (farther) your worship and other, do, or may know, and more aptly can
expres, to Gods glory: for his graces, on that Ientleman, so abundantly
bestowed: Who (I know right well) does make no les account of your Worship,
then the Justice of dutiful and perfect Amity requires. Which is a thing,
very rare (now a days) any where to be found. And for better proof of the
Premises, (by your leave, and with your patience) I will, here, truly and
briefly Note such matter unto you, as neither (Withal) is impertinent to this
Paradoxall Instrument, now, first published: nor mete to be let pas (in a
manner) unknown, and utterly vnrecorded.

For, whereas, about, 3. or 4. months last past, a virtuous M.M. Lok.
Ientleman and Merchant, with zealous Intent, for the Auauncement of God his
glory, and the great Commodity, and honor of this kingdom, procured unto him,
Worshipful, yea and Honorable Aid also: to set forth Ships, for a Northwest
Discovery: And shortly after, there came abroad, in Print, a little English
book, containing some probable reasons, tending to the persuasion of the same
Course and voyage: In the Epistle of which little book, no small piece of Credit
(for the Attempt to be liked of) was ascribed to M. ^ee his Judgment, (as,
there, is to be seen) set down, in his Mathematical Praeface, with the English
Euclide, published: So it came to pas, that it was his wurshipfull friend ( M.
Edward Dyer) his fortune, First, to Advertise him (as he told me) both of the
said book, by the Title thereof: and of his Name, in the foresaid Epistle (to
good purpose) used. Whereupon, he, calling to Remembrance his old Atlanticall
Discourses, to the self same purpose (at the said M. Dyer his request) almost
ten years sins, set down in writing: And perusing thoroughly all reasons and
allegations (both Pro and Contra) now, in the said Pamphlet expressed: did,
furthwith, by every Article thereof, in the Margent, Note their value, or
imperfection. And, straight way, after that, made a new Collection, for the
same voyage, very probable. And thirdly (the same day) writ, 18. new
Considerations of his own: very pleasant, in probability, for an other voyage
of Discovery: (in respect of Safety, Nerenes, and Commodity) nothing inferior
to that, which they, They did s^t forth the 12. of June last.
now, have undertaken, God send them good speed.

And, M. Dee, being thus furnished, as well to maintein probably his former
Judgment (by M. Gascoyn recited, in the foresaid Epistle) and intending to
give those his, 18. new and very strange Articles of Consideration, to him or
them, whom he should d^me apt and desirous to further the said Discovery (no
les, then this was by a discrete, careful, diligent, and constant Procurer,
follower and furderer, brought to the present execution): And also, purposing
freendly to examine, and faithfully to Instruct M. Capitain Frobisher, and M.
Christopher Hall, and other, that should have the chardge about the said
Northwest Discovery (As he was, partly by the right worshipful Sir Leonell
Ducket Knight, and partly by M. Frobisher him self, before that, requested to
do) made, then, no delay, to repayr to the Moschouy house: Where, he found him
self courteously and very worshipfully enterteined. And at that time of his
abode there, and after that, at sundry other times, of his Resort, thither, and
to their Ships, he proceeded so with them, according to his Intent: and
pleasured them, so much according to their desire: That he finding them, quick
of apprehension, and likely to remain As (besides many other things) this
letter, may seem to be a sufficient witness.

To the worshipful and our approved good friend M. Dee, g^ue these with speed.
This 26. of June, 1576. I arrived in Shotland in the Bay of Saint Tronio^s in
the Latitude of 59 degrees, 46 Minutes.

I with M. Hall make our duti^^ll Commendations to you with as many th^nkes as
we can wish, till we be better furnished of farther matters to satisfy our
duties for your ^rendly Instruction^: which when we use we d^o remember you and
hold our selves bound to you as your pour disciples, not able to be Scholars
but in good will ^or want of lerning, and that we will furnish with good will
and diligence to the uttermost of our powers. The cause of our stay here, was,
to stop a leake which I had in the Micha^ll, and withal ^illed certain fresh
water and by Gods ^race this night according to my Commission I will depart.
This present ^ight I have a says wind, God be praised. I have had sharp
weather and ^og^: But all my company continu^ with a good courage a^ they began
at the first. News I have ^one, but my ^arkes sail very well all: ^ut the
Ga^ri^ll has no fellow, she spa^d^ hal^e her Sails to all men. ^^u^ I commit
you to God. In last this present afternoon ready to set ^aile.

Your loving friend to use and command Martin Frobisher.
Yours to command Christopher Hall.



Thankful, for his pithy instructing of them: And they, finding him (above
their expectation) skillful: And (more then could be wished for) Careful, for
their well doing, in this their commendable and honorable Attempt: both the one
and the other, became very sorry of their so late acquaintance and conference,
for these their weighty affairs furdering: And greatly misliked their want of
time, The Complement of the perfect Art of Navigations.
sufficient for the Compleme^t and principal points of the Perfect Art of
Navigations learning at his hands. Such points, (I mean), as needed either
great knowledge in the Sciences Mathematical, and Arts Mechanical: or expert
Skill, of many Causes and effects Naturall^ Such points (I say) to their
affairs, and the Perfect Art of Navigations, incident^ he very aptly could, and
right willingly would have dealt with them in: If that pinch of time, would have
so permitted. For, it is very evident, by his description of the Perfect Art of
Navigations (in his foresaid Mathematical Praeface, declared) and also, common
reason, and daily experience, will confirm the same: that, not only, such
skill and furniture, as both here is rehearsed, and in that Praeface is
specified: But, other also, is most needful for him to be fraught withal,
that shall be allowed for an exact Hydrographer, Pylot-Maior, Arche-Pylot, or
Grand-Pylot-Generall of such an Incomparable Ilandish Monarchy, as, this
BRYTISH IMPIRE has been: THE BRYTISH MONARCHY.
Yea, as it, yet, is: or, rather, as it may, and (of right) ought to be: As I
have been informed by him, who can reasonably declare how:

WHom, also, I have heard, often and most heartily Wish, A very Commendable Wish
of a faithful Subject.
That all manner of persons passing or frequenting any our Seas, appropriate:
and many ways, next enuironing England, Ireland, and Scotland, might be, in
convenient and honorable sort (at all times,) at the Commandment and Order (by
Beck or Check) of A PETY-NAVY-ROYALL, A PETY-NAVY-ROYAL.
of Three score Tall Ships, (or more:) but in no case, fewer: and they, to be
very well appointed, thoroughly manned, and sufficiently vittailed.

The Commodit^es ensuing of the Continual Guard and service of the
PETY-NAVY-ROYALL.
The Publik Commodities whereof, ensuing: are, or would be, so great and many, as
the whole Commons, and all the Subjects of this Noble Kingdom, would (for
ever,) bles the day and hour, wherein, such good and politik Order, was (in so
good Time and Opportunity) taken, and established: And esteem them, not only
most worthy and Royal Counsailers, but also Heroical Magistrates, who have
had so fatherly Care for the Communaltie: and most wisely, General Brytish
Security.
procured so General Brytish Security:

France, Denmark, Scotland, Spain, nor any other Cuntry, can have such
liberty, for Invasion, or their mutual Conspiracies, or Ayds, any way,
Transporting: to annoy the blessed State of our Tranquillity: as, either they
have (in times past) had: Or else,
may have, whenever they will forget, or contemn, the Observing of their
sworn, or pretended Amity.

Marchant^, (Said he) of how great value to them, and Consequently, to the
Publik-Weale, of this Kingdom, such a Security were? Whereby, both outward, and
homeward

The wisdom and purpose of that most politik Lawmaker, King Minos, may,
herein, to us, be a sufficient Advertisement. For, Thucidides Lib. prim^.
Diodor. Sic. Lib. 6. Cap. 15. Graecorum primus e^t mari^ Imperio poti^us.

M^nos, king of C^^te, did Reign, about 2860. years ago.


Minos, antiquissimus eorum, de quibus audiuimus, Classem habuit. Et dominatus
est in maxima part eius Maris, quod nunc Hellenicum (.i. Graecum) voca^ur: Et
Regnauit in Cycladibus, and primus Conditor multarum vrbium in illis locis
sui^, Cum inde ei^cisset Cares: and filios suos Gubernatores constituis^et: Ac
Praedandi consuetudinem (sicut consentaneum est) quantum potuit, e mari
sus^ulit: Idque ob eam cansam fecit, vt vectigalia and Redditus magis ad se
peruenirent.

What Abundance of Money, now, lost by Assurance, given, or taken,

Perfect Art of Navigations, are very necessary: Whereby, they may be the better
hable to be divided and distributed, in a greater Navy, with charge of
Maistership or Pylotage, in time of great need?

Gubernau^^.
For, this Art of Navigations, requires a great skill and industry. And, If,
2000 years since, it was found true, among the Graecians, that Ars est enim Res
Nautica, Thucid. Lib. 1. in Oratione Pericl^^.
si quid aliud: Nec discitur obiter: Sed ita ex^rcenda est, vt in eam solam,
cura intendatur, ne obiter s^mul alia agantur: How much more, now, in our
days, may it be truly affirmed: When, it is, ten times more, (in particular
skill, and ingenious feats) augmented, then it was, in those days? They of
this Navy, should oftentimes espy or mee^e the Privy Sownders and Serchers of
our Channells, flats, banks, Pyts, etc. And so, very diligently, deciphring our
Seacoasts: Yea and in the River of Thames also: otherwhile, up to the Station
of the Grand-Nauy-Royall. And likewise, very often, mete with the abominable
Thieves, that steal our Corn, and vittailes, from sundry our Coasts: to the
great hinderance of the Publik plenty of England. And these Thieves, are, both
Subjects and forreyners: and very often, and to to evidently seen: and
generally murmured at: but, as yet, not redressed: for all the good and wise
Order, by the most honorable Senate of the Privy Counsayll, taken therein.

Fourthly, how many Thousands, of Soldyers, (of all Degrees, Omnigatharums:
taken up, on the sudden, to serve at Sea? For, our ordinary Land-musters, are
generally intended, or, now may be spared, to be employed otherwise, if need
be. I think, I have so hard, out of some book, written De Republica.

How many Hundreds of lusty and handsome Men, would be (this

Moreover, what a Cumfort and Sauegard, will it, or may

And, by reason of the foresaid Pety-Nauy-Royall, Yt shall, on land, to do
very valiant Service: and that, speedily: as well, against any of the foresaid
forreyn possible Offenders: As, also, against such of Ireland, Scotland, or
England, who shall, or will traitorously, rebelliously, or seditiously assemble
in Troops, or Bands, within the Territories of Ireland, or England: while,
greater Armies (on our behalf) shall be in preparing, against them: If, farther
need, be. For, skillful Sea-Soldiers, are, also, on land, far more traynable to
all Martial exployts executing: and therein to be more quick eyed and nymble,
at handstrokes, or skaling: better to endure all hardness, of Lodging, or diet:
and les to fear all danger, nere or far: Than the Land-Soldyer, can be
brought to the perfection of a Sea-Soldyer. As (to the same Intent) the
Incomparable, and most expert Graeke Capitain Pericles, in his Oration (had to
the Parliament Senators of Athens) auowched: Comparing their State, to the State
of the Lacedaemonians. Saying: Thucidid. Lib. 1.
Cumque Praesidium alic^bi aduersus nos collocabunt, nocebunt illi quidem: quia
excursionibus vastabunt Agros, and recipient Transfugas: Sed non poterunt simul
and obsidere nos, and prohibere nostras Nauigationes in ipsorum terram: Vbi cos
Class vexabimus. At nos quidem plus habemus Industriae, ad praelia in terra,
ex vsu rei Nauticae: quam ipsi habere possunt ad Rem Nauticam, ex vsu Militiae
Terrestris. Nec facile erunt periti Rei Naualis. Nam, nec vos (quanquam a bello
Persico, Class vtimur, and nos exercemus) satis Idonei estis.



The Brytish Impire.
Ireland, and (by right) Scotland, and the Orknayes also, very Princely,
prudently, and valiantly recovered: that is to say, by the said
Pety-Nauy-Royall, duly and justly Limited: Discretely possessed: and
Tryumphantly enjoyed.

Should not forreyn Fishermen (over boldly, now, and to to
(in manner) home to our doors: and, among them all, deprive us, yearly, of
many hundred thousand pownds: which, by our Fishermen, using the said Fishings,
(as chief), we might enjoy: And, at length (by little and little) bring them,
(If we would deal so rigorously with them,) to have as little portion of our
peculyer Commodity, (to our Ilandish Monarchy, by God and Nature, assigned) as,
now, they force our Fishermen, to be contented with: And yearly
(notwithstanding) do, at their fishing, openly, and ragingly use such words of
reproach, toward our Prince and Realm, as, no true Subjects heart can quietly
digest: And, besides that, o^fer such shameful wrongs to the good laboursom
people of this Land, as is not (by any reason) to be born withal, or endured
any longer: Destroying their Nets, Cutting their Cables, to the los of their
Anchors: Yea, ^^d oftentimes, of Barks, Men, and all. And, of these sort of
people they be, which (other whiles) by color and pretense of coming about
their feat of fishing, do subtly and secretly use Sowndings, and Serchings,
of our Channells, Deeps, Showles, Banks, or Bars, along the Sea Coasts, and in
our Haven Mowthes also, and up in our Creeks, sometimes in our Bays, and
sometimes in our Roads, etc. Taking good Marks, for auo^ding of the dangers:
And also trying good Landings. And (so, making perfect Chartes of all our
Coa^ts, rownd about England, and Ireland) are become (almost) perfecter in
them, then the most part of our Masters, Loadmen, or Pylots, are: to the
dubble danger of mischief in times of War: And, also to no little hazard of
the State Royal: If (maliciously bent), they should purpose to land any
puissant Army, in time to come.

And, as Concerning those Fishings of England, Wales, and Ireland: Of their
places: Yearly seasons: the many hundreds of foreign Fisherboats, yearly
resorting: the diverse sort of fish, there taken: with the appertenances: I know
right well, that (long ago^) all such matter, concerning these Fishings, is
declared unto some of the higher powers of this kingdom, and made manifest, R.
H.
by an other honest Ientleman of the Middle Temple. Who, very discretely and
faithfully has dealt there in, and still trauaileth, (and by diverse other
ways also) to farther the Weale-Publik of England, so much as in him lies.

But, Note, (I pray you) this point very advisedly: That, 1. Note.
As, By his plat, of our said fishing commodities, many a hundred thousand
pounds of yearly Revenue, might grow to the Crown of England, more than (now)
does: And much more, to the Commons of this Monarchy, also: besides the
inestimable benefit of plentiful vitayling, and relieuing, both England: and
Ireland: And beside the increasing of many thousands of expert, hard, and
hardly Mariners: And besides the Abating the Sea forces of our foreign
Neighbors, and unconstant friends: And (Contrariwise) the increasing of our
own power, and force at Sea: 2. Proverb. Principium, plus quam dimidium totius.
So, it is most evident and certain, that Principium (in this Case) is, Plus
quam dimidium totius. As I have hard it verified (prouerbially) in many other
affairs.

Wherefore, the very Entrance, and Beginning toward our SEA-RIGHT Recovering,
And the foresaid Commodities enjoying, at length: Yea, and the only means, of
our Continuance therewith: Can be no other, but by the dreadful presence, and
power, (with discreet oversight, and due order) of the said PETY-NAVY-ROYALL:
being (whole some times, sometime a part thereof) at all the chief places, of
our Fishings: as if they were Publik Officers, Commissioners, and Iusticiers:
by the Supreme Authority Royal, of our most Renowned QVEENE ELIZABETH,
rightfully and prudently thereto assigned.

A Master Key.
So, that, this Pety-Nauy-Royall, is thought to be the only Master Key,
wherewith to open all Locks, that keep out, or hinder, this Incomparable
Brytish Impire, from enjoying (by many means) such a yearly Revenue of
Threasor, (both to the Supreme head, and Subjects thereof,
) as no plat of Ground, or Sea, in the whole world, else, (being of no greater
quantity) can with more Right, The marvelous Privilege of the Brytish Impire.
greater honor, with so great ease, and so little Chardges: So nere at hand, in
so short time, and in so little danger: any kind of way, yield the like, to
either, King or other Potentate, and absolute Governor thereof, whosoever.
Besides the Peaceable Security, to enjoy all the same, for ever. Yea, yearly
and yearly, (by our wisdom and valiantnes duly used) all manner of our
Commodities, to arise greater and greater: as well, in wealth and strength, as
of foreign love and fear, where it is most Requisite to be: and also of
Triumphant Fame, the whole world over, undoubtedly. Also, this Pety-Nauy-Royall,
will be the perfect means, of very many other, and exceeding great Commodities,
redownding to this Monarchy: which, our Fishermen, with their Fisherboates
only could never bring to pas our enjoying the great blessing of God,
appropriat to this Kingdom. Presently.
Fisherboats only, can never be hable to Cumpas, or bring to pas: And those,
being such, as are more necessary, to be cared for (Presently) then wealth.


Therefore, the Premises well wayed, above and before all other, this Plat of a
Pety-Nauy-Royall, will (by Gods grace) be fownd, A Politik. A. B. C.
the plain and perfect A. B. C. most necessary for the Commons, and every
Subject, in his calling, to be carefully and diligently musing upon, or
exercising him self therein. Till, shortly, they may be hable, in effect, to
read before their eyes, the most joyful and pleasant Brytish Histories, (by
that Alphabet only, decyphred, and so brought to their understanding and
knowledge) that ever, to this, or any kingdom in the whole world else, was known
or perceived.

Furdermore, How acceptable a thing, may this be, to the Ragusyes,

Moreover, such a Pety-Nauy-Royall, (said he) would be in The Marts.
for their ordinary Marts keeping (if England may not best serve that turn) And
also, to defend, help, and direct many our

One such Navy, (said he) by Royal direction, excellently well manned, and to
all purposes, aptly and plentifully furnished, and appointed: and NOW.
Now, in time of our F^elix est ea Res^. quae tempore Pacis, bella tractat.
Laurentius Grimalius. ^ol. 71. Libro Secundo de Optimo Sonatore, ad Sigismu^dum
Polonia Regem.
Peace, and quiet every where (Yet), beforehand, set forth, to the foresaid
Seas: with their Chardges and Commissions, (most secretly to be kept from all
foes and forreiners) would stand this Common wealth, in as great stead, as sour
times, so many Ships, would, or could do, if, upon the sudden, and all at once,
we should be forced, to deal, (for removing the foresaid sundry principal
manners of Annoyance:) we being, then, vttorly unready thereto: And the Enemies
Attemp^, requiring speedy (and admitting no successiue) defeating.

To Conclude herein: This Pety-Nauy-Royall, undoubtedly, will stand the Realm in
better stead; then the enjoying of fowr such Forts or Towns, as Callys and
Bulleyn only, could do. For, this, will be as great strength, and to as good
purpose, in any Coast of England, Ireland, or Scotland, between us and the
Foreign foe, as ever Callys was, for that only one place, that it is situated
in. And will help to enjoy The Royallty and Souerainty of the Narrow Seas,
throughout^ and of other our Seas also, more seruisably, then Callys or Bulleyn
ever did: or could do: if all the Prouisoes hereto appertayning, be duly
observed: Only Peace with all foreign Princes intended (by this Navy) to be
preserved.
forasmuch as, we entend, now, Peace only preserving: and no Invasion of
France, or any Enemy, on that Mayn, inhabiting: toward whom, (by Callys, or
Bulleyn,) we need to let-in our Land forces. etc. Much (I know,) may be here
said, Pro, and Contra, in this Case. But, God has suffered such matters to fall
so out: and all to us, for the best, if it be so (thankfully) construed, and
duly considered.

For, when all foreign Princes, our Neighbors: dowtfull friends, or undutiful
People: (Subjects, or vassals) to our Soueraign, shall perceive such a
Pety-Nauy-Royall,
houering purposly, here and there, ever ready and hable to overthrow any their
malicious and subtle secret Attempts, intended against the weal Public of
this most Noble kingdom, in any part or Coast thereof: Then, every one of
them, will, or may think, that, (of purpose) that Navy was made out, only to
prevent them, and none other: And for their destruction, being bewrayed: as
they would deem. So, that, no one, such foreign Enemy, would adventure, first, to
break out into any notable disorder, against us: Nor homish Subject, or
wavering vassal (for like Respects) durst, then, privily muster, to Rebellion:
Or make harmfull Rodes, or dangerous Ryots, in any English, or Irish Marches.

But, such matter as this, I judge you have, or might have hard of, ere now,
(by the worshipful M. Dyer,) and that, abundandy: Seeing, Synopsis Reipub.
Brytanicae, was, at his Request (six years past) contrived: As, by the
Methodicall Author thereof, I understand. Note: A secret Policy herein.
Whose Policy (here) For the Partings, Meetings, Followings, Circuits, etc. of
the Ships (to the foresaid Pety-Nauy-Royall belonging) with the Alterations
both of Times, Places, and Number, etc. is very strange to here. So that, in
Total Sum, of all the foresaid Considerations, united in one: Yt seems to
be (almost) a Mathematical demonstration, next under the Merciful and Mighty
Protection of God, for a faesable Policy, to bring or praeserue this Victorious
Brytish Monarchy, in a marvelous Security: Whereupon, the Revenue of the Crown
of England, and Wealth-Publik,
will wonderfully increase and flourish: And then, thereupon, Sea forces (a new)
to be increased, proportionally: etc. And so, the Fame, Renowm, Estimation, and
Love, or Fear, of this Brytish Microcosmus, all the whole and Great world
over, will speedily be spread, and surely be settled. etc.

Truly, I was carried (almost, ere I was aware) and that, very pleasantly, into
the Consideration of the manifold and Incredible great Commodities, that may
arise to this Kingdom, by A Navy, such, as I have (by good Instruction) spoken
of: whereas, my chief purpose was, and is, to entreat of matters, touching this
Paradoxall-Cumpas, and the perfect Art of Navigations. But, seeing the word of
a Navy, was so nere, in Sownd, to Navigations: And seeing, no Navy (in deed) can
be dealt withal, at Seas, accordingly, without good skill of Navigations:
(though Navigations, may be without a Navy) verily, for so good a purpose, and
so nere to my matter, I favored my fantazy, while it somewhat strayed from my
principal Intent. And not so, neither. For, my principal Intent and his
chiefly, (whose brief Aduertisements herein I would gladly make some Remembrance
of) Is, (as it ought to be, of duty) to be fownd faithful, seruisable,
Comfortable, and profitable to the Political Body of this Brytish
Commonwealth: Every Subject his Duty.
Whereof, we all, be Members, by God his merciful Ordinance. That is to say:
All true Subjects, their Chief Intent, and principal purpose, (in all worldly
their affairs, Arts, Sciences, and Studyes, etc.) ought to be, the procuring,
furdering, mainteyning and increasing of the weal and Commodity Publik, so much
as in them lies, and as, they decently and dutifully may. And, So, the End of
Ends, and yttermostscope of the said Art of Navigations, is such Publik
Commodity, of this whole kingdom intended, and meant: that, from that Publik
fowntain, very easily and certainly, may be derived to every private man, his
proportional part of delitious Refreshing, and vital preservation, in very
godly sort, and politik order.

But, Contrariwise, Where private wealth and commodity is sought

And, as Concerning the former Pety-Nauy-Royall: that I may, as well Report
some part of his Plat, and Considerations, for the Charges thereof bearing and
mainteyning, The ernest wish of a dutiful Subject.
as I have expressed his earnest wish for such a Navy to be set forth, for the
Causes alleged: After this manner, was his entrance into that part of his
discourse. What would that Noble, Valiant, and Victorious Atheniensien PERICLES,
say, if, now, he were living, and a Subject of Authority, in this Brytish
Kingdom? What Common Contribution, would his pithy Eloquence persuade, for the
mayntenance of this Pety-Nauy-Royall? Who, taught by word, and proved in
effect, Vnam Pecuniae parandae rationem putandam, Naues quamplurimas habere:
Alias vero extra eam rations, nullius momenti existimandas. And so,
effectually persuaded the Atheniensiens, Quod, NAVES, Diuitias: Diuitias vero,
aegestatem ducerent. Which AEnigma of Prudent Pericles, is thus (in Latin)
expounded out of the Graeke Suidas. Opes igitur in Terra, Inopiam arbitrari: In
MARI autem sitas esse Opes, existimare: Nihil aliud est, nisi vnas putare Opes,
Naues quam-plurimas: Reliqua, Inopiam iudicare: Cuiusmodi est Pecunia
Spectaculorum, and Iudiciorum. Suadet itaque, Omnes in haec factos sumptus,
Nauibus esse assignandos. And, syns this matter of the Pety-Nauy-Royall, has
somewhat occupied mine Imagination, I have fownd (Said mine Instructor) by that
worthy and excellent Plutarch his Graeke histories, Plutarch in Pericles life.
of Notable men's lives, that this Peerles Pericles (about two thousand years
sins) faithfully and ernestly intending, Pericles flourished An. Mundi, 3537.

About which time, Plato was borne.


to advance the Atheniensien State and Commonwealth: And to make it, after the
best manner, to excel all other, with whom it had, or might have to do:
perceived, the only means, to be Such, as, by manifold, and more forcible
Arguments, the like, must to this Brytish Ilandish Monarchy be much more
auailable, To procure unto it, Triumphant prosperity: And how? By Sea Security:
And how, that? By this Pety-Nauy-Royall, in due Great wisdom it is, to use
OCCASION when it is present.
time provided, and discretely, at Sea mainteyned. For, Pericles wisely
understanding, that no other means was so easy, so ready, and so sure, for
Athens to atteyn to their wished for Souerainty, among their friends and foes,
dwelling about them: But if, they were Lords and Masters of the Seas, nere and
far about them: The marvelous Commodity, of being Lords and Ma^sters of the
Sea.
he would not lose any opportunity of fardering his purpose therein, both by
Ships preparing, and apt men trayning up to Sea discipline. And thereupon would
not, Imperitis Voluptatibus Ciuitatem delinire: But with such exercises delight
them, as, besides other their private Commodities growing thereby, The
Principal and final Publik purpose, might also therewith, be brought to
greater nerenes. As: Sexaginta autem Triremes quotannis emittere, in quibus
multi ex C^^ibus nauigabant: stipendiumque singulis octo These eight Atticall
Mines, were to be rated of our usual and current money, now. 25. pown^s: very
nere: and other wise, to be named a hundred Crowns, For every Mina Attica, was
of an 100. drachmes. Whereof, 8. made the ounce etc.
Minae erat: qui eas pro meditatione, and exercitatione ad Nauticam and Marinam
Disciplinam, perciperet. This Pericles, also, by many his victories, was found
and tried, abroad (on Sea and land) Vir bello fortis and strenuus: as well, as,
a most provident and Circumspect Cownsailor, at home. Nulla enim incidit (eo
Duce) ne fortuita quidem Belli offensio. And, Quam diu in Pace vrbi praefuit,
moderate vsus est Imperio, and tuta Ciuitas erat: Opibusque ac Potentia (ipso
Rempub: gubernante) praecipue florebat: As Thucidides witnesses, and other.
And now behold, what follows (in Plutarch) noted, of some part of that most
comfortable fruit enjoying, which, of the former Ships prepared, And the
Citizens to Sea discipline before hand trained up, was reasonably expected:
Deinde, Magna Class, optimeque ornata, and instructa, Graecas quidem
Civitates, quarum open and subsidio iuuabantur, benign humaneque tractauit:
Vicinis autem Barbaris Nationibus, Regibus and Tyrannis, ostendit Potentiae
molem, licentiamque and audaciam, quacunque libitum foret Nauigantium: Mareque
totum, sub suam ditionem and Imperium redigentium. O, a Sownd Cownsailor and
Courageous Capitain, most mete for the Brytish Sea Royalty recovering. O
Pericles, thy life (certainly) may be a pattern and Rule to the higher
Magistrates (in very many points) most diligently, of them, to be imitated.
But, albeit, that such a Graeke Pericles, can not, readily, for our purpose, be
found out: Yet, it is (Said mine Instructor) of some grave and expert men,
thought probable, that this Politik Devise, and humble Advertisement, can not
so sone take effect, An humble Advertisement.
as all the States and the whole Commons of this Brytish Impire, may, (for the
manifold and weighty Respects declared), both very faithfully desire, and also
very quickly be induced, to be, after a most easy manner, Contributary
thereunto: under the name of A perpetual Benevolence, A PERPETVALL
BENEVOLENCE, FOR SEA SECVRITY.
for Sea Security. For, who is there, of this Kingdom: A true and natural
borne Subject (Spiritual or Temporal,) but very willingly would: and without
any his hinderance, could, yearly forbear (to further and stablish so
marvelous a Benefit publik) The Hundredth Penny, of his Rents and Revenues: and
the Five hundredth penny, of his Goods valuation? And after the same rate, is to
be understood of all and every Fraternity, The peculier specifying, of the
manner of Wealth, you may consider in the Act, of the last Subsidy, granted,
Anno Eliz. 18.
Guyld, Corporation, Mystery, Brotherhood and Communaltie Corporated or not
Corporated, within this Realm of England, Wales, and other the Queens
Majesty's Dominions, their goods and revenues. And that, for only the first
and immediately next ensuing seven years space. Then, for the second seven
years, to pay only, The Hundred and fiftith penny, of his or their Rents and
Revenues, and the Seven hundred and fiftith penny of his or their goods
valuation, yearly. And after 14. years expired, to pay for ever, but the half
of the first Contribution. So that, after the first. 14. years fully expired,
(after the day of this decree and Act making,) the Rate to be, yearly, but The
Two hundredth penny, of his or their Rents and Revenues, The two Hundredth penny,
of Lands and Rents. And the Thousandth penny of goods, (for eeuer) yearly, to be
payable.
and the Thousandth penny of his or their Goods valuation, for ever, And that, I
mean, only, of all natural born Subjects, of this our blessed Island ALBION.
So that, such an exact valuation of their wealth and hability, should not
hereafter (in any wise) be a thing to the Subjects and Commons, praeiudiciall:
And a cause of greater Charge, or burden to them, in their Ceasments (to come)
for any other Publik Service, or Commodity, than heretofore, the most general
manner of favorable As, one worth 500. l^. in goods, to be ceased at 50. li.
leuying, of such other Taxes and Subsidies, has been used. But, Believe,
undoubtedly, After that this SEA SECVRITY (with that favor of the Omnipotent
King, which he chiefly bears to Justice, and Peace: and by the wisdom, and
prudency of the higher powers of this Impire) shall be ones established, and
confirmed, in trade of due execution, (either by means here expressed, or
better), Undoubtedly, O, godly Intent: O long looked for Common wealth.
All other extraordinary TAXES, SVBSIDIES, RELIEVES, and LONES, etc. will
cease, and utterly be needles, FOR EVER. Provided and excepted always, that no
man being in the retinue of the Pety-Nauy-Royall, A Prouiso.
shall with this Contribution be any thing charged: of what degree, or hability
so ever he be. Suerly, Seeing God challenges the Tenth yearly, and First
fruits, continually: in Token of our Thankfulness toward him, and for
Mayntenance of the Levites, that are of the Spiritual Ministry, Truly: the
Tenth of the Tenth, I mean, the Hundredth part of our Revenues, As it is a les
portion then the other, So will many thowsands, be more willing to give it, and
more truly to Reckon it, also, then (now adays) they do the other: And will
Judge This new Benevolence, as a gracious, godly, and politik A Politik Ester
offering.
Easter Offering, toward the Repayring and new Strengthening of the fowndation
and Walls of TEMPLVM PACIS, or Solomon's Temple, (as it were) I mean, of the
whole Brytish Monarchy: Wherein, by this means, we may, in Peace, joyfully,
all the days of our life, and thankfully, serve the King of Kings, and Lord of
Hosts: Little dreading, and les feeling the fury of any forreyn Enemies power.
And thereby, also, be the better hable to cut of, and speedily to

To be plain, and very brief: Who is there, in this whole Kingdom,
so Temperate and Thrifty in his expenses: that dispendeth not, yearly, in very
vayn, and utterly unprofitable Charges, (I will not name some, worse,) the
Hundredth part of his yearly Revenues: and the Five hundredth part of the value
of his Goods? Let every man, vnparcially, examine him self, and his own Case,
therein. But, if we, now, would leave of, such vanity, and (in deed) folly, and
turn that vayn folly to Ripe wisdom: And that superfluous charge, private, to
wealth publik: We may be judged to have given an attentife ear, to the Kingly
Prophet: and to have bin obedient, to his Counsel: Where he says: Declina a
malo, and fac Bonum: Inquire PACEM, and persequere eam. Sir, pardon me I pray
you: for, though I meddle not with the Mystical and spiritual sense, hereof:
(for, I am neither Doctor, nor Bacheler of Divinity: no, nor, of any calling
Leuiticall) Yet, truly, this exposition, or application, is not utterly unapt
for this our purpose, of seeking ways to preserve the Peace publik, with all
forreyn Princes: And to establish the Security thereof, perpetually: So far, as
humain policy, may make reasonable account,
of so likely and circumspect means, duly executed.

It is an old Proverb. A Sword, keeps peace: So, this Navy, by his present
readynes, and the Secret of his Circuits, Herein consist sundry Secrets.
and visitations of sundry forreyn and homish Coasts, observed: will make the
malicious murmurers, and privy malefactors, of all sorts, to keep in, and to
forbear their wicked devises and policies: which, otherwise, against us, they
would adventure to execute.

Moreover, whereas, some are of Opinion, that pretty Speed, Speed.
were needful, in the Premises (as the tickle and perilous State of
Christendom, is, at this present:) Truly, in Respect thereof, we have great
cause to thank God, for the honest and prudent disposition of some Subjects of
this Realm: at whose hands (till Ships enough for the purpose, might advisedly
be built) we may, partly buy, and partly hyre, both in number and goodness,
Ships, sufficient, to serve, in this Case, with all Opportunity.

But, as Concerning any of her Majesty's Principal Navy,
to be among them, now, a^ the first, for Cowntenancing of their Credit, or
furnishing of their Strength, he would not presume, to sp^^ke thereof: referring
(very dutifully) such points, to the great wisdoms of the highest Magistrates,
to consider of.

And, Certainly, if any thing, may (reasonably) be alleged, as a Hinderance,
whereby this Incomparable Ilandish Impire, shall be barred (yet longer) from
tasting of this most delitious, Comfortable, Cordial, and preservative fruit
of * Peace and Tranquillity (politikly Three great Douts and Objections.
from being put in execution: The first thing may be, a Certain Dout, which may
arise among the grave Cownsaylers, and circumspect Gardians





The Touchestone of all Subjects wisdom.
As for the first: If the Touchestone of all Subjects wisdom, that is, the
Queen her most excellent Majesty, and her right honorable and faithful privy
Counsel, do like, this Pety Navy (for the purposes before rehearsed) to be set
s^rth and mainteyned: This Navy to be nothing chargeable to the Queens
Maie^^ie.
So that, the same, become not chargeable to her highness: but be sufficiently
provided for, by the most easy and voluntary Contribution of her loving and
faithful Subjects, and other, (in manner, above specified:) Then, it is to be
said to the Dout of want of Money necessary: That, if the ^oresayd ordinary and
universal Benevolence of England, will not suffice (Though it will amount,

Moreover, in this Case of want, for such a Publik Benefit furdering (as never
was the like thereof, to this Brytish Monarchy so probably, Only the Six
Hundredth Penny of Revenues and Goods jointly.
Rate to be leuyed) of the Inhabitants of Ireland, Iernsey, Garnsey, the
Counties of Northumberla^d, Cumberla^d, Westmerland, the Town of New Castle
upon Tyne, the Bishoprik of Durham: and of all those Cities, Boroughs, and
Towns (only the Town of Barwick to be excepted herein) which by any Letters
Patents, of the Queens Majesty, or of her most Noble Progenitors, (otherwise)
have Exemption, Privilege, and Immunities, from paying any Tax, or Subsidy.
etc. And likewise, of the Inhabitants of the Five Ports, and every of their
Members: And also of the present Inhabitants within the Liberties, of Romney
Marsh. And thereupon, good and sufficient Prouiso, A Prouiso.
to be made, and established, to all and every of the foresaid extraordinary
Ayders, that this their discrete and voluntary Contribution, shall in no case
(hereafter) be unto them any thing praeiudiciall, or dammageable to their
Charter or Privilege of Immunitie.

And this Request, with no little Reason, The Reason, why, of those Exempted
and Priuileged Places, an Extraordinary Aid, is to be requested only this once.
may be offered to their Courtesies, to Consider of: Seeing, not only, it is
for the better and more assured Peace and Tranquillity enjoying, over all
these Kingdoms of England, and Ireland: and for a marvelous and Incredible
wealth, and no les Strength, procuring to the same: But also, forasmuch as, all
the former, ordinarily exempted of all Taxes, and Subsidies, etc. shall, or
may, by the continual Service of this Navy, and also by the Threasory thereof
(hereafter) be greatly aided: and that (peculiarly) to the lessening both of
their
Charges, and also of their
Danger, many ways: In respect whereof, such Privileges, Immunities and
Exemptions, were first granted unto them: and continually have bin, and are
confirmed. So that, such their extraordinary Benevolence, shall not seem
merely given: no, nor so chargeable unto them, as lent Good: But, to be Money
most commodiously (for their peculiar Causes, and behoof) somewhat before hand,
disbursed.

Also, if it were presently known, that this Pety-Nauy-Royall, (undoubtedly)
should, for the foresaid exceeding weighty Respects, very shortly, be
considered of: And with conueniency and Opportunity, furdered to the setting
forth, and use thereof: upon that True and sufficiently warrented Assertion, and
declaration: How many godly Aldermen, Legacies.
Remember: or, be contented to be put in mind, of devout Contribution, or
Legacy, toward the Threasory augmenting, for due mayntenance of the foresaid
Pety-Nauy-Royall?

How many a Bishop, Dean, and Archdeacon, etc. With their Mammon of Iniquity,
to the preservation of Publik Tranquillity: and the mayntenance of the Politik
Security thereof, against Forreyn fraud and force: and all Homish possible
Rebellions?



Could the devout zeal, and Intent of our forefathers, be so Beneficial to
Thousands: And, without any Commandment, or Request Publik, (they being then,
in darkness, and beclogged with Superstition) most gladly, be so liberal, to
the building of so many fair Monasteries, etc. Their decking, and Threasory
within: and enduing with Lands, abroad (far and nere) to their charge, of so
many Hundred Thousand pownds, as, now, (in manner) are inestimable: And shall
we, now, in the clear Sun shine of the pure Truth and Gospel: in the time
of true Religion,
known, and observed (As we will be cownted of,) Shall we, (I say), be either
so ignorant, how to use our Liberality: Or, so cold in Charity: or so blind
in foresight: Or, so privately scraping, and miserably hoording up: or, so
thankles and vnfreendly to the Common State of this kingdom: Where, both, our
Ancestors have received their life, mayntenance and wealth: And we our selves,
no les: and are most desirous, that our Childern, Wives, friends, and
Posterity, should enjoy as great Commodities, by means of the Publik Society,
and the Civil Communalty, being preserved in Secure Tranquillity: Shall we (I
pray you) in virtuous zeal, and Liberality, and chiefly, in these our
Respects, of very needful and certain, very Godly and great Commodities
enjoying, be far Inferior to them, in their Respects, such as they were? We,
being in wealth, and Revenues also, far Richer, now: than they; then were? God
forbid: that so great disorder, and lack of discretion, should be to be
suspected now, or to be douted of, in the people and Subjects, of this Godly,
wise, and rich Kingdom.

And How, can any Man, reasonably doubt of the Hability of so mighty a kingdom,
to set forth, and maynteyn most easily, only Three or Fowrscore Tall and Warlik
Ships: Where, so many Thousand Thousands, of folks, are Contrybuters to the
Charges requisite? Seeing, only Forty or Fifty worthy Subjects, of their own
pryuate Hability, do very easily, and (in manner) contynually, Maynteyn in
trade, at Sea, so many (and more,) such tall Ships: And the same, well
Appointed, well vittayled, well Manned: and they, Duly paid:

And chiefly, Seeing Such a Pety-Nauy-Royall, of Threescore Tall Ships, The
Pety-Nauy-Royall.
and each of them, between eightscore and two hundred, Tun of Burden: And
Twenty other smaller Barks, (between 20, and 50, Tun,) may be new made, very
strong and Warlike: and all, well vittayled, for Six Thousand, Six hundred, and
Sixty Men: and those Men, Liberally waged: And both Ships, and Men, to all
needful purposes, sufficiently appointed: and so maynteyned continually, and
that, very Royally, FOR EVER: for les, then Two Hundred Thousand Pownds
Charges, YEARLY, sustained. The yearly Charges of the Pety-Nauy-Royall. Will
be les than 200000. Pownds Yearly.


Moreover, In Respect of farther by-help, toward the Charges maintayning: Yt is
not to be forgotten or neglected, that for a while, Pirates Goods.
who, either at broader Seas (you may ges, where) or else, nerer hand, have made
Ravening hauock: And now, they, and their Goods, Threasor, Ships, and all, will
fall into the hands, of Our Pety-Nauy-Royall, or some part thereof.

Mary, herein, my Instructor, wishes some Just and needful Order to be
provided, and kept inuiolably. That such Ships, Goods, Threasor: etc, should
not rashly, greedily, or disorderly be dealt withal. As though, we our selves,
also, would be come Parteners with Thieves: where, now, we are BY GOD AND OUR
GOOD QVEENE, constituted, as Discrete Iusticers and faithful Reformers of
manifold Wrongs, at Sea, sustained: And therein, to execute our Charge, as much,
and as conveniently, as we may:

Therefore, after that such a Pyrat, Ship, and goods, are under our safe Custody
bestowed: Proclamation: is, so immediately to be made, that within a Monthe
after, (or six weeks space, at the fardest,) yt may be published in sundry
chief and most frequented Ports, of this kingdom: lying, (as may upon sundry
Circumstances be gathered) most apt, and toward the places, either from whence
those goods came: or toward which, they were to be carried: with all such
necessary Notice and Advertisement published, by the Proclamation aforesaid, as
may be auaylable to help the true Owners to their goods again. Vnic^ique, quod
Suum est, tribuatur.


Those taken Pirates, always, can (herein) best Instruct, where, of whom, when,
and how, they came by that Booty. The wares them selves, the Merchants Marks,
Letters, Bills, Reconings in that Ship or Ships, with those Pirates fownd, will
also give some light to such Merchants here, as are best acquainted, with men
of those quarters and Cuntryes, from whence, such goods came: Or whither they
were to be brought. And, so, after the first Proclamation made, every six
weeks after, the Like to be made, in place convenient, as before: Till a whole
Year and a Day space, be fully expyred, after the Day of the said Pirates taking.

And, if, within that year and a Day space, No Claym be made: That, then only,
and not before, of All such goods, (not yet Claymed), A prouiso.
Sale be made, by Auction Publik. Provided allways, that of wares, which would,
by such length of time, take great hurt, or Perish: (in good order of Auction,)
Money be made in due time. And then, out of all manner of that Auction Money, all
Charges, until that time, sustained, to be first Discharged: And so, the whole
Some thereof, remaining: And the Threasor also of Gold, Silver, and ready Money,
(If there be any,) is to be distributed, after this manner, ( If, is here used,
for that the whole does belong to the Prince, by prerogative: and therefore it
is here half Petitionally, and so, Conditionally reckened upon: As, by the
Queens Royal bountyfullnes, which is always to be hoped upon, in Rebus Re^p
B^ytanicae necessarys: And the rather herein, Seeing none of her Majesty's
Ordinary, standing, or certain revenue is hereby diminished: nor her highness at
any charges about the getting of these Pyrat^: and l^^ng her Graces Customs
are the more increased, when her Seas are free and safe from Pirates.
If it shall by the Higher Powers, be so liked of:)

Divide the Some, and Value of all, into Ten equal Parts. Whereof 4. are to be
allotted to the Threasory of the Exchecquer Royal of our Souerayn: 3. to the
Threasory of the Pety-Nauy-Royall: 2. to be shared among the Capitaynes,
Souldyers, and Mariners: That is to say, among all the Men of those Ships,
which did present an actual service, in the taking and Maistering of the
foresaid Pyrat, or Pirates: and one part of those Ten, to be Due to the Lord
Admiral of England, for the time being.

And as concerning the Shares, which are to be parted among the said Seruitors
of the Pety-Nauy-Royall: This, is Justice: That (generally) it be distributed,
according to the proportions of their Months wages: one compared to the other.
And (particularly,) Od In hoc, multae pereunt Respublicae: Cum qui Bonus and
Strenuu^ est ^^r, nihil plus quam Ig^^^^^ fert l'ramij. Iacobus ^^manc. Lib 9.
De Rep. Cap. 20.
Reward, out of the Nauies Threasor, is to be cheerfully and thankfully given,
to whosoever (at that time,) did most valiant and manfull service. And so, for
a Second, Third, and Fowrth. etc. If it so fall out.

And of all Goods, Threasor, Money, and Iuells etc. By means of the foresaid
Proclamations (or otherwise.) Duly challenged: After all former charges, for
the preserving thereof hitherto, shall be accordingly The Tenth of Pirates
Spoils, truly restored, to be contributed for a courteous recompense.
the Tenth of the clear value, of the so challenged Goods (the said charges
Deducted) Restitution, presently, is to be made to the said Challenger: And
then, that Tenth, is to be distributed, in manner before express^d: by 4. 3. 2.
1. If the same be so liked of, By our Souerayn.

To Conclude then: One other Chapter (yet more) hereunto, A Supplication to the
Queen her most excellent Majesty.
to be so bountiful to the Commons, as to Give, Grant, and Assure FOR EVER,
to the Threasory of the foresaid Pety-Nauy-Royall, all that her Right, Title,
and Interest to the TENTH of all Forreyn Fishings, within the Royal Limits and
Jurisdiction of her BRYTISH SEAS of England and Ireland: where, now, No man, in
her highness behalf, or to her use, receives of any Forreyn Fisherman, any one
Penny, in token of their dutiful acknowleging her Royallty, within her due
Limits of the foresaid Seas.

There is a dubble Title, and a Third Reason, of this Lawful demand: The
Titles, are these: As Well for occupying those Our peculier Seas, and
Seacoasts, (to their great Gayn) otherwise, then as a The use of the Sea, is
Common, but not the Jurisdiction of the Sea. And yet, the same, may be
Praescribed: And the Propriety thereof fall to the Title Royal. Vide Cepolam
Tractat, de Seru. Rust. Cap. 26. Fol. 95. columna. 2. This is Bartolus opinion,
recorded by Cepola. Habentes Iurisdictionem in Territorio Coherente Mari,
dicuntur habere Iurisdictionem etiam in Mari Vicino, vsque ad Centum milliaria:
and possunt ita Capere and punire Delinquentes in Mari, vsque ad Centum
milliaria, Sicut in Terra, in suo territorio. Quod Nota: quia habui de facto
pro Venetis contra Ianuenses. Bart. Cepola. Tractatu Rust. Praediorum. Cap. 26.
Habentes Iurisdictionem in Terra, habent etiam Iurisdictionem, in Mari and eius
Insulis, valde remotis, DVMMODO alteri loco terrestri non sint magis
propinqnae: Angelus, in Lege, Insulae Italiae, ff. de Iudicijs, etc. Vide
Cepolam Cap. 26. vbi de Confinio in Mari statuendo, aeque vt in Terra. Which
comes nere to the AEquitie of this Philosophical Judgment, for the
Determining of the Royal Brytish Sea Limits.
Common Sea Passage: And also, for that they shall not be, nor ought to be
exempt of all Tything, there, toward God his part: where, with les cost, they
receive greater Benefit, then any Husbandman, of Tylth of the Earth. In Respect
(therefore) of Gods Glory: the Royal Authority, in our own Coasts, will Induce
them, By Right and Might, to Remember both God, and Queen, by whose favors,
they are so greatly benefited, within our foresaid Sea Limits.

Which Limits (According to the Judgment of mine Instructor,) Are, in all
places, to be accounted, directly to the Myddle Seas over, Between the
Sea-Shores, of her own Kingdom (and of all Pety Isles, to the said Kingdom
appertayning) and the Opposite Sea-Shoares, of all Foreign Princes: And in all
Seas, lying immediately between any two of her own Coasts or Sea-Shoares, the
whole breadth of the Seas over (in such places) is, by all Reason and Justice,
appropriat to her peculiar Jurisdiction and SEA ROYALLTY.

The Proportion of the Equity of this Judgment, depends somewhat upon the
Civil Law, concerning Partition or Propriety of Isles growing up in fresh water
Rivers. And it is not unreasonable, to deem Seas between diverse next Kingdoms,
to be in like and Analogicall Condition, in respect of King and King: As fresh
water Rivers, are, in Respect of Private Subjects, of one Kingdom, whose
Grownds are lying on both sides of the said Rivers: Though the Stream and
waters thereof (after a sort) be accownted Common.

Diverse private Grounds, have, through them (by Praescription so won, or
otherwise purchased:) Some, Iter: Some, Actum: Some, Viam: Yet, no man, that,
may there lawfully pas, may also lawfully dig, to his gayn (or otherwise) In
Itinere, Actu, or Via, of that sort, without further and due license obtained.
So, all high Ways, are cownted Common and Publik, to pas in: But, for any
Private Man, (though he be a Subject,) in any part thereof, to dig for a Quarry
of Stone, or mine for Owre, or Stonecoles etc. Yt is not lawful: though he
would fill it up again, as well as he found it first. So, here, the Brytish
Seas, are Common, and free for all Ships of all Nations to pas in, and upon:
But, as concerning the Fish, under the water of those Seas: (Which Fish, God
and Nature, brings favorably within the peculier Bownds and Jurisdiction of
Our Royal Precinct:) No Foreign Subject, ought, customably, or otherwise
(presumptuously) therein, to cast Net for the same: or, (usually or
presumptuously) to search, or drag, to his private gayn, therein, without the
especial 1. good leave, of the Majesty of our Souerayn Queen (the undoubted
Lady and Mistres, of the Sea Coasts next adjacent) first obtained: or,
generally to be 2. hoped for:
Or, at the least, not expressly known to the 3. Contrary.

And herein, we deal, neither Injuriously or dishonorably. For, we will, to
all our Opposite Neighbors, also attribute, allow, grant and yield as good
Right and Interest, for the other Moyty of the Seas, to their Shore and Coasts
appropriat, as we do now challendge, for our peculyar half. So, that, this is
most Just, Conscionable, and Godly: Herein, To do, as we would be done unto.
Which point, tends greatly to the Assurance of all good Amity, Justice, and
good Conscience.
and peaceable Traffic contynuing, with our faithful, or loving Neighbors.

And, Seeing Justice, and God, is on our side, what Shame and discredit is yt,
or may it be, to us, with all Christen Nations, (that shall truly understand
the Case:) if we, like faint hearted and degenerated Meacocks, should, now, NOW.
make dainty, shrink, or be afraid, valyantly to season on, and prudently to
enjoy, this so manifest Right and possession of our Sea Limits: and that, every
way? being, in deed (where they are greatest) in respect of other Princes late
Attempts, and Succes, of enlarging and settling their new devised Sea Limits:
not so great a part, as a drop of water, is, in respect of a pottle.

Can that Pety Marchantlyke king of Portingall, have any reasonable Pretense:
either, by Law of God, or Man, to invade and posses: not, Quod nullius in Bonis
erat, aut est: The Law: Quod Nullius in Bonis est, Occupanti conceditur.
But, many other men's Ancient and lawful Possessions, and Kingdoms: though
they were, (and some yet be) Infidels? And that, in a course much longer, from
his own, little, rightful, and original Kingdom, than half the world is
about, in the greatest Circle: yea, after the shortest Cut or Course, which any
way, they can be brought, to the bounds of their late forced Royallty? And
shall not we, have the Courage and skill, rightfully to enjoy the very Precinct
of our own Natural Ilandish walls,
and Royallty of our Sea Limits, here, at home, and before our doors?

Can the Portugale King (by the Popes Authority) cause the King of Spayn, to
make his Nauies and Armados, to forbear coming within any portion of the East
half of the whole world? (as, to enjoy, or be master of any Sea, Mayn, or
Island therein:) And also, will the King of Spayn, be contented, so, to
condescend and allow unto the Portugale, upon condition, that the other half of
all the world (Westward) might be at the like his choys and Jurisdiction? (And
though, in deed, between them two, and before God, this Covenant Negative, is
firm, and inuiolably to be kept: Yet, neither of them, by any law, of God or
Man, can farther season on, Note.
as their New possessions, but, as we, and other, lawfully, may: That is, where
they find, Quod Nullius in Bonis est,) Can they, honorably (Quoth he) thus
presume, and with a Christien, Conscience, Deal, Divide and Share the whole
world, between them two only ( quo Iure, quaue Iniuria) as much as they can:
And will not they,
or must not they, and all our opposite Neighbors, be so reasonable, yea and
honorable with all, as to allow, like, and commend our wisdoms and Industry, to
enjoy the skyrts and Purlewes (as it were) of our Brytish, natural, and
appropriat Sea Limits? And that, in the most decent, peaceable, and freendly
manner, that Princely Counsaylors hearts can devise, and most discrete
Capitaynes, under them, can execute?

Well, (Said he) my Hope is, that under our good Souerayn Elizabeth (ere long,
if it be her pleasure) the AEquity of this Case, will, A Godly and Political
Marriage, And the blessed Ofsprings thereof.
or may, be married, with the Security of the whole State of this Impire: And
that they two, will bring forth COMMON 1. WEALTH, INVINCIBLE 2. STRENGTH, AND
IMMORTAL TRIVMPHANT 3. FAME: Three most lawful Brytish Childern, and long
wished for, of the true, Brytish, and Christian Druides, they being also,
Political Philosophers, and not Sophisticate.

Believe Pericles his Saying, betymes: Thucid: Lib. 1. Page 93.
Magnum est, enim, potiri Mari. Considerate enim, SI INSVLANI essemus,
INEXPVGNABILES essemus. SI INSVLANI ESSEMVS, INEXPVGNABILES ESSEMVS.
Note, here, (I pray you,) a fowrfolde wise purpose, under One golden Saying:
to the Brytish Monarchy (at this Instant) most aptly, applyable: SI INSVLANI
ESSEMVS.

Besides all this: Yt is most ernestly and carefully to be considered, that our
Herring Fishings, against Yarmouth chiefly, have not (so Notably to our great
Injury and los, NOTE.
and the great and Incredible gayn of the Low Cuntries) bin traded, but from
xxxvj. years ago, hitherward. In which time, as they have in wealth, and
number of Boats, and Men, by little and little, increased: and are now become
very rich, strong, proud, and violent: So, in the Race of the self same time
running, the Coasts of Norfolk, and Suffolk, next to those Fishing places
adjacent, are decayed in their Navy: to the Number, of 140. Sail, And they,
from Threescore, to a hundred Tun, and upward: besides Crayers, and other.
Whereupon, (Besides many other damages, thereby, sustained publikly:) These
Coasts, are not Though of Late in the Vlishing and Low Country Trublesome
disorders, Some Few (by Stealing over of vittayles, and other things, from this
Commonwealth) have made them selves privately rich, and so, Hable to set forth,
to Island, and to other places, a Ship or two: who (before,) were far unable
thereto, by their own Wealth, and Lawful trade of Dealing.
hable to trade Iseland, as in times past, they have done: to no little los,
yearly, to the wealth-Publik of this Kingdom.

But, the Herring Busses, hither, yearly resorting, out of the Low Cuntries
(under King Phillip his dominion) are, above. 500.

Besides, an Hundred, or such a thing, of Frenche-men.

The North Seas Fishing, (within the English Limits,) are yearly possessed of
300. or 400. Sail of Flemyngs, so accownted.

The Western Fishings, of Hake, and Pylchard, are yearly possessed by a great
Navy of Frenchmen: who, yearly, do great Injuries, to our poor Cuntrymen, her
Majesty's faithful Subjects.

Strangers also, enjoy at their pleasure, the Herring Fishing of Alamby,
Wyrkington, and White Haven, upon the Coast of Lancashire.

And in Wales, about Dyfi, and Aberysthwith, the plentiful Herring Fishing, is
enjoyed by.300. Sail of Strangers.

But (In Ireland) Baltemore, is possessed yearly, (from July to Michelmas) most
commonly, with 300. Say^^ of Spaniards: entering there, into the Fishing, at a
Streict, not so broad, as half the breadth of the Thames, against White Hall.
Where, our late good King Edward (the Sixth,) his most honorable Privy
Counsel, was of the mind (once) to have planted a strong Bulwark: for other
weighty Respects, as well, as for his Majesty to be Souerayn Lord of the
Fishing of Myllwyn and Codd, there.

Blackrock, is yearly fished by 300, or, sometimes 400, Sail of Spaniards, and
Frenchemen. But, to Reckon all, I should be to tedious to you, and make my heart
to Ache, for sorrow. etc.

Yet, Surely, I think it necessary, to leave to our Posterity, some Remembrance
of the places, where, our rich Fishings else, are, about Ireland: As at Kilsale,
Cork, Carlingford, Saltesses, Dungarwen: Yowghall, Waterford, La foy, The Band,
Calibeg. etc. And all, chiefly enjoyed, as securely and freely, from us, by
Strangers, as if they were within their own Kings peculiar Sea Limits: Nay,
rather, as if those Coasts, Seas, and Bays, (etc) were of their private and
several purchases: To our unspeakable los, discredit, and discomfort: And to
no small danger (farther) in these perilous times, of most subtle Trecheries,
and fickle fidelity. Dictum, Sapienti sat esto.

And, as for Ireland Fishings, some Towardnes of good Policy, and somewhat like
reason of providence, was in the heds of the honorable Counsailors and
Parliament Senators to King Edward the fowrth: When, in the fifth year of his
Reign, this Act, (among sundry other,) was established: That no Ship, or other
vessel, of any forreyn Cuntry, shall go to Fishing in the Irish Cuntryes: And,
for Custom to be paid, of the vessel that comes from forreyn Lands to
Fishing. Farther to urge, or more particularly to specify the Conclusions, and
reasonable Sequeles, as well of the words of the Act, as the Intent of the Act
making, is needles, in this place.

Now, then, who can dout, (to begin withal) but that it is a most reasonable
and freendly Request, of all these forreyn Fishermen, to require, (with all
circumstances of Humanity, Courtesy, and Freendship, therein, and thereto used,)
The Tenth only, Only the TENTH, of Fish taken by Forreyn Fishermen, within
the Brytish Sea Limits, is to be Levied, Discreatly.
of all their yearly Fishings: by such means, as, most conveniently for them,
and to our behoof, best, we may receive the same: In Token, of their reasonable
Acknowledging the ROYALTY of this Brytish Monarchy, in the self same Brytish
Seas, and Coasts, to be, by God and Nature established: where, they receive so
great Commodity: and where, from hence forth, no Injury by any Man of ours,
shall be to them done, or offered: But, their thankfulness to God, (in respect of
Tithe) and their Freendly duty to the Royal Majesty, and Imperial Dignity of
our Souerayn Lady Elizabeth, (within her own Sea Limits) is, thus, in
rightful, decent, and freendly manner, required.

And here, also, the Third Reason of Demanding the foresaid Tenth ( Supra Page
21. Linea. 1^
before spoken of,) is to be plainly specifyed: Which is this. Whereas, the
Herring Busses, and other Forreyn Fishermen, have, heretofore, used to be at
great Charges, with hyring Wafters and certain Ships (of their own Cuntry)
appointed Warlike: for their Guard and Defense, in the time of their Fishings,
within our Brytish Sea Limits: Now (by the Politik order, and valiant Industry
of her Majesty's Pety-Nauy-Royall, executed) No Pyrat, Rouer, or Pilfrer, nor
any Warryour, in Ship of War: No, nor Executioner of any Letter of Mark, shall be
permitted to use, or haunt any of our Brytish Seas: and therefore, None of
these sorts, shall bread unto the Forreyn Fishermen, any Disturbance, Los, or
hyndrance, in the time of their said Fishings: And, besides this, by the means
of the said Pety-Nauy-Royall, (contynually maynteyned at the foresaid Seas,) all
manner of their Merchantlike Ships, at all times, may freely and safely pas,
and frequent, not only the Brytish Narrow Seas, but also Diverse other Seas:
being within, or any thing nere the Walk and Circuits, of the same
Pety-Nauy-Royall. Wherefore, In regard of their said great Charges 1.
Sparing: And for such Security 2.
enjoying in the time of their Fishings, (Which two points, are by our
Pety-Nauy-Royall, supplied, and to them procured): And in regard of the
inestimable Los, and Damage, assuredly preventing, (against all Pirates,
Warriers, and all other violence of Man,) Which, else, might happen to their 3.
Merchantlike, very rich Laden Ships, Hulks, or other, passing within, or nere
the Circuits, which are (ordinarily and extraordinarily) of our
Pety-Nauy-Royall, to be used and frequented: (Whereby, also, among their own
Nation, great Sommes of Money, oftentimes, lost by 4.
Assurance taking, may, now, be saved.) In Regard (I say) of these fowr, their
great Benefits, by this Pety-Nauy-Royall, received: And in regard of the
Aduerte, quod sunt tantum 4 Reges, qui ^nguntur: Hierosolymitanus, Francorum,
Anglorum and Siculoru^. Bart. Cassaneus, F^l. 1^7. De Gloria, M. Ast. Francorum
Rex Regis Angli^ est Tributariu^^ Anglia etiam Rex, Francia, Legitimo
denominatur and insignitur Titul^.
Fyfth inestimable Benefit, and Riches, yearly received, of the Fish ^ taken
within our appropriat Sea Limits. And Sixthly, in respect of the Honor,
Reverence, Privilege, and * Praeeminence, which (By Law) is Due unto her Royal
Majesty, enjoying the Lawful Possession of the Brytish Sea Royalty (Though,
for a few years, last passed, yt has been by Pirates, and other, somewhat
abused:) And Aduerte, qued sunt tantum 4 Reges, qui Enguntur: Hierosolymitanus,
Francorum, Anglorum and Siculoru^. Bart^ Cassaneus, F^l. 1^7. De Gloria, M.
Ast. Franeorum Re^ Regis Anglia est re^butarius Anglea et^am Rex, Francia,
Legitim^ denominatur and insignitur Titul^.
Seventhly, In respect of Gods part, and their Foreign Tithe, Duly and
thankfully paying, of our peculiar Commodities, by them received: And that, the
rather: Because her Majesty does give the same, For the preservation of So
many, of sundry Nations, from the Rauyn of the Pyrat, and mayntenance of Godly
Peace, and good Order, in her Royal Sea Circuits. And Aduerte, qued sunt
tantum 4 Reges, qui Enguntur: Hierosolymitanus, Francorum, Anglorum and
Siculoru^. Bart^ Cassaneus, F^l. 1^7. De Gloria, M. Ast. Franeorum Re^ Regis
Anglia est re^butarius Anglea et^am Rex, Francia, Legitim^ denominatur and
insignitur Titul^.
Eighthly, in Token of their Freendly, Honest, and Just meaning toward us: And
in token of their sincere and unfeigned making great Account of our sound
Amity, and good Peace with them to be continued: In respect, of all the
Premises, A Covenant very Just, Freendly, and Commodious, for both Parts.
The foresaid TENTH of Foreign Fishing (as before) demanded, and agreed upon,
FOR EVER: may seem, both, on our behalf, and also, on the behalf of all the
honest and well advised Forreiners (whom it does, or shall concern,) to be very
reasonably, justly, and freendly demanded, decreed, and accorded upon, FOR
EVER: That is to say, so long time, as the said PETY-NAVY-ROYALL, shall enjoy,
the ROYAL SOVERAINTY of the BRYTISH SEAS: according to this first Plat, or,
some better Institution, thereof.

Note.
Yt is also to be known and Noted, for our Comfort herein, toward the Charges of
the said Pety-Nauy-Royall: That the Tenth, yearly, of all Forreyn Fishings,
Good Cumfort of great Importance.
within the Sea Limits, to her Majesty's Royalty appropriat, is above an
Hundred Thousand pownds, de Claro.

Gwicciardine, in his Description of the Low Cuntry, gives good Evidence of
one portion thereof. As, of our Herring Fishing alone: (what say I, Ours? Nay,
the Flemish Herring Fishings, in our English or Brytish Seacoasts.) For, he
records, that the Low Cuntries, make yearly 490 Thousand pounds sterling, of
those Herring, Salted and Barelled: Rebating the Charge of the Salt. By this,
you may have a gros guess, of farther Reconing.

But, how sounds this Latin Record, in a true and discrete Brytish Subjects
ears: either, in respect of the los sustained, in Revenue: or, in Respect of
some Disgrace, redounding to them, that can Redres the same: if, it be amysse?
Est etiam eodem Sub Principio Autu^ni.

Olaus Magnus Lib. 20. Cap. 28.


tempore, Copiosissima Halecis Piscatura, in Littoribus Angliae and Scotiae:
quae, per Piscatores Flandriae instituitur: a quibus postea, sortitur Nomen:
vt, Romam ille Piscis delatus, Halec Flandrorum appel^^tur. The same Sea, is
called MARE Albertus Krantzius lib 4. cap: 20 Danicae Hist. and lib. 1. cap 39
Norm. Hist. etc.
BRYTANICVM: And the Seacoasts, be called of all Nations likewise LITTORA
BRYTANIAE, Littora Angliae: And yet, the Herring, therein taken, are called
HALEC FLANDRORVM: Nay, we our selves, call them, Flemysh Herring: Yea, we our
selves, being beaten from our own Fishings, and Fishing places, are glad to buy
our own Commodity, of Strangers: Against all Reason, Conscience, Law, and good
Civil Policy.

Yt were a shame, to allege, that they are worthy to enjoy our Fishings, as
Lords thereof: because, they can skill to handle and order the Herring, better,
than Englishmen. We must take heed of that Reason, betimes: For, so, they can
do our Wool, and undressed Cloth: the more wicked or unskillful, are our
workmen at home, the whiles: And the les of our wool, and undressed Cloth,
would have bin put into their hands, to try such Maistries therewith: etc. But,
to our present purpose returning.

Then, By Gods grace, we may (comfortably) thus Answer to this first Dowt, The
Answer to the First Dowbt.
In the name of the whole Body Political. Seeing, Our Revenues, now, and
wealth, are greater, then was our forefathers: And Seeing, we are sufficiently
persuaded of the manifold Publik Benefits, such, as never happened to our
forefathers (for all their Incredible foresaid great Charges) And which, by all
humayn conjecture, are like to ensue: not only to our selves, but also to our
Wives, Children, Kindred, Friends: And so, to this whole Brytish Kingdom,
universally: both now, and ever, after our days: We will (say we) be found,
through Gods help,
so well advised, so discrete, so liberal herein, and bountiful, as, above
all things, this hoped-for Publik Peace, and General Security, chiefly
requires, that we should be:

And the Hundred Thousand pounds, all manner of ways, to these uses,
collected, will amount to be so many, as we thoroughly are persuaded: (These
last discourses, well considered: and two more, which we, of our selves, with
great reason and probability, will annex hereunto) That, contrary to the first
dout, we confidently, now, may trust, that, not only, for this
Pety-Nauy-Royall, a sufficient mass of Threasor, will easily and spedily be
contributed: But, great The Politik bestowing of Some of the Overplus, of the
Pety Nauies Threasor.
Overplus also, will thereof grow (ere long.)

And then, it is intended, That 1. a Part thereof, shall be employed toward the
Relief of such poor Men, as either by Sickness, maym, or vnweldynes of age, are
to be dismissed from the said Navy: and other, to be taken in, in their rooms.
2. Part, toward the finding of the poor Widows, and Orphans of such Men, as
in good service, in the said Navy, have manfully spent their lives: 3. Part,
toward a sufficient Stipend, for 4 Pety-Pylots-Publik, Four Pety-Pilots-Publik.
in 4 sundry, and apt Ports of this Island, to be resident, and ready to serve,
Mathematically and Mechanically, with Quadrants, Rings, Chartes, Sea Compasses,
Sandglasses, and such other furniture, as to the charge and Service of
Pylotage, and Maistership in the foresaid Navy, may be found needful: each one
appointed to xx Ships: (or a Quarter of the whole Pety-Nauy-Royall, how great
so ever it do grow hereafter:) To those Ships, I mean, that are to the Coasts,
next him, assigned. And those 4 Pylots, First, to be chosen out of them, that
have, already, become expert at Sea: And then, The Grand-Pilot-Generall, of
England.
by the Grand-Pylot-generall of England (for the time, being) to be informed
farther, as appertains: And that, every year, once, by their appointed
repair, made unto him, at place certain. Other 4. part, for Preparation of
Store, of things necessary to the said Navy: And each thing, excellent good,
and perfect in his kind. An other 5. part thereof, to be bestowed toward
necessary Havens, Harboroughes, Ports, Blockhouses etc. mainteyning: or, in
most needful places, new making. And 6. Part, in building every year, some
excellent Ships of war, for the foresaid Pety-Nauy-Royall. Some, toward New 7.
Forreyn Discoueries making: Foreyn Discoueries.
for Gods glory, the Wealth-Publik and the Honorable Renown of this Ilandish
Impire. Whereupon, also, depends the First of our two discourses, before
spoken of. For, so may part of the Threasory of the Pety-Nauy-Royall, be
employed, toward New Discoueries making, that, of all such Discoueries, the
half Charges may be Contributed out of the Threasory of the foresaid
Pety-Nauy-Royall: And so,

Greater Publik Equity, is in such a manner of New Societies making: and with
better order,
and more aid, may greater things be attempted, than hitherto have bin: with
the Timorous minds of a Few: and therefore, with their to to straight
Allowances, at their first Onset giving. Whereupon (oftentimes) not only their
first Charges have bin lost: But also, the Attempts discreditted: as of things,
either unlucky, unlikely, or vntr^e: where, none of all these points, has bin
the occasion of such ill Succes.

By this means, all Merchants, and other, that a^e Partners of Priuileged
voyages, shall be, not only vnhindred, of their hoped-for Gayn: Note.
but, rather, greatly furdred, to bring that to pas, by Publik Aid, and to the
Benefit Publik, and Private also: which, before, with much adoo, could scarce
be maistered: to make them (a few parteners of such Societies) to become,
Privately, Welthy thereby.

Hereuppon also, the Queens Majesty's Customs, both owtward and homeward,
will greatly be increased: And all the Commons, and Body of the Realm, will
grow in greater love, with the Merchants Doings: and better like of the
Princes establishing of such Priuileged Societies: When, the wary and careful
Diligence of the Merchant, and the gracious Privilege of the Prince, shall
(PROPORTIONALLY) be beneficial to ONE, A FEW, and ALL. (Which is the chief
Mark, that One, a Few, and All, should shote at.) For, so, shall such Doings,
be as much auaylable to the Commonwealth, then, as, now they are to the Private
Lucre of a Few: And that, with Publik Damage. Seeing, the self same things,
which they Bring in, or Deal with, now, be Deerer bought than they were,
before any such New Trade or Society, therein Priuileged.

Homish Discoueries.
to be made within the Queens Majesty's Dominions, of her Brytish Impire. For,
most certain yt is, that there is Naturally
covered in the Earth, and unknown, in these Dominions, so great Riches of
Lead, Tyn, Copper, Silver, Gold, and Diverse kinds of other very commodious and
proffitable Mineral Matters, as might incredibly increase both the Threasor
Royal, and also of all the Partners Publik and Private: who, should
Proportionally, be at all Charges, about such Mineral Discoueries, to be
throwghly and Maisterly executed.

And by the way: How think you? Does it not sting the Natural born Subjects,
that Strangers shall be grafted into their places: and their Publik and private
Part of Benefit, to be, thereby Cut of? The Strangers Science, and Cunning,
might be recompensed, and their Charges allowed: But, so unnaturally to deal
with the True and Natural Body Politik, yt is not Necessary: I will say no
farther. And, if Strangers, would not so deal, other, would: and will be found.

This thing, being once, by due Publik order and Authority, established: Note.
How many an Owre, and Mine, (very rich,) would be disclosed and pointed to:
Where, they are: and Mineral Examples, of great Cumfort, showed by diverse
Private Men? (Ientlemen and other) who, now, will never open their Mouths, to
disclose the same: Because, in their own Grounds, where their Propriety (by
Gods law, and the Law of Nature) should be, to them, most beneficial of all
other Men: now, (as the manner, yet, is) their part, would be least, of all
other.

But, when, with better Allowance to the Prince, Note.
and the Proprietary Owner of the Soil also, (where any Gayn may rise by
Myning) and with some great Publik Commodity (as to the Threasory of the
Pety-Nauy-Royall,) these Mineral and Metal woorks, shall be followed, Then
Then, Private Men, will not grudge, though 40, or an hundred other Private
Partners, have great Gayn of their peculiar ground. And thereupon (Say we) the
Commodity, all manner of ways,
will arise greater, than ever it will do, otherwise, by such Societies, as
they now are.

And upon this Consideration, that, of their Perpetual Benevolence, for Sea
Security, Some portion thereof, shall be employed to such Publik uses, as both
the whole Body of the Realm, may undoubtedly have some sensible and certain
proof, The Industrious Increasing of the PVBLIK THREASORY, is A Principal
Cumfort to the Commons.
that their Publik Threasory of the Pety-Nauy-Royall, does, as proportionally
increase, as any, or a few Private Men's Coffers else, before, were, or (by good
order) might have bin, by such Societies, well amended: upon this
Consideration (Say we) How gladly, and how readily,
will every Man be Contributer thereunto, after the most easy Rate, and
proportion prescribed? And making this Reconing among them selves, (over and
besides all the former marvelous great Benefits Publik, rehearsed:) Thus, will
they, then, say: The Frank Speech of the wiser sort of the Communalty.
Yea Mary: This, is Commonwealth like, in deed: When, our Common Threasory, is
as carefully, and discreetly augmented, by the wisdom and Authority of the
Higher Magistrates, and the witty and Circumspect travails of our Parteners,
(Merchants, and other, whosoever) As, before, by such Privileges, All, was
intended and procured for the Benefit only of a few. And chiefly, Seeing,
before, the gaynfull wares and things, whereof they were Parteners, were, by
their vnhabilities (not insatiable Covetousness) that dealt with those Attempts:
or by the manner, as they dealt with them, become very dear: and derer, than
before such their Societies established. Reason perfect none can be yielded, why
it should so be: But, this Single soul Allegation, is often repeated: The
great Charges, which hitherto have been laid on their Shoulders, in that
peculiar Trade of their Society. etc. And therefore, as soon as they are in
possession of any thing, to raise Money on: they think it politikly done, to
make presently their Reconing of their whole Charges hitherto sustained: And
so, by and by, to begin to raise the pryces of their things, higher, than they
found them, before their new Societies erected: to hasten, thereby, their
discharge,
or Recompense of Damages (say they) as yet sustained. And so, by that means,
the poor Commons, buying the same wares derer, than before: become (seely
Souls) Contributers to these few Men's private wealth amending: But, to the
decaying and weakening of the wealth and hability of the Commons.

And therefore, by the prescript of humayn Reason, yt is a more perfect
Political Ordonance, so, before hand to ease all such disordered Charges,
that, both, Rich 1. The Intent of these two Discourses in the Commons behalf
annexed.
1. Forreyn New Trades, and great Threasor, may substancially and thoroughly be
brought in, and purchased to this Kingdom: publikly, as well, as privately: And
also, that Gods great Bountifulnes, 2.
2. Covertly bestowed upon this Incomparable Ilandish Monarchy, may, by Publik
Aid also, be so brought to light, handling, and use, as the whole Commons,
hereby, may in their Pety-Nauy-Threasor, become wealthyer: And pryces of such
things as (either one way,
or the other) are gotten: may be either kept low, or brought low: That, the
greatest part of this Kingdom, (which are the poorer sort) may, both, laud
and bles God, for the wisdom, Charity, and Justice, of their Governors
(Whereupon also, they will both better love them: And for very love, be more
affrayd, to di^please them.) And also, universally, all the Realm over, the
true and faithful Blessing and prayer of all honest Subjects, may be
concurrent with, and assistant to, all such honorable and Publik Attempts,
either 1. Forreyn or 2. Homish: Consider before for the Byhelps to increase the
Threasor Publik, Ten General Extraordinary mean^: besides the first Ordinary
Benevolence:
for the better succes thereof obtaining, by Gods mercy: wherewith, these our
two brief Discourses, in this place, shall be finished.

These Ten General, and Extraordinary means, of increasing the Threasory of
the Pety-Nauy-Royall, in this place, may be thought sufficient, for the
probable Dissoluing of the first Dowt.

Answer to the Second Dowt, or Objection.
And, as for the second Objection, yt is more easy and certain, to put that
point, out of all Dowt. I mean, as Concerning Scarsity, and Dearth, of
Vittailes, suspected or Dowted, by the continual vittailing of this Navy.
Mary, herein, some forecast must be used: as, sundry other, in other points,
are. (But not This brief Aduertiseme^t does expres but some of the principal
points, most behoofull for the Commonwealth at this time.
here to be rehearsed.)

For, as the Men, to Furnish the foresaid Navy with, are to be chosen, (and
that, with Diverse Considerations) out of all Shires, and Coasts of this Realm
of England: So, likewise, the vittailes, are, so, to be provided for, that the
whole Realm, may yield the same: every part, according to the fertility of the
Soil: And according to the Store to be reserved, for their Service, actual or
possible,
otherwise. And that is very needful: if, against forreyn Enemy, we should
need a Mayn Army (one, or mo,) by land, any way, toward Coast or Border: or,
for the Grand-Nauy-Royall vittailing, in time of need.

And, seeing the Vittailes, shall be so indifferently, or proportionally
prepared, all the Realm over (as before,) How can any one party, in this
Publik, and Commonwealths Case, find him self straightly, unduly, or
unjustly, dealt withal?

And, as the Vittailes, and Men, should rise, Note this Point.
(after a sort) jointly and proportionally, within the places correspondent:
Store always to be reserved: as I said: (And such, about the River of Thames
chiefly, and within certain miles thereof, And in other Quarters: as, both for
the City of London, continually: And the Grand-Nauy-Royall, The Twenty Ports
for the Pety-Nauy-Royall.
in time of need, may be [as it has bin] seruisable:) So, should the Ships,
receive those Men and Vittayles in, at Twenty sundry Places, or Ports, in
England.

Now, seeing then, this Vittayle, thus orderly and indifferently prepared, out
of all Places, is to be bestowed on 1.
Christen-men: yea, and them, our own 2.
Cuntrymen: And not, on FORREYNER, SCOT, FRENCH, FLEMISH, DANE, or SPANIARD,
etc. And some of them, either Sons, 3.
or Brothers, or Fathers, or Cosens, or Kinsemen, or Singular Friends: Yea,
some, Esquyers, some Knights, some Barons: And some of them, Landlords, to
sundry of us at home, here remaining: 4.
Fourthly, Seeing, this Vittaile is to be bestowed on them, who do, and will
adventure their lives, in all Casualties and dangers of the Sea: And against
all violence of Pyrate, or any open warryor: And that, not, for any their own
Private Quarrel: But for the Publik Safety, and Security, of all England and
Ireland. Not, for thine, and mine, alone: But, for the Safeguard and prosperous
Estate, of Millions of Men, Women, and Children, within this Monarchy, on Land:
(and by this means,) at their ease, quiet, and pleasure, remaining. Considering
then, well and ernestly, all those 4 general Respects: What true and Sound
member, is there, of this Common wealth: and faithful desirer of the blessed
Peaceable Security, of England and Ireland, under our Souerayn Empres, our most
Gracious Elizabeth: who, will not (in a manner) be willing, the Charges to be
borne (part and part like) the whole Realm throughout? wherewith, to bestow
meat and drink, on them, continually: that refuse no one day, or a moment (if
occasion be offered) to adventure their heart blud, life, and Lymmes, for us: And
on Seaboord, continually, to endure hard diet and lodging: for Commodities
innumerable, of both these whole Kingdoms?


But, it is not so meant: as, to have any farther Contribution of purs, then is
before spoken of. But, what is he, (Yea, what is he, I say again?) is he, a
sound member of the Commonwealth: a faithful Subject to our good Queen
Elizabeth: or, a Charitable Christian, that either would (in this Commonwealths
service, or at any time else) Solomon Proverb. 11. Qui abscondit Frumenta,
maledicetur in populis: Benedictio autem super Caput Vendentium.
hide Corn, or other vittayle, from Publik Aid, and Reliefe^: Or else, would not
be content, to receive the due value, and reasonable Price thereof, very gladly?
But, most miserably, wretchedly, couetuously, yea unchristianly, (I will not
say, Traitorously) would desire (now chiefly) to enhance the price of Corn, and
Vittayles, to the great pinching of the poor at home: And perchance, for a
Traiterous means, to hinder the vittayling of the foresaid Pety-Nauy-Royall:
or, to make it odious, or doutfully thought of, to some: as though, it were a
just occasion, of prices of Corn and vittayles starting up:
more now, then before? O, vayn, blind, Covetous Miser (who so ever he be,
that is so minded.) Thou, and thy like, and that of late days, when no Army,
or Navy, has bin to be vittayled, have, on the sudden, and in the time of
great Store, all the Realm over, (even then) God knows, upon what wicked
Intent, or misconstruing, or light Credit giving to Conjecture, found in some
new Three halfpeny Prognostication: have, most unreasonably enhaunsed the
Prices of Corn, Butter and Chese: And at other times, of Beofs, and Muttons,
etc.

I Pray thee, be Reasonable: and think truly: and make Reckening with me,
Christianlike; and like a good Member of this Commonwealth: And, as a true
Subject, to our Souerayn.

What, may be the The true Cause of Dearth.
true cause, of Dearth (whenever it pleases God, to use that his skourge?)
Any other thing, but Want of Corn, or Vittayles? That Want, if God send yt, is
either by the Ordinary Causes Natural, taking effect, according to the
Predestined Plat of this whole wordls aeconomie, and contynuance: Or, it is, by
Extraordinary Means, of Gods sending: And that, Diversely, and in diverse times,
and States of the Corn, or Cattayle etc. These, be true Dearths, upon great
wants of Corn, or Cattayle to be had: Or, at the least, to be had so good, as
is behoofull for Man's bodily Sustenance? All other Dearths, that come not of
Want, by Divine means: are either by 1. Fraudulent Want: As, through Corn, and
Vittayles stolen, and Privily conveyed to our Enemies, or Fickle friends: for
Private gayn only: to the hinderance of the Wealth-publik: Or, by falsely.2
Pretended Want: As the Unchristianlike Practice, of such Caterpillars, and
Ravening Wolves: (Devouring Come and Cattle) would make the Commons believe.
And, when, Abundance and Sufficiency is, to make and Wrast a Dearth: by selling
Three Quarters of Wheat, of the very value (then) of fowr: And Three Oxen, of
the very value of fowr: and so, of Sheep etc. What a Deuouting, and Ravening,
is this? Of eue^y ^owr, to Devour and consume one: and the same, never more to
be hard of, in this Commonwealth? And this, only, for his most Private Gaynes
sake, to be Bagged, or Chested up, for his Idol, to behold or Delight in, As
in his strength, and furniture: ready to mainteyn him, in other wicked
purposes: And (as God knows) foolish Intents^ Pere^ance, with some of that
p^^^ (so miserably and diuelishly scraped together; or violently, in manner,
wrasted out of the poor Commons hands, and mouths) to be at Charges, to
enclose some part of the Commons, Commons Enclosing.
from a poor Village, or Township. With some, to buy his neighbors House, or
Farm, over his head: and so, to make him friends, of the Mammon of Iniquity.
Nay, Nay, make himself, the Careful ^reend, and doting lover, of wicked
Mammon: The Devil Infernal, and not of God, nor his Members: Nor the members
of the Commonwealth: Yea, many at Thousand of such, as, each one of them, is
more profitable and Comfortable to the Weal-Publik of England, than a Thousand
such Mammons dearlings are. I mean the Maryner, the Soldyer; the Ientleman,
Esquyer, and Knight, yea and Baron: now, Tossed and Turmoyled at Seas: being the
Publik Watchmen, Guard, and Champions, for the most Blessed State of
Tra^quillity publik, in this Sacred Monarchy, preserving.

And no les, is the Error and disorder used in this Kingdom, of Dard^narie
Trade, and Monopoly: two grievous hindrances, to the Weale-Publik. Iacobus
Siman^as; Episcopus Pacensis, said very well, in his book De Republica: A ^.
1570. Against our English To To, many Dardana^ies.
dedicated to the King of Spayn: Ne oneret^^ Annona, and ad^o r^rum Vaenalium
Prae^ia, iniqua sint: animaduertere oportet in DARDANARIOS, qui om^ia
praeemunt, vt ea postea Carius vendant. Hi quidem perniciosiss^^m Rebu-publicis
esse s^l^nt ^. Vtpo^e genus auarum, and iniusti Lucri Cupid s^i^ian. And again.
You may also in Vlpian (Lib. 47. ff. Tit. 11) Find Consideration against
Dardinaries.


Multis quoque l^gibus Regijs Occu^sum est Dardanarijs. Sed illa, omniumest
op^i^^, and R^bus-publicis v^^lissima, quae vetat, Ne quisquam vnquam frumen^^m
ema^, vt vendat. Ea enim esse^tum est, vt res frumentaria, justice prae^ijs
vendatur, and vilitas Annonae Consecuta^it. Quamobrem, plurimum Re^publicae
interest, vt ea Lex Conseruetur: and qui secus fecerit, acerrime coerceatur.

And as for MONOPOLY: this, had the same Simancas Noted, out of Z^no his
Constitutions.

Iubemus, ne quis cuiuscunque Vestis, vel Piscis, vel cuiuslibet alterius ad
victum, Lib. 4. C: Tit. 59.
vel al quemcunque vsum pertinentis Speciei, Monopolium audeat exercere: Neue
quis, illicitis habitis Conuentionibus, Coni^rare, aut pacisci, vt Species
diuers^ram Corporam negociationis, non minoris quam inter se statuerint,
vaenundentur. AEdis^ciorum quoque artifices, aliorumque di^ersorum Operum
profess^res, penitus arceantur, pacta inter se Componere, vt ne quis, quod
alte^ Commissum sit, Opus, impleat: ant iniunctam alteri solicitudinem, alter
intercipiut. Si quis autem MONOPOLIVM ausus fuerit exercere, bonis proprijs
expoliatus, perpetuitate damnetur Exilij.

Again, what Reason has any Man to go about, by raising price of vittayles,)
to bread opinion in some simple heds, that this Navy, is occasion thereof: And
so, to cause misliking of that, by one mean: which by his former Publik
Contribution, he pretends to be glad and desirous, that it should continually
be well mainteyned? What dubble and hypocritical dealing were that?
Prouerbium. Altera mann fert Lapidem Panem ostentat altera.
With one hand, to offer Bread: and in the other, to hold a Stone, ready to
give a blow therewith, to the Receiver of that bread? All such sorts, of
Fraudulently or Violently caused Dearths, as, they are very much against the
Commonwealth, and Common Comfort, (to be received of Gods merciful Plenty, or
Sufficiency of Corn and Vittayles sent us:) So, will they now, (as the poor
Commons are in good hope) either, for very Conscience sake: Or, for good zeales
sake, to the due and Reasonable maintenance, of the foresaid Pety-Nauy-Royall,
be utterly abhorred, eschewed, and very well left.

1. And here, also, the poor Commons would (if they Durst) make Supplication,
The Supplication of the Commons.
All, kneeling on Knees, Man, Woman, and Child: and jointly, with one most
humble Voice, Request the Higher Powers, That No more Vittayles (Corn, or
other,) might, under License, (or cullor thereof,) be Transported to Forreyners:
or otherwise, (in this Realm) by Privilege to be used: Than, as may be best,
to the Publik-behoof of all them at home, and for the sufficient and more easy
Mayntenance, of those Valiant and worthy Publik Watchmen, lying out at Seas.

2. And, furdermore, that in time of Excellent Plenty, and good cheap: the
Overplus of Corn, and other vittayles, may be brought to the next Publik
Garners and Stoarhowses, The 20 Publik Garnars, and Stoarhowses.
being at, or nere unto, the foresaid Twenty Ports, to the Pety-Nauy-Royall,
assigned. And there, with Publik Money of the Pety Navy his Threasor, to be paid
for, presently:

3. And from those 20 Garners, or Stoarhouses, only, to be, to places
convenient This Transportation is not Contrary to the first Petition: Vide
Infra Page: 41.
Transportable: under the General The Queens Majesty's General License, For
Transporting of Vittailes by Humble Suit, to be obtained.
License, from her Majesty, before, granted unto the Body of the Pety
Counsel, of chief Officers, to the Pety-Nauy-Royall appointed.

4. And would, also, make humble Request, that the Incredible Abuses of
Purueyers, and Takers of vittayles, and other things, might be more narrowly
seen to, and duly reformed.

5. And Fifthly, the selfsame Brytish and English Commons, Man, Woman, and
Child, with wringing hands, most pitifully lamenting a Remediles
Inconvenience, and heinous Absurdity, already, and to long, committed: would,
most humbly and dutifully, make Petition, that Presently, such vnparciall
providence may be used: Facta, Infecta fieri non possunt. Proinde, (Sero
Saltem) Sapia^t Phryges: Ast, non ninus Sero.
That, from henceforth, The Private Commodity of a few, shall not cause the
Brains of many a thousand, of true and faithful English Subjects, to fly in
the Air. Brains (say they) Arms, Legs, Lymmes, and lives of the Commons, to
be (as the Case may fall out, which, God forbid,) sold after a sort: Though,
not directly, and willingly: yet Indirectly and unwillingly (in respect of our
Cuntry-mens Intents therein:) Seeing the Chiefest Instruments, wherewith to work
so woeful a Spoil and Calamity, are daily (almost) from this Kingdom conveyed:
(No, no, it goes not so nycely to woork: For, open Markets and Sales, are made
of them, in great plenty,) to such Copemens hands, as, No one of them, does
heartily, and will constantly, or can perpetually, wish our prosperous estate.
Nay, such, as, for many years, (almost continually) some of them, have gone
about, to overthrow, and confound, this blessed Brytish Monarchy: And some of
them, such a Nation, whose Records, Chronicles, and Histories, both Ancient,
and of late days, published, do term Englishmen, Their Ancient Enemies^ And,
in deed, in heart, do ernestly desire, and constantly But, what should we heap
up VAE SVPRA VAE, in this Case: To declare also, the Heinous Abusing of this
Commonwealth, by carrying OUR GVNPOWDER out of this Realm, in maruailous great
Abundance? Whereof, (and of good SALTPETER, likewise) all the stoare we could
have provided, from beyond the Seas, would have bin little enough, for most
needful Martial Service, hereafter to be done therewith.
Hope, one day, to handle them so: What thousand crouching Salutations so ever,
(with Monsieur, and, A Vostre Commandment, Monsieur:) and the like
appertenances, of glorious glosing, and deep dissimulation, their great
Necessity (at any time) teaches them to devise, and counterfeit. A true Lesson,
this Old Proverb, will be found, in Such: That, which is bred in the Bone,
will never out of the flesh.

Good God, who knows not, what Prouiso is made and kept, in other
Common-Weal^s, Against Armor carrying out of their Limits? Though our Friends
may Reasonably be thought worthy to be Helped With Armor, against our Common
Enemy: Yet under pretense of such Freendly Dealing, The Common Enemy is not to
be Furnished herewith, as Plentifully, as, either his Case requires, or his
Purse is hable to reach unto. Whereof the Right Honorable Privy Counsel have
very Wisely given warning to the Contrary. And the like Consideration, is to be
had, for Vittayles Transporting.
Such, and to such Places, chiefly, from which, (possibly) they may, thereby,
receive great damage. And shall we, with the most terrible, forcible, and
hurtful kind of Weapon, and Engyn, furnish both the Infidels, and the
Barbarous Princes forreyn, (though, far from us, yet to the destruction of
Christians, notwithstanding.) And also, nere at hand, such kind of people, as,
(which way so ever, the matters in controversy, fall out, finally) will be
found, an Incredible great Scourge, to this Kingdom, by unsuspected means: as
the woeful Commons, make their pitiful Reconing, already: or greatly do dout:
how rude, so ever, some of these people, of them selves, be: And how simple and
slender so ever, their presently seen, and known Navy, is to be regarded.

Therefore, if the Brytish Communalty, may obteyn so much Grace at our Souerayn,
and her most Honorable Privy Counsels hands: As, to enjoy the Benefit of
Sea-Security, by means of the foresaid Pety-Nauy-Royall: Then, such Cast-Peces
of Iren Ordinances, we shall greatly need, for our own Ships furniture: And
also, other Iren works, diverse ways. Fuel also, and Ship Timber (from time
to time) we shall have occasion to use, more, then else, would be occupied. And
then, the want of so many Hundred Pieces (of Iren we mean, and not, of Bras to)
as have bin, of late, from hens transported, will make very evident, the Dubble
Damage, and Treble Danger, possibly, ensuing thereof, when, our Enemies, being
with our store furnished, we must be constrained to provide the like, new: and
so, be driven to tarry a great time. And also, to take the fortune of all
faults, In Iren Pieces, happening. Whereas, otherwise, at leisure, the
Principal good Pieces (in all Respects) heretofore, continually culled out:
And, in * Rupe Tarpeia, of our New Troy, reserved, might (without any
detriment to the Prince or Commons) have now served our turns very well: And
so, the Poor Commons should not have, One, and the same Awle, twice thrust in
their right Eyes. As, to see, and feel again, the Incredible Spoil of Woods,
and Forests, as has bin made, to further Iren works withal: And yet,
(Notwithstanding,) Iren to be now, derer, than it was, when, from beyond the
Seas, we were chiefly served thereof: And our Iren also (yet) worse, then the
forreyn Iren. And our Woods, and Forests, already, so destroyed thereby, that
Fuel, and Timber, of all sorts, (of necessity) in many places of this Realm,
is become, on the sudden, extremely dear: and thereupon, The Prices of
Vittayles, enhanced, by indirect means.
Pryces of vittayles, somewhat the higher raised.

Oh, the Lamentable Spoil of our woods, sundry ways: both, contrary to Laws
made, and also, for lack of sufficient Prouiso, and due execution, as wisely
and justly performed, as either Old Laws made, or new, devised, was, and may
be, a sufficient Token of wisdom Speculatiue, in Lawmakers heds: Omnis La^s
Virtutis, in Action Consistit^ Arist.
But the great Rechelesnes, in the Practice (which only, should be the great
Profit to the Commonwealth, expected) does make us seem great Hypocrites: in
good Laws making: and keeping the Books, wherein, the Laws are recorded: but
not observing the Laws, in our Actions Civil.

A Needful Prouiso, against Unable, Indecent, or Superfluous Buylders.
Peradventure, if (among sundry other Ordonances, for preservation of Wood and
Timber, to be made) some Prouiso were established, by Act of Parliament, that No
man should Buyld, or cause to be Buylt, but with these Three points,
concurring: First, according to his Ability, and not above: Secondly,
according to his State, or Vocation, and not above: Thirdly, according as his
Necessary Affairs, and allowable Commodities, The Commodities, of this Prouiso.
shall require, and not Superfluously: Thereupon, fewer Banckrupts, and more
Housekeepers, would be found: Les Ambition, and more Charity, would be used:
And, Thirdly, better Cheap of more Store and Choice of Ship-Tymber, and other,
would be reserved.

The Penalties of the former Transgressors, might be, after this, or, a better
manner, Decreed. The Penalties of these three manner of Disorderly Buylders.
Of the First, the House and Houses, so built, to be sold, by Auction: And the
Tenth part of the Whole Value, to be contributed, to the Threasory of the
Pety-Nauy-Royall.

Out of which Three manner of Forfets, and Amercements, the Fifth part of the
Forfet, is to be awarded due to him, or them, who truly do give Advertisement
of the said Disorder: and sufficiently does prou^ the same, so to be, as his
Advertisement specifieth.

Now then, how can it stand with the Terms of good Policy, All these great
Incommodities Publik, depending upon our greatly disordred Iren Mines: And yet,
notwithstanding, such Warlike provision, as,
so Derely to the Commons, is wrought and made thereof: For a few Men's private
commodity (we know not whom) to be carried away, far and nere: to our great
disfurnishing: And to the furniture and Strengthening of Moore or Moschouite: or
other Forreyn Prince: French or Fleming: our Secret Mortal Foes, or unassured
Friends? In effect: The Sorrowful Commons, most heartily wishing the
Pety-Nauy-Royall, to be duly mainteyned: And most assured, that thereto, will
be requisite, not only, Stoare of such Iren Cast Pieces,
But also, of Timber, Fuel, and other Iren work: (The The Occasion and due
Reason; of this Petition.
pryces of all which, being by the foresaid disorders, unreasonably enhaunsed)
do greatly dout, that either the foresaid things, will, (by farther disorder,)
become deerer, then they now are: Or else, the Extremity of the pryces, being,
then, made more sensible: the simple Multitude, or some other wrangling head,
will Impute all, to this new devised Policy, of the Pety-Nauy-Royall
mainteyning. And therefore, in this place of Consideration of Pryces and Dearth,
they would have had such a Petition (as before) most humbly moved, to the higher
States. But no one man dare, (I know no just cause why) utter, in The Vnfayn^^^
Zeal of the Publik Commodity; Will Animate the Faithful Subject to ma^e
humble Petition for Red^e^ of great Enormities, as yet.
Dutiful order, the Tenor of the Premises, to the higher powers. Though,
(disorderly) many Thousands do murmur at the matter, in marvelous manner:
when, daily, they find so many Camps (as it were) of Iren Pieces, ready laid
to the Forreyn Market: and for Forreyn Nauyes, or Forts furnishing. Delivering
(thereby) a Rod, of our own making, into the hands of them, who could find in
their hearts, to skourge us with wire whips, as God best knows: And to bring
us, into farther Inconveniences, then, either Dearth of Timber, Fuel, Iren, or
Vittayles, are to be esteemed. But, unto God his most Merciful and Mighty
hands, we commit our principal Protection, now and ever.

And Suerly, if there be any Brytish, or English If Perele^ Pericles be dead,
pore Pletho (as a Passager in the Ship of the Common-welth) By leave, does
utter his Faithful Care, to the Helm-man, Infra, Page 69.
Pericles, now living, who conveniently may, and will, both Zealously take to
heart, and also Circumspectly, and depely look into these, and like Matters:
(Nothing fawning upon Forreyners, Nor to much listening or leaning to their
Aduises, or Devises, best for them selves, and their Purposes: and not for us,
and Ours: Nor fearing Forreyn, or Homish hurt, therefore: Meaning none, him
self) He would not make Strange, though the weaker and Imperfecter sort of
People (Which are so nooselled and embroyed up to the elbowes, Yea, to their
heart roots, with the Insatiable love, of To to Private Lucre, that, therefore,
they care, To to little, for the Publik and Commonweal,) He would not (I say)
be Aghast, though such would Diuilishly Malign him, and Subtily seek his
Discredit, and Confusion: as (in deed) the Atheniensiens, and other, did, to
good Pericles, and other, his like. Yet, for all that, such A Pericles, would
go forward, so long, as he might prevail: observing the wise Precepts, of
Perfect Politik Government. And to such, as fownd them selves grieved, by any
their Private Pain, Hur^, Los, or Chardge, sustained, by means of his
Direction or Cownsaill, for Dutiful, and Needful Service, to be done, to and
for the Commonwealth, ei^he^ Militando,
or, Contribuend^, or otherwise, he would say thus: (For, so, said the True
Pericles:) Thucid. Lib: 2.
Non est mihi inexpectata Indignatio Vestra: Intellexi enim me (...) e^^que ob
caus^^, Vos conuocaui: vt vos admoneam, and reprehendam^^^^ vet mi^^
Succenseti, vel Rebus Aduersis succumbisis. Eg^ enim Iudico, Flo^in^^ Patria,
^^ebus esse Priuatis: quam Florentibus^ Pri^atis, (...) Repub: Nam, (...)
Priuatus tenet Opes, tamen Euersa Patria, simul haec omnia pere^^t^^ Bed^in
Florente Patria, etiam Pauper Ciuis, saluus esse potest. Quando igitur,
Ciuitas, Priuatorum Ciuium Difficultates sustinere Potest: Nemo autem Priuatus
vnus, Rempub. Laborantem Sustentare potest: Iustum est, V^^^ersos E I, opem
ferro: Et non (quod vos nunc facitis) Perterritos Priuatis Iacturis, deserere
REMPVBLICAM.

And in the same Oration.

Omnibus autem Imperantibus accidit, vt In praesentia, in odio sint. Praeclare
autem facit, qui Inuidiam propter Res Honestas and magnas perfert. Odia autem,
non sunt perpetua: Sed praesentem Splendorem, sequi^ur aeterna Gloria. And
again: Vos existimatis, tantum Socijs, vos Imperare. Ego autem affirmo, cum
duae parts Bellantibus vsui sint, TERRA, and MARE: Vos, p^orsus Maris Dominos
esse: Of What Impo^tance it is, To be Lords of the Seas.
and eius partis Cui nunc Imperatis, and Reliqui Maris: SIHAC CLASS, quam
habetis, PROCEDERE VOLVERITIS. Nec vllus Regum, nec vlla Gens, impedire vos in
Mari potest.

In the ATHENIENSIEN STATE, then, if that were True, Much more, may the BRYTISH
IMPIRE Verify that word, absolutely, NOW.

O ALBION, O BRYTAN, O ENGLAND, and (I say) O BRYTAN, again: What is to be
hoped, of the Races of those thy true Noble Courages: fraught with wisdom and
valiantnes: whose worthy Fame (most certainly) is registered all the world over?
God forbid, that it should truly be said: that Only now, in our days, None
can, None may, None dare: or None will, Carefully, and Faithfully undertake to
do so due service to God, so Beneficial to this Impire, so victorious an
exploit for his own Immortal Renown establishing, as, to Merit some part of
a Praeface to the Memorial of his Triumphant Style, such, as the Roman
Pompeius Magnus, did justly deserve, in the Roman Impire. Which, with these
words, by Plin. Lib. 7. Cap. 26.
Pliny is diligently recorded: and for ever (thereby) and Gratefully
remembered: CVM ORAM MARITIMAM PRAEDONIBVS LIBERASSET: ET IMPERIVM MARIS, POPVLO
ROMANO RESTITVISSET: Ex Asia, Ponto, Armenia, Paphlagonia, Cappadocia, Cilicia,
Syria, Scythis, Iudaeis, Albanis, Iberia, Insula Creta, Basternis: Et super
haec, de Regibus Mithridate Atque Tigrane, TRIVMPHAVIT.

Oh, Note. What was the Actual Praeface, and politik preparatiu^ to all these
Triumphs? Was it any other, than, IMPERIVM MARIS, POPVLO ROMANO RESTITVTVM?

God grant us (therefore) the verity and fru^e, of this Sea Souerainty, every
way: And that, with all Opportunity.

To Conclude then, (In this point Answering:) And to end my Conference, with
that kind of People, which either delight in Dearth of Gods sending: or use
(nay abuse) Dearth Fraudulently procured by other: Or, will them selves
Violently force in, And Counterfeit a Dearth: Note the Reasons, wherefore the
Vittayling of the Pety-Nauy-Royall can Cause no Dearth of Vittailes.
And all, for Private Lucre only: (which is a poison to the Body-Politik of
this Kingdom) To those, I confidently affirm: And, Evident and sure it is,
that the Mayntenance of the Pety-Nauy-Royall, can cause no one Grayn, or any
one pound of Beof, Butter, or Chese: Or any quantity of any other vittayle, to
be wanting in this Kingdom: No more, than if no such Navy, were to be vittayled.

And the Reason is: No more Men, are now fed at Sea, thereby,

Secondly, the Vittayles are so Proportionally, and discretely from all

Thirdly, True and speedy Publik Payment also, will help to pleasure Debentur
Bylls, their ouerlong delayed discharge, shall (here) utterly be abolished.

Fourthly, the Pl^^ty^ of (...) (by Princely As, by License granted to the
Pety-Counsayle, of the Pety-Nauy-Royall.
Privilege) duly provided, and discretely saved, and ordered, in our Twen^y
Publik Storehouses and Garners, of the Pety-Nauy-Royall, may in time of True
Dearth (...) not only be a ^aruellous da^e to this Realm, for the (...) Charge
of maintayning so many Thousand English or Brytish Subjects as appertayn to the
Pety-Nauy-Royall: But also (by very good reason) may be deemed, (...) and
politikly made read^: to be seruisable, for the relief, of many an Hundred of
the poor Common^ at home: And that, for pryces, tolerable. I mean, the said
Storehouses, to be peculiarly seruisable every one of them, to such places
(...), as do ^ye most commodiously, or next unto them, to rece^ue the (...).
From some of which places, before (Ordinarily, and in the time of Plenty) part
of the Publik Provision, was gathered into the said Garn^^, or Storehouses.
Which manner of pleasuring the Commons, is very Charitable Justice.



Moreover, this forfetted Provision, by some of the smaller Barks, of the
Pety-Nauy, may very speedily, and with small extraordinary Charges, be carried,
and landed, either in the very place, where (then) the Dearth pincheth the
Commons, most: or, in any other place: from whence, very commodiously, by
farther Landish or Inlandish Carriage of it, (from the Sea side, Or, from any
Haven or Creke,) it may be brought: (yea, if need be), into the very Heart, and
Myddle of this Alli^n.

And here, it is to be Considered, also: that the Money, arising of the foresaid
Charitable Sale, of the forfet, will, the one half thereof, become due to the
Threasory of our Soueraign: And the other half, to the The Threasory of the
Commonwealth.
Cofers of the Pety-Nauy-Royall: which is (in effect) the Threasory of the
Commons, and Commonwealth. And thus, the Private disorder of some one, or a
few naughty persons, is so prudently corrected, that, (besides the deserved
Penalty, laid upon the Offenders Backs: and the Publik Terror, thereby procured
to the like minded Misers,) both the Vittailes them selves, do relieve and
pleasure many Hundreds of honest and faithful Subjects: And the Money thereof,
also, is no les profitable to the increasing of the Threasories, as well of our
most Gracious Queen, as also, of the Pety-Nauy-Royall.

And, Seeing that the accustomed Goodness, (yea the most merciful and
Bountiful aeternall providence) of our heavenly Father, is such, appropriated
unto this I Will of Albion, that, by the The Fertility of this ALBION.
Fertility of the Soil, and due Industry of Man, employed thereto, it is very
plentifully and holesomly hable (one year, with an other, and most commonly) to
Vittayle Note this Hypothesis.
Two times so many more, as the Natural Subjects of this Land are, in
multitude, of Men, Women and Children, (So that, the same, might, by very good
Order, be reserved within this Kingdom.) Who is there then, of any sound
reason, or experience, that can dout, that the An Argument In^oluble.
Necessary Vittayling of the Pety-Nauy-Royall, (The Men thereof, being but a
little Parcel, of the whole Body-Politik, of this Kingdom,) can cause any
undue Want, or Dearth of vittayles?

Seeing, also, by this Hypothesis, Note.
it follows, that within every Three years, space (Ordinarily,) Stoare may be
Laid up, for Six years: or, at the least, for Fowr: to maintayn the whole
Realm: yea, though, for two years together, neither Wheat, not Barley did grow
at all, in the same: or, at the most, did yield (clear) but four graynes, for
one, sowed.

And, where I speak, of Corn and Grayn reserving: I mean, no longer, Store to
be made thereof, then (holesomly) the same may The Norimberg Secret, (or other)
of Corn Reserving well, many years, is to be made a great account of.

Vide Theop. ^anosium. in Epist. prafixa Libell^ P. Rami de Religione
Chris^iana.


serve. Wherein, also, is many a foul fault committed, in this Kingdom: either
by the devilish Greedy guts, over long keeping back their Corn from the Common
Market: or by other, to negligently using it, (in shorter time) reserved.

But, when, Extraordinary plentiful years do come, then, may the Publik
Threasory, feel the great Extraordinary Benefit thereof: (as, before is told,
how:) And, also, the Ordinary Store, yearly be laid up, Notwithstanding.

And, here, you may Note: Note.
that, very seldom, any Dearth, only of God his sending, does continue above
two, or Except that Universal Dearth, in Joseph his time, most
Extraordinarily, continuing Seven Years together: as God had foreshewed, that
it should: G^. 41.
three years, together, continually.

Therefore, I Conclude, that we of this Kingdom, might (upon wise Order taken,
and inuiolably observed,) so enjoy continual Plenty: Or (at the least,)
Sufficiency of all manner of most needful Vittayles: (And of Corn and grayn
chiefly,) that, the price of Wheat, should not, in any Common Market, arise *
above a Mark the Quarter: Rye, x.s. and Barley, viij.s. the Quarter. And, So,
Proportionally, of Peason, and Beans. And Butter, Note this, I pray you. For,
it is One of the Chief and best means, to bring the Pryces of all things
(either Natural, or, Artificial,) to that Temperament, which is mo^^
Commodious, both, for the Buyer, and Seller: And For the Landlord, and Farmer,
all the Realm over.
Not above ij.d. the pound: and Chese, not above a penny the pound, etc. And
here, I use this phrase, Not above: For, rather, the Prices will be les. And
thereupon, you may easily Conclude, that all Laboring Men, Handicraft Men, and
other, may afford their Labors, yea, and wares, better cheap. And so, a
marvelous number of other Commodities, will thereof ensue: whereof, any man of
experience, or good judgment, will sone perceive the Dependency, or
Consequency.

Unto which peculiar great Blessing of God, our enjoying, No certayner,
readyer, and easier means, can be devised, Than, by the Continual Circuits of
our PETY-NAVY-ROYALL: Thereby, (besides many other Commodities, ensuing) either
keeping in, and terrifying the wretched hearts of them, who, unduly would, (else,)
proloyn Corn, and Vittailes, out of this Realm: Or catching them by the back,
as soon as they begin to Cross the Seas, to any forreyn Nation. Of which point,
this may suffice to advertise them, that are faithfully willing, to follow
constantly the Redres, and Reformation of the manifold disorders, herein,
continually committed, against the Weale-Publik of this Brytish Monarchy.

An An^^^r to (...) Want, (...), is m^de.
And, where the Quantity of Vittayles, before hand, together, at once provided,
Makes a Show, of great Waste, either made, or in Danger to be made: (if
Diligent Regard thereof, be not had:) Weak ^rayn has that Man, that would
think Waste to be made, for Laying up together, in a Fortnights space, so much,
as shall not be spent, in Fowrtene Wekes. But, if there should so much be spent
in a Fortnight, as would duly serve the Navy Fowrtene Wekes: Then were there
Waste, indede: And so, some Want, fondly procured, more, than else is needful.
Or, if, under Pretense of Beof Powldring, for the Pety-Nauy-Royall, some Falls
Judas would steal or proloyn A Hogshed, Two, or Six, to send over Seas, to
Forreyner: And that, for Private Lucre: or for a Farther, and Worser Intent,
etc. But, that, and such like soul Disorders, will be left now, (We Hope:) or,
most Narrowly be seen to: As well in Beof, as Butter, Chese, and Bacon, etc.

And, as for Seeing to, or Saving of the Vittayles, that they be not lost: Ye
need not Dowt. For, yt stands them more upon, than so. And, As for Excessive
Feeding at Sea: Who knows not, their Diet to be but Reasonable, and
Sufficient? With Hunger rather finishing their Meals, than with Unwieldy
Carcasses: Ouercharged with Meat and D^ink, As among us, at home, many a
Thousand is?

I Omyt also, to speak of the great Aid of Fresh Vittayles, which the Navy may
have, sundry Ways, at Seas: by Diverse kind of good Fish, (our Men being
sufficiently skillful, now, at length, to prevent or Cure the Skyrby.) As
Pylchard, Whyting, Haddock, Playce, Sole, Cunger, Herring, Burt, Thornback,
Salmon, Bream, Gurnard, Mullet, Mackerell, etc. All, being (most commonly,)
Better, then we have them at Land, brought to us. Which * good Fish, will also,
be a Means, of their spending les Flesh, at Sea: And therefore, to Need the
les, from Land.

So that, If all things be Duly, and Deeply Wayed: besides a great number of
other the Principal Benefits, Redownding to this Kingdom (by the foresaid
Pety-Nauy-Royall:) it is rather thought, that the streict Diet, (in deed, a
moderat, prescribed, and uniform Diet) of our Publik friends at Sea, in the
foresaid Navy employed, will be a means of very much Vittayles, and Flesh
saving: and to help toward plenty finding, on Land. For (As English-mens noted
Vice, or Disorder is:) Of the self same Men, some, would at their Landish home,
or in Alehouses, and Tauernes, eat and drink, more, then Man's nature,
behoofully needs: Or else, some would be more fine, delicate, and costly in
their Diet, then wisdom and discretion would Prescribe them etc. So that, No
dout, can here remayn, that Dearth can have Root, or just occasion, to rise,
or grow in this Kingdom, of this Temperate Diet, allowed to them at Sea: who,
else, ought to have as much, or would have costlyer, and more, if they had
continued on Land.

And, while the Consideration of one great Aid, and Means, A little Digression,
against some Mis-Vse of the Fis^ings of the Noble Rivers of Thames, and other,
within this Realm.
for Flesh to become better Cheap, is in our hands: I think it very needful,
to give you to understand, that by the wicked Wilfulnes only, and evident
fraud, of diverse Subjects of this Realm, There is, yearly, destroyed, more
than Five Hundred Cart-loads of good fresh Fish, within this our I Will of ALBION.
And though, then, not Meat-able, for Man, when they are so destroyed: yet,
within short time after, they would be. And likewise, though, not then, likely
to amount, in the whole Quantity, yearly, to so many loads: Yet, at the time of
their being Market-able (of the Myddle This Phrase, of Myddle-Sort Markat-able,
is to be understood, neither of them which hard and scant are to be judged
Markat-able: Nor of the over grown Fish, and in the Superlatiue Growth (as a
Man might term them,) But only of them, which, most commodiously are
Seruisable: in respect of Profit Publik.
sort) they would evidently appear, so, to be rated: or rather, far above. And
neither, any more Charges, nor yet any greater travail of Man, is to be
employed, for the same sorts of Fish having and enjoying: both, when they would
be (as is said) Markat-able: And also, when the foresaid great haboundance of
Vittayles, by them, might be enjoyed: Than is, when, so abhominably, they are
destroyed, and utterly spoiled.

And, that this brief, and very needful Advertisement, may be found the more
manifestly true, and duly given: You may understand, That, in the River of
Thames only (as my Instructor, by Worshipful Ientlemen, and other Men of
experience, heretofore has tried out) most commonly, every year, by the
Fishermen belonging to some one small Town (or within a little Circuit about
it,) there is destroyed, above a Thousand Busshels, of the young Fry, of diverse
kinds of good Fish: which, in due time of their growth, and by lawful order,
being taken, would have been ^able, to satisfy Two Hundred Thousand Men, one
day: Or, Twenty Thousand Men, ten days: or, Two Thousand Men, an Hundred
days, or, Fowr Thousand Men Fifty, days. etc.

Which Account, depends upon the Rating of every kind of Myddle Markat-able
Fish, Note these Hypo^heses.
to be (one with an other) of Ten times so much meat, as, when, they are
destroyed in such Small Fry, as we mean of: And also, that a Bushel of such
Markat-able Fish, is hable to satisfy 20 Englishmen, One day, for their
sufficient Repaste and Sustenance: (the Bread and drink, requisite thereto,
being excepted.) What is, then, (I pray you) to be rekened, of the Publik
Damage, of 500. Cart loads, of Fish, (yearly) thus destroyed? How may it
(reasonably) any longer, remayn unreformed? Which 500, Cartload, (according to
the former Rate of Myddle Markat-able Fish,) do amount and rise, of only 2400
Bushels of Fry, yearly destroyed.

But, if you suppose to be only 30 Trink-Boats: and that every one of the said
30 Trink-Boat Nets, every day, only for 300, days, in every whole year,
destroy, but one Bushel of very small Fry: The Sum thereof, does amount to
Nine Thousand Bushels of Fry, so destroyed, yearly. Which Fry, when it should
be Myddle Markat-able, would be, (one with an other) of Ten times more Meat and
Fish, than, when, it is so destroyed. Therefore, the Crafts-men of the
Trink-Boats, on the Thames, may, very probably, be accused, convicted, judged,
and condemned, as the most abominable yearly Destructioners of Nynety Thousand
Bushels of Markat-able Fish.

And, if you abridge me, in the number of the days of their Labor, yearly: I
will, then, charge each of their Nets, with destroying daily, more, than a
Bushel of Fry: one day, with an other, every day of their Labor. And I know
(notwithstanding,) how much, I keep me, within my Bounds, yet: How Horrible and
Intolerable, so ever, this Fact, does sound in your ears: who have not
listened to this matter, before now: nor know the Verity thereof, yet.

Of this Nynety Thousand Bushels of Fish, if you will account but every 48
Bushels, (which make six Quarters,) to be a Cart load: the Sum will be 1875
Cart loads, of fresh Fish: which is destroyed, yearly, by the Trink-Nets, only:
And that, in the Noble River of Thames, only. Whereby, it is most evident, that
my first Assertion, of 500 Cart Loads of fresh Fish, destroyed, in the whole
Realm of England, is most undoubtedly true.

So is it, now, also, Probable: that, in all England, by the manifold disorder,
used about Fry and Spawn, destroying, there is yearly Spoiled, or Hyndred,
the Brood of Two Thousand Cart Loads, of fresh Fish, of myddle Markat-able
skantlyn.

The Publik Los yearly caused by the Trink-Boats, Kiddels, etc. is incredible
to them that know not the T^uthe: Or, will ^ot Search, and Examine to the
quick, what V^olent, or, rather Frau^ulent Disorder, is therein Practiced.
The Value, of the foresaid Nynety Thousand Bushels, of fresh Fish, (one with an
other, being rated at five Shillings a Bushel) is Two and Twenty Thousand, and
Five Hundred Pounds, of Current Money of England.

Which quantity of Fish, also, (according to our former Hypotheses) would
mainteyn, for one day, a Thousand Thousand, and Eight Hundred Thousand Men. Or,
Nine Hundred Thousand Men, two days: Or, Three Hundred Thousand Men, six
days: Or, a Hundred Thousand Men, 18 days: Or, Fifty Thousand Men, 36 days:
Or, 25 Thousand Men, 72 days. etc.

And, if, in the River of Thames, Trinker-men only, do not (in your Opinion,
or, in the estimation and knowledge of them, who are somewhat expert in these
Cases,) seem duly charged, with this Incredible Spoil, and Damage Publik: I
will allow, unto you and them, into this Reckening (to make up, the full and
heaped up measure, of this abominable Iniquity) all the Destruction of Fry,
and young Fish, which the 18, or, 19 Tymber-Nets, do yearly make: who are fayn,
every two howrs of the Flud or Tide, to discharge their Nets, for fear of
breaking. I will give you in^ also, the Spoil, which is yearly made with the
Engynes, called Kyddels. And they, are in the Thames, above an Hundred and
Forty. And now, you can not dout, but I have good reason, to warrant you, that
the Destruction and Spoil of Fry and young Fish, made yearly, and that For, by
many other means, the Fry and Spawne of Fish is destroyed: as Partly by the
Statute made Anno 4 Henrici Sep^i. Cap. 15, may appear: and Partly, by our
daily Experience, may be pe^ceyued.
only, by the Three former unlawful Engynes, (occupied in the Thames) does
amount, yearly, to the foresaid Publik los, of 90000 Bushels of Myddle
Markat-able good Fish: in the Total Sum: I mean, when, the same should come
to be, of Myddle Markat-able growth. Though, at the time of their Spoiling
them, they are, in Measure, but Nine Thousand Bushels.

And, because, the 30, or 31 Trinker-Men, not 1. only, are the chiefest Cause,
of the foresaid exceeding great Destruction of FRY, and young Fish, (to the
Intolerable Damage Publik,) but 2. also, lie in the River of Thames, to the
great Annoyance, and Cumber (many times) of the Ships, and Boats, passing
between London, and Grauesend (and farther:) And otherwhile, to the loss, both
of Goods and Lives, of many of her Majesty's Loving, and Faithful Subjects:
What discrete Subject, or true Member of the Brytish, or English Monarchy, is
there, who, in his heart, Does not abhor this Heinous Enormity? and will not,
with his Voice, Heartily, Cry out, and Say: Fie on them, Fie on them: Away with
them, Away with them: Who, so abhominably, convert Man's Meat, to the Feeding of
Much like Disorders, have heretofore been used, about O^sord Haven, in the
County of Suffolk. Read the Statute made Ann^ 4 Henri^^ 7. Cap. 21.
1. Swyne: And Otherwhile, 2. Bury some of their unlawful Spoil of Fry, and
young Fish, in the Shores of the Thames, and Otherwhere.

God, of his infinite Goodness, sends us (Yearly) Evident Tokens, of the great
Habundance, of this kind of good Vittailes, prepared purposely for this part,
of this Brytish Albion: But, these Trynker-Men, Cast Incredible Much of such a
Threasor, before their Swyne, to Battle them withal: And are, (by that
means,) great Hynderers, bot^ to the Wealth, and Relief Publik: and also, to
the Glory of God: Who, would be Duly Glorified, and Praised of many a Thousand
of the Rich, and Poor, who, should be Served, Pleasured, and Relieved, with
the great Habundance, of the Diverse sorts of good and wholesome Fish, Swarming
in this Incomparable River of Thames (from the one end thereof, to the other,)
in very mayn Skulls: If these Publik Enemies of God and, Man, did not (more
than Barbarously, and les than Christianlike,) utterly spoil, and wickedly
tred under their feet, such a Blessing and liberal Gift of our GOD, and most
loving heavenly father, proffered unto us, and in manner, put into our hands.

Very much, more abominable, and more unreasonable, is the wickedness of these
Trinker-men, than was the Disorder, heretofore (and till of late) committed in
Ireland: where, the Inhabitants of diverse Cities and Towns, adjoining nere to
Rivers, that do Eb and Flow (in which Rivers, the Fry of Salmon, Ele, and other
Commodious Fish are bred and nourished) did keep great herds and numbers of
Swyne: which, at low water, they do, or (till of late) did lead, of suffer, to
feed upon the Strands, of the said Rivers: where they do, or did, destroy great
Quantity of Salmon, and Ele Fry: and of diverse other good Fishes: to the great
hurt, and hindrance of Fishing: and the exceeding great damage, of the
Commonwealth. As, by the Act, made against the same, at Dublyn, Anno vndecimo,
of our most Gracious Souerayn Lady, Queen Elizabeth, more at large, may appear.

And, at this present, I am the bolder, to expres my Instructor his feruency,
against the Trinker-Men, their heinous endammaging of the Publik-wealth of this
Kingdom: Seeing, for (about) an Hundred and Fifty years ago, the whole Body of
this Realm, by their Parliament Senators, left unto us, worthy Record of their
vigilant Eye (to find out such Offenses) and their Politik Prouiso: by very
good Justice, either to Cut of the Cause, of so grievous hindrance to the
Commonwealth: or, discreetly to punish the fact (so often, as it should be
Committed) with a Hundred Shillings, to be Forfetted, to the King.

In the Second year, of King Henry the Sixth, these are the words of the
Statute, to our purpose, prudently established: CAP. XV.

The Statute, against Trinker-Men: for Ever enduring.
ITem, it is Ordained, that the Standing of Nets, and Engines, called Trinks, and
all other manner of Nets, which be, and were wont to be fastened, and hanged
continually, day and night, by a certain time, in the year, to great Posts,
Boats, and Anchors, overthwart the River of Thames, and other Rivers of the
Realm, (which Standing, is a Cause and an Occasion of as great, [and more]
destruction of the Brood, and Fry of Fish, and Disturbance of the Common
Passage of vessels, as be the Wears, Kyddels, or any other Engines,) be wholly
defended, for EVER. And that, every Person, that so sets, or fastneth them,
from henceforth, to such Posts, Boats, and Anchors, or like thing, continually
to Stand, (as before is said,) and be duly thereof, by the Course of the Law,
convict: he shall forfait to the King. C.S. at every time, that he is so
proved, in Default. Provided always, that it shall be lawful to the
Possessors of the said Trinks, (if they be of Which (commonly) are so unlawful,
that of a Bushel of Wheat, thrown into the Stream nere before the Net: Three
Pecks of the same (or, the half) may be stayed in the Hose, or Cod thereof: as
Honest Men, full many, will Auouche.
Assise,) to Fish with them, in all seasonable times: Drawing and conueying
them, by Hand: as, other Fishers, do other Netts: and not fastening, or tacking
the said Netts, to the Posts, Boats, and Anchors: continually to Stand, as
before is said. Saving always, to every of the Kings liege People, their Right,

Title, and Enheritance, in their Fishings, in the said Water.

But, what shall any Zealous Lover of Justice, and good Publik Policy, say, or
think, herein? Seeing, so long ago, so Just, sufficient, and easy a Remedy, was
provided, against these Trink-Boats: 1. as well, for the manifold Cumber,
Danger, and Damage, happening by them, to such, as should, and did pas (Up or
Down,) upon the Thames, by Day: and chiefly in the Dark Nights, and Foggy
Weather: As also, against the exceeding great Publik-Dammage, to the Natural
and Ordinary Increase, of very good Fish, (of diverse sorts) wilfully, and very
ungodly, procured by the said Trinker-men, has been, no better regarded?

And, seeing, 2. Suits in the Law, have been, in our days, commenced, and
followed (by virtue of the said Act) against the said Trinker-men: And they,
thereupon Condemned: And yet (that notwithstanding,) their unlawful Practices,
still are continued?

And Thirdly, Seeing, (before our Eyes,) the Damage to the Commonwealth, and
the incredible hinderance to that plenty of Vittailes finding and enjoying,
which God has prepared for us, is, by these Trinker-men procured, more now,
than ever before, most unlawfully, and fraudulently: etiam, cum Calumnia
quadam, to the Pitiful Clemency, and the very great Lenity, used toward them?

Therefore, Seeing, (I say,) that Neither the foresaid very good Law, can fear
them: Nor, the Amercements, (as they are used,) do sufficiently pinch them:
Nor, the manifold just Complaynts (besides Costly Suits, made and had) against
these Trinker-Men, are (yet,) of sufficient effect, to the poor Commons, to be
used herein, according to the Laws of this Realm: But that, they remayn
remedyles, (yet,) and are evidently Spoiled (yearly) of an incredible great
Publik Benefit, by these Trinkerly disordred, and unlawful Fishings (as before
is declared:) How can I, hope, that, upon this very brief, and simple
Advertisement, of my Instructor, These Trink-Nets shall utterly, and speedily,
be cut of,
without any longer sinister means to be used, by any Subjects, to beard,
check-mate, or, to deface so commendable and needful a Statute, as that is,
which before is expressed, against the Standing of any Trink-Nets? But, yet,
for all that, such is my Confidence in the goodness of her most excellent
Majesty: and so, assured I am, her Majesty's heart, to be fraught with pitiful
Compassion, on the Lamentable, and due Complaynts, made, of the great and
excessive hynderance, and damage to her Commons and Subjects wealth and
relief: And, likewise, so well, are we acquainted with the most commendable
Justice, executed by her Majesty's most Honorable Privy Counsel, when duly
and thoroughly they understand the Causes: That, (with calling these things, to
my Remembrance) not only, now, my Hope is revived: but, also, I dare half
warrant the Commons, That Trink-Net-Men, henceforward, shall be impartially
constrained, to use their Trade of Fishing only, according to the Law: and,
Not, as they (most unlawfully and very ungodly,) to long a time have done, and
very abhominably at this present, they do: Yearly destroying far more Fish,
than they send, good, seasonable, lawful, and allowable, to the Markets. For,
the more part of those, which they send, are Unseasonable or Unlawful Smelts,
or Whiting-Mops: Wherein, the Hebber-Boats, only, might sufficiently well, (or,
with much les Publik-dammage) serve: as the wise and expert, are well assured
of it.

Of the diverse, yea the manifold Though all other Abuses be here Untouched,
yet, that unlawful Engyn, at Myll Tails, From Stanes Westward, (called a B V
C K, Wherewith, in some one Night a Bushel of Salmon Fry, is destroyed:) would
Spedely, and Severely, be Abolished.
other abuses, of Fishing: or hyndrances to the same, in this noble River of
Thames, only: to disclose, rehears, and expres the matter, and manner,
particularly, fully, and impartially, it does require a peculiar, and great
Treatise.

But, to Conclude this necessary Digression, withal: I may, aptly enough (and
omitting many other,) Note only two manners of Hyndrances: Which, (easily, and
most quickly) may be redressed: The one, is, of long time used, and (I know
not, why,) permitted: and yet (notwithstanding) is a great Hindrance and cause
of Destruction, to the Western store of diverse kinds of good Fishes. I mean,
above London Bridge^, upward (which is Westward.) And that is, the Fishing with
any manner of Net, in the places, which either for a Season, or in the other,
which are continually exempted from being Fished in, (commonly called
Seueralls, and Rough places.) In which places, what unlawful, or undue
Subtlery is used, to avoid the Roughs, and Stakes, for fear of hurting, or
renting of their Nets, (and yet, to beat, and punch the Beds, or Skulls of
Fish: and by [in manner] thundering s^owncing, thumping, and pashing, or, with
Chayn drawing under the water, etc: to drive the Fish, to their Nets) may
easily be understood, and daily seen, or nightly hard, and perceived. But, with
all men, of sufficient Judgment (in many Respects,) it may be condemned, as a
great hyndrance to the Brood and Store preserving: and a violent breaking, of
the first Intent of the Politik Civil Senators: who, made the Ordonances, for
such Places Seueralling, or utterly Exempting, and reserving vnransakt, and
undisturbed. And though Peter-Men, will make great show of good Argument, to
the Contrary: yet, it is best, to make sure woork: in Circumspectly
establishing the Privilege, and exemption of those peculiarly assigned, and
well known places, of Store and Brood: from any manner of Net casting in the
same, or any artificial disturbance, purposely, therein to be used, for any
Fish taking.

The Second Hyndrance, is the Stinching, Soyling, (or, rather Beslouening,) of
the Thames: Both Shores, and Channels: Where, the yearly Recours, and far more
Plentiful Haunt, than now is, of the Western The Seasonable Repayr, of the
Western Smelt, is a matter of great Importance: Both, for the very who^esome,
and Plentiful Vittayling of Multitudes of all States: And also, for the good
help, of many a poor Fisherman, toward his Maintenance, (for that Season:)
Both for Meat, and Money, for him, and his Family.
Smelt, (which is the Seasonable, and best Smelt) was wont to be. Which kind
of Fish, greatly abhors such Fylthy grownd. And this new, and to bold
Attempt, has, but of very late years, excessiuely, bin enterprised: Not only,
(as I said,) to the great Hyndrance of the best, and most Seasonable Smelt, his
annual Delight, as in times past (and till, of very late) to Return, and abide
in great Plenty, for the space of the whole Season, in the Ancient Place of the
chief Western Smelt Fishing: But, also, to the causing of many loathsome Sights,
horrible Savors, and infectuous euaporations, of such Dunghill stuf: to no
little grief of Sent, and no les danger to the health of very many, of Court,
Cuntry, and City: which, either do frequent, or (now and then) pas upon the
same River of Thames, between the City of London, and Richemond: where (most
usually) our Soueraygn, every year, does make some abode.

Between which two places, as our Soueraigns, (Kings and Queens) have very
often, and (almost) yearly, heretofore, passed by water: So, durst no man, in
those days, so carelessly, and unlawfully annoy, and bestinche the Thames:
either, Banks or Shores, (in that Tract of the River, chiefly: being, also, the
fairest and pleasantest passage, of the whole River:) both, in respect of not
offending, either the Eye, or Smell, of the Majesty Royal: and also, for fear
of breaking The Statute.

THat No Person, or Persons, after the first day of August, next coming, do
cast, or unlade, out of any manner of Ship, Crayer, or any other vessel,
(being within any Haven, Rode, Channel or River, flowing or running to any
Port-Town, or to any City, Borough, or Town, with in this Realm, or any other
the Kings Dominions, any manner of Balast, Rubbish, Gravel, or any other
wrack, or Filth, but only upon the Land, above the Full Sea Mark: Upon Pain,
that every Person and Persons, offending this Act, to lose and forfait, for
every time so offending, * Five Pounds: the one half to the King our Soueraign
Lord, and the other half thereof, to such Person and Persons, as will sue for
the same, by Byll, Playnt, Original writ or Information, in any the Kings
Courts of Record, in which Action, or Suit, no wager of Law shall be admitted,
nor any Essoyne or Protection allowed. Anno 34. Henrici. 8. Cap. 9.

* The Statute against Annoyance, and Infection by Dung. etc.

ITem for that so much Dung and Filth of the yssues and Intralls as well of
Beasts killed as of other Corruptions, be cast and put in Dyches, Rivers, and
other waters, and also within many other places, within, about, and nigh unto
diverse Cities, Boroughs and Towns of the Realm, and the Suburbs of them, that
the Air, there, is greatly corrupt and infect: and many Maladies and other
intolerable Diseases do daily happen, as well to the Inhabitants, and also
Dwellers in the said Cities, Boroughs, Towns, and Suburbs, as to other, thither
repayring, and passing, to the great Annoyance, Damage and Peril of the
Inhabitants, Dwellers, Repayrers and Passers aforesaid. It is accorded and
assented, etc. Anno. xij. Richardi Secundi. Cap. xiij.


Ordonances, generally provided, and very duly appliable to the same Case.

And how, either already, it has offended, or may here after, offend the Eye
and Nose, and be dangerous to the health, as well of the right Honorable, Privy
Counsailers to our Soueraygn, or, of other of the Nobility: or, of the Ladies
and Ientlewemen of the Court: As of very many other also, of all Degrees: any
man may easily judge, that either has those his two * Senses Decorum
observing,

And some, have of late, so much encroached upon the Patience of the Commons
(in this indecent and unlawful filthy Attempt:) yea, so far, as, not 1. only,
by Scattrings, they have annoyed the Channels, and Publik Shoares, Though the
London (...), may do good to the Weste^n Co^^^ields. Yet THE V^^^ MANNER of
Publik An^oyance therewith, to Man, and Fish, is neither Lawful, or Nedefull^
And i^ but a Late Rusticall Attempt, and Easily, may otherwise be ordered: And
those Husbandmen their Land, nothing the L^^ helped, to become Battle, and Fat,
Sufficiently.
with the said Dung: and (in some places, nere the usual Landing of the right
honorable Privy Counsel, and Ambassadors: and of other her Majesty's
Subjects, of all sorts) with the often Recours of the Carts to the Dung boats
sides, have made such Publik Shores, and Stronds, as before, were very clean,
hard, and grauelly, to become (thereby) very myry, and deep to the knees: and
vyly stinking, at the Eb, when the Sun has had any power thereon: And
chiefly, if the wind do carry the Noisome Savor thereof, toward any man: But 2.
also have made two kind of Standing-Leystoofs or Dung-hils: the one immediately
to receive from Boat the foresaid Filth: And the other, not far of: and nere,
or in the High and Publik ways: or in the Lords waste adjoining. Both which
kinds of new devised Dung hills, if heretofore, any Law or Policy did permit,
or rather, not sufficiently prevent: yet (notwithstanding that slight
permission, or want of Prouiso: better Consideration, advise, and examining of
the matter, will or may find good Remedy for the noisome Disorder: and
establish some sufficient As, None of the Foresaid London Stuff, to be laid
within 400 Foot of any high way: nor any to Remayn, or be above 48 Hours
together on any Allowable Wharf, or Leystoof: Made, or Used, on, or nere the
Thames Banks: And that not above the quantity of 4 Cart-Lodes, So to be left
Lying at once. By this, or some better and more streict Order, the great
Multitude of People which pas on, or by, the Thames Sides, would wish some
Reasonable Redres, for their more Commodious, and Healthful Passage, in their
Affairs Private, or Service Publik.
Order: as well, for apt places assigning, or admitting, for certain Leystooss
making: as also, for a very short time limiting for such stuf, lying or
continuing there, to the great Annoyance, and possible Infection, not only and
chiefly of the nere Inhabitants, but of them also, which do and shall pas
thereby: of what Dignity, Degree, or State so ever, they (he or she) are:
English, or Forreiner.

And, though the Husbandmen, therabout, do greatly allow such kind of helping
their poor and hungry erable grounds: more, now, than in times past: yet,
this Notable dangerous, and needles annoying of so many. Thousands, of the
Queens Majesty's loving Subjects: (and that for a very few Husband-mens
fancies) has not helped them, to be hable, or (at the least) admonished them,
to be the more willing, to sell their Corn any better cheap, either at Market,
or at Home, to their poor Neighbors, or, to other. And yet (forsothe) for
their only Private wealth amending, they dare be so bold, or are become so
careless, to annoy, and unlawfully to vex, with lothesome Sights, and unwholesome
Savors, so many, and so much, as they do. Yea, and that, daily: and more and
more. Farther I will not (as now) say, in this unpleasant matter: though I could.

But, in this point, (as in many other,) the poor Commons, and quiet Subjects
of her Majesty, Hope of Amends, and Redres, is very Com^ortable to the Queens
Majesty's very Faithful, obedient, and Quiet Subjects.
do Hope, that some Redres, will speedily ensue. So, that Private Gayn,
Delight, or wilfulnes, shall not so much either rechlesly, craftily, or
violently, devour, or bar the PROFIT-PVBLIK: or, be so Noysom, and grievous,
to the poor Commons: Whose Health and welfare, ought, in all good
Commonwealths, to be carefully procured, and constantly maynteined: as much,
as any Humayn, or their best Policy, can advance, and preserve the same.

The Third and last Dowt, is of the Due, True, and Just, Bestowing, of such a
Mass of Threasor, which yearly will be, Ordinarily, Contributed: and odly,
otherwise, now and then: as by Gift while men are living: Or, by Legacy, after
their Decease: and sundry otherwise. The meaning hereof, is this: That the
Threasor Contributed, may sundry ways be abused. As, Partly, through the
corrupt Nature, and very falsehood of such, as should in Office have the
fingring of yt: Being not contented with their sufficient Salary, and Due
Allowance. Or, by Indiscreet bestowing some part thereof: by wasting it to
other purposes, or uses, than it is meant, intended, and contributed for: one
time or other. Or, by feigned Robberyes: or Los, by Negligent Ways. Or
(perhaps) the Poor Commons, and Body of the Realm, may (to Scrupulously)
settle in their Fansyes, A Special Dowt herein, which they dare not expressly
Declare: As might be, To consider many things, which have been, in times past,
Liberally given to uses Publik, and to Gods great Honor: (As, in those Days,
Christian Religion, was rated.) And the same Gifts, then, most circumspectly
also, by the best Advise of Lawyers, (in Tenor of words) ordered: And with many
other Circumstances, confirmed: Yet, Notwithstanding all that Assurance, And
the Force of Legacy Law: Many a Thousand Pounds Rent, of such Free Gifts, have
been in our Days, by Act of Parliament, turned from the first appointed Uses:
And Therefore, herein also, might the like Alteration be Dowted.

Easily, and Probably, their Fantazies might, An Answer to this Dowt of the
Commons.
in this their Dowt, be satisfied. First, the Cases are very unlike. For,
there, either withowt Advise and Consent of the whole State: Or, of a Simple
Intent,

Secondly, to Prevent the likelihood or possibility of such dangerous Athenes,
upon Occasion, not utterly unlike to this: But, ours, for manifold Purposes, to
us, more Commodious, than theirs, could be to them.

The Peloponnesians, being returned homeward from Attica, Thucidides ( Lib. 2)
records some of the Atheniensiens new Ordonances ensuing: Saying: Post quorum
discessum, Athenienses Praesidia and excubias disposuerunt, in Terra, and in
Mari, sicut volebant per totum Belli tempus seruari. Et decreuerunt Which is,
very nere, Six Hundred Thousand FRENCH Crowns: and understanding those Talents
to be of Silver: So, will one French Crown be Rated at 10 Drachms, Atticall in
Silver.
Mill Talenta de Pecunia in Arce posita, a reliqua summa segregata, separatim
reponenda esse, neque insumenda: sed de Reliqua Pecunia, in Bello sumptus
faciendos. Si quis suaderet, vel decerneret, vt ea Pecunia moueretur, aut in
alios vsus expenderetur, quam cum Hosts Atticam Class and Nauali Exercitu
peterent, and reprimendi essent, Illi Suasori, Poenam statuebant SVPPLICIVM
CAPITIS. Et centum Triremes praecipuas atque instructissimas, quotannis, a
reliqua Class seiunxerant, adiunctis singularum Praefectis: Quibus, vna cum
Pecunia illa, ad nullam rem vti fas erat, praterquam, cum Ciuitas, illa extrema
necessitate and Periculo premeretur. The like Prouiso, has been in sundry other
Realms, established: And in this Kingdom also, ordained: And, in this Case,
full well, and necessarily, may be.

Prouiso, will undoubtedly be had, against all falls and negligent Officers, in
any Service Publik, (to the use and behoof, of the foresaid Pety-Nauy-Royall,
appointed:) That, so sone, as, any of them, shall be sufficiently convicted of
falsehood, in their Office, used: Rigorous and sharp Judgment (according to the
greatness of the fault,) shall pas against them: and they utterly be dishabled
for ever, From all Publik function of Office, within the Realm of England, and
Ireland: upon a Band of Recognisance, taken of their hands, to that Intent. And
the matter, Process and Conclusion, fully to be Recorded, in two books: with the
Offenders Name, subscribed with his own hand: (As, sundry other things, else,
are, for Safety, and Readynes, to be twice, or oftener Registered.) And if any
Officer shall, twice, or thrice, be found a Trespaser, by his own Negligence,
or of any under him: in any matter of Importance, touching his Office: After
due Amends shall by him, or his Suerties, be made, to the Publik Threasory:
That Negligent Officer, shall be put out of his Office, immediately. And, after
this, or some better Rate, all F^ults, and Offenses of Falsehood, and
Negligences, and such like, in every kind of Officers (to the Pety-Nauy-Royall
belonging,) shall diligently (by apt Surueyors) be seen to, and quikly espied:
narrowly sifted, and duly corrected. So that (undoubtedly) such Justice, being
impartially, and speedily used, shall make, that, ere long, all these Officers,
from the lowest to the Highest, shall be tried, approved, grave, honest,
discrete, and circumspect Men: who will deal so justly, carefully, and
diligently, as their Oaths received,
shall bind them: And their sufficient Suerties, shall be answearable for:
And, as, the whole Commons will heartily request them, for to do: and will, most
faithfully promise unto them, and gladly perform (upon their good service, and
due desert) such extraordinary Rewards, and so great, as may encourage any
Christen Man, to deal truly, and justly, in so weighty Affairs Publik: And
may also rejoice any godly man's heart else, to see excellent Virtue, receive such
Publik Honor, Credit,
and Gwerdon.

which, also, incomparably surpasses all Humayn Policy: though the same be
most carefully used, for matters tending greatly and chiefly to his Glory, and
Honor: as, undoubtedly, this does. And so, are the Three former Douts, briefly,
and sufficiently (as this place may admit.) Dissolved, and taken away.

Therefore, Seeing No Dout, or Objection, (worthy of Consideration, or, of any
Importance,) is remaining, to the Contrary of that most zealous WISH, or
rather, SVPPLICATION, which (certainly) is agreeable to the Hearty Desire, of the
most part of all Natural, and Faithful Subjects of this Kingdom, at this
very Present: (upon our own State, both, in it self, chiefly, and absolutely:
And also, in Respect, of our Foreign Neighbors, their unassured Friendship,
being Considered): Why should not we HOPE, that, RES-PVBL. BRYTANICA,
IEPOGLY^IKONBPYT^NIKON
on her knees, very Humbly, and ernestly Soliciting the most Excellent Royal
Majesty, of our ELIZABETH, (Sitting at the HELM of this Imperial Monarchy: or,
rather, at the Helm of the IMPERIAL SHIP, of the most part of Christendom:
if so, it be her Graces Pleasure) shall obteyn, (or Perfect Policy, may
persuade her Highness,) that, which is the Pyth, or Intent of RES-PVBL.
BRYTANICA, Her Supplication? Which is, That, ^TOLO^ E^OPLI^MENO^, may help us,
not only, to ^ POYPION THE L^^ LLEIL^: But make us, also, Partakers of Publik
Commodities Innumerable, and (as yet) Incredible. Unto which, the HEAVENLY
KING, for these many years last past, has, by MANIFEST OCCASION, most
Graciously, not only invited us: but also, has made, EVEN NOW, the Way and
Means, most evident, easy, and Compendious: In-asmuch as, (besides all our own
sufficient Furniture, Hability, Industry, Skill, and Courage) our Friends are
become strong: and our Enemies, sufficiently weak, and nothing Royally
furnished, or of Hability, for Open Violence Using: Though their accustomed
Confidence, in Treason, Treachery, and Disloyal Dealings, be very great.
Wherein, we beseech our HEAVENLY PROTECTOR, with his GOOD ANGEL to Guard us,
with SHIELD AND SWORD, now, and ever. Amen.

TRuly, I can not here let pas, an other Little Discourse, (as there are
Diverse,) of his, much to this Intent. I am not utterly Ignorant, (Said he,) of
the Humors, and Inclinations, of the People of this ALBION, being (now) the
greater Portion, of the BRYTISH IMPIRE. For, although, as well through so many
Conquests, as also, great Resortings hither, of sundry other Nations, there
has been made a Marvelous Mixture of People, of Repugnant Conditions: Yet,
from Year to Year, the General Disposition, of the present Inhabitants, does,
much alike, Alter to this great Imperfection:
That is: Though otherwhiles, they know and Taste of the Best: yet, seldom
time, they do Constantly follow, and continue in the same: I mean now, in
Publik Behavior, Et officijs Ciuilibus: For that, their Civil Conversation,
and Industry, in many points, is nothing so answerable to the Dignity of Man,
As the very Heathens did prescribe Rules for the Government thereof. Let CICERO,
his Golden Book, DE OFFICIIS, be the Evidence against them, to the Contrary:
And that, in those Points, by the Heathen Orator expressed, which both greatly
are agreeable to the most Sacred Divine Oracles, of our IEOVA: and also, for the
Common-Wealths-Prosperity, right Excellent.

I have oftentimes, (Said He,) and many ways, looked into the State of Earthly
Kingdoms, Generally, the whole World over: (as far, as it may, yet, be known to
Christen Me, Commonly:) being a Study, of no great Difficulty: But, rather, a
purpose, somewhat answerable, to a perfect Cosmographer: to find him self,
Cosmopolites: Cosmopolites
A Citizen, and Member, of the whole and only one Mystical City Universal:
And so, consequently, to meditate of the Cosmopoliticall Government thereof,
under the King Almighty: passing on, very swiftly,
toward the most Dreadful, and most Cumfortable Term prefixed:

And I find (said he) that if this The Brytish Monarchy has been Capable of
the greatest Civil Felicity, that ever was any Particular Monarchy, Else, in
the whole world: Yea, so Incomparably, that it might have Co^tended, for the
General Monarchy, with any that has been. If requi^ite Policy thereto, had been
used in Due time, an^ Constantly Followed.
Brytish Monarchy, would heretofore, have followed the Advantages, which they
have had, onward, They might, very well, ere this, have surpassed (By Justice
and Godly, sort) any particular Monarchy, else, that ever was on Earth, since
Man's Creation. And that, to all such purposes, as to God are most acceptable:
And to all perfect Commonwealths, most Honorable, Profitable, and Comfortable.

But, yet, (said he) there is a Little lock of LADY OCCASION, Flickring in the
Air, by our hands, to catch hold on: whereby, we may, yet ones more (before,
all, be utterly past, and for ever) discretely, and valiantly recover, and
enjoy, if not all our Ancient and due Appertenances, to this Imperial Brytish
Monarchy, Yet, at the least, some such Notable Portion thereof, As, (all
Circumstances, duly and Justly appertayning to Peace and Amity, with Forreyn
Princes, being offered and used) this, may become the most Peaceable, most Rich,
most Puissant, and most Flourishing Monarchy of all else (this day) in
Christendom. If A^istotle did Aptly say thus of the Island of C^^^e: Vide^ur
haec Insula ad Principatum Graciae nata, ac praeclare Sita (Polit. Lib. 2. Cap.
8.) much more Aptly, may we, Or might we have said it, in respect of all our
Opposite Neyghbors and ^arder of, also.
Peaceable (I say) even with the most part of the self same Respects, that
good King Edgar had, (being, but a Saxon:) And by sundry such means, as, he
chiefly, in this Impire did put in proof and ure, Triumphantly. Whereupon, his
Surname, was PACIFICVS, most aptly and Justly. This Peaceable king Edgar, had
in his mind (about 600. years past) the Representation of a great part of the
self same Idea, which (from above only, and by no Man's advise,) has
graciously streamed down into my Imagination: being (as it becomes me, a
Subject) Careful for the Godly Prosperity of this Brytish Impire, under our
most Peaceable Queen Elizabeth.

For, EADGARVS PACIFICVS, Regni sui prospiciens Vtilitati, pariter and Quieti,
Quatuor Millia FLORES HISTOR: Radulfus Cestrensis has 4000 only. Consider the
probable Agreement of these Two Place^, afterward, in the Margent. And of these
Two words there, STATVIT, and CIRCVMNAVIGAVIT. And to that STATVIT, does this
word CONSTITVIT somewhat answer^.
Octingentas sibi Robustas congregauit Naues: E quibus, Mill Ducentas, in
Plaga Angliae Orientali: Mill Ducentas, in Occidentali: Mill Ducentas, in
Australi: Mill Ducentas in Septentrionali Pelago FLORES HISTOR: Radulfus
Cestrensis has 4000 only. Consider the probable Agreement of these Two Place^,
afterward, in the Margent. And of these Two words there, STATVIT, and
CIRCVMNAVIGAVIT. And to that STATVIT, does this word CONSTITVIT somewhat answer^.
Constituit: Vt ad Defensionem Regni sui, contra Exteras Nationes, bellorum
Discrimina sustinerent:

O wisdom Imperial: most diligently, to be Imitated. Videlicet, PROSPICERE: to
Foresee: O Charitable Kingly Parent, that was touched with Ardent Zeal, for
Procuring the Publik-Profit of his Kingdom: Yea and also, the Peaceable
enjoying thereof. O, of an Incredible Mass of Threasor, a Kingly Portion, yet,
in his Cosers, remaining: If, then, he had, (or late before,) any wars:
Seeing no Notable Tax, or Contribution Publik, is (Historically) mentioned, to
have been, for the Charges hereof, leuyed. If, in Peace, he him self, flourished
so wealthyly. O marvelous Political and Princely Prudency, in time of Peace,
to Foresee and prevent, (and that, most Puissantly and Inuincibly) all possible
malice, fraud, force, and mischief Forreyn. O most discrete Liberality, to
such excellent good uses, pouring out his Threasor, so abundantly. O faithful
English People (Then) and Worthy Subjects, of such an Imperial and Godly
Governor. O your True and willing Hearts, and blessed ready hands (Then.) So,
to Impart such Abundance of Vittayles, for those Huge Nauies mayntenance. So,
(I say) as, neither Dearth or Famine, seemed (fondly) to be feared of you, for
any intolerable want, likely to ensue, thereby. Nor, prices of Vittayles,
complained of, to be unreasonably enhansed, by you: finding, for their great
Sales, so good and rare Opportunity.

This Peaceable KING EDGAR, was one of the perfect Imperial Monarchs of this
Brytish Impire: and therefore, thus, his Fame remains (for ever) Recorded:
ANGLICI ORBIS BASILEVS, FLOS, ET DECVS AEDGARVS, non minus Memorabilis Anglis
quam Cyrus Persis: Romulus Romany: Alexander Macedonibus: Arsaces Parthis: And
why not, ARTHVRVS ^RYTANIS? Because King ARTHVR his Name Se^e, was a Thorn in
the Saxons eyes, of those Days: and his Name reher^ed, was Odible to their
Ea^es: Who^e Ancestors were by that Bryti^h Arthur^ 12 times, overcome in
Battle.
Carolus Francis: Anno vitae 37mo. Regni sui, cum Fratre, and post, 21mo.
Idibus Iulij, obijt: and apud GLASCON. Sepelitur.

O Glastonbury, Glastonbury: the Threasory of the Carcasses of so famous, and
so many rare Persons, ( Charta Regia Henry's Sec.
Quae olim MATTER SANCTORVM dictaes: and, ab alijs, TVMVLVS SANCTORVM: quam, ab
ipsis DISCIPVLIS DOMINI, aedifica^^m fuisse, Venerabilis habet Antiquorum
Authoritas.) How Lamentable, is thy case, now? How has Hypocrisy and Pride,
wrought thy Desolation? Though I omit (here) the names of very many other, both
excellent holy Men, and Mighty Princes (whose Carcasses are committed to thy
Custody), yet, that Apos^le like Joseph, That Triumphant BRYTISH ARTHVR, And
now, this Peaceable, and Provident Saxon, King Edgar, do force me, with a
certain sorrowful Reverence, here, to Celebrate thy Memory.

Radulphus Cestrens.
This Peaceable King Edgar, (as by Ancient Records may appear:) His Summer
Progresses, and Yearly chief pastymes, were, The Sailing rownd about this Whole
I Will of Albion: Guarded with his Grand Navy of 4000 Sail, at the least: parted
into 4 Equal Parts, of Pety Nauies: each, being of a Thousand Ships. For, so
it is Anciently Recorded. Idem quoque AEDGARVS, 4000 NAVES CONGREGAVIT: ex
quibus, omni Anno, post festum Paschale 1000 Naues ad quamlibet Angliae partem
Note STATVIT^ and CIRCVMNAVIGAVIT: which declares two orde^s of (...) and so
may the Total Some of 4^00 be also True. He S^yling wi^^ h^s NAVY ROYAL^, o^
^00 Ship^, (...) the other Sta^^^^^ty (...) Sa^yes^ (...) MATHEVS WESTMONASTER.
says 4800 sib^ Ro^^^tas Con^^e^au^^ Naue^. So that he did gather (...): And
^lso aff^^meth the Partition into 4 equal P^rts: And names the ^ Stati^n^: a^
ot^e^, do other^ise speake^ of the Seruis^ble Al^er^t^o^ of their Stati^ns So
that one with the other Conferr^d, and imper^e^t ^oniectures of the Writers
b^^n^ So^^at h^^pen, the V^^^y seem^th ro^ to be to^ched.
Statuit: Sic, AEstate Insulam * Circumnauigauit. Hyeme vero, Iudicia in
Prouincia exercuit. Et haec omnia, ad sui Exercitium, and ad Hostium fecit
Terrorem.

Could, and would that Peaceable, and wise King Edgar, before need (as being in
Peace, and Quiet, with all Nations, about him) And Notwithstanding, mistrusting
his possible Enemies, make his Pastymes, so Royally, Politically, and
Triumphantly: with so many Thousand Ships: And at the least, with ten times so
many Men, as Ships: And that, yearly? And shall we, being not assured of such
Neighbors ^rendeships, as may become, to us, as Cruel and Tyrannical
Enemies, as never King Edgar neded to Dread any the like: And they, as many,
and Mighty Princes, as never King Edgar coped with the like? Shall we (said
he,) not Judge it, some part of Wisdom, to Imitate carefully, in some little
Proportion, (though not with so many Thousands,) the prosperous Pastimes of
Peaceable King Edgar, that Saxonicall Alexander? Yea, Prosperous pastimes,
those may be justly cownted, by which, he also made evident to the whole world,
that, As he wisely knew the Ancient Bownds, and Limits, of this Brytish Impire:
So, that he could, and would, Royally, Justly, and Triumphantly Vsus rei, melior
re ipsa.
Enjoy the same: Spite of the Devil, and Maugre the Force of any Forreyn
Potentate: And, all that, so Highly, and Faithfully, to the glory of God,
finally,
intended, and brought to pas: As the Wisest, and Godlyest Prelates, and
Cownsailors of those Days, (so cownted of, and recorded,) could best advise or
direct him: Or (Perchance,) but sincerely Commend, and Dutifully encourage him,
in: He being, of himself, so bent: As, purposing, first, Inuincibly to Fortify
the Chiefest and Uttermost Walls of his Ilandish Monarchy, The C^ief Walls of
t^is Ilandish Monarchy, ought to ^e P^udertly (...), Valiantly Guarded, and
Diligently, by Sea-Spye and Watchman, to be kept in Security, from all Sudden
Approach, of the ^nemy by Sea.
against all Forreyn Encombrance possible: And in that Fortification Furdering,
and Assuring, to trust best his own Oversight, and Judgment: in yearly vewing
the same, in every Quarter thereof: And that, (as it were) for his Pastime
Imperial, also, in the Summer Time: to the end, that afterward, In all
Security, he might, in Winter time Vacate, and Videte quoniam Ego sum Dominus,
Psalm: 45.
( VACARE:) be at convenient Leisure, On Land: chiefly, to set forth Gods Due
Honor: And Secondly, to Understand, and Diligently to Listen to the Causes and
Complaynts, of his Commons. For, (As Mathaeus Westmonastariensis, of him, to
his Immortal Commendation, has left us a Remembrance:)

Habebat autem That is: Beside his Yearly Sea Progres.
praeterea Consuetudinem, per omnes Regni Prouincias transire: Vt intelligeret,
quomodo Legum Iura, and suorum Statuta Decretorum, a Principibus obseruarentur:
Et, ne Pauperes a Potentibus praeiudicium passi, opprimeren^ur, d^ligenter
inuestigare Solebat. In By this foresaid Navy, mainteyning.
vno, FORTITVDINI, In altero, IVSTITIAE studens: Et Reipub. Regnique Vtilitati
consulens, in Vtroque. Hinc, HOSTIBVS circumquaque TIMOR, Et AMOR omnium erg^
eum ex^reuerat SVBDITORVM.

Thus, we see, how, in Take time, while Time is: for Time will away.
Opportunity, this Peaceable Edgar, procured, to this Impire, such prosperous
Security: That his true and faithful Subjects, all manner of ways, (that is,
at home, and also at Sea, both outward and inward,) might peaceably, Safely,
and Securely, employ their wits and trauayles, for the marvelous enritching of
this Kingdom, and pleasuring very many other: Carrying forth, the Natural
Commodities of this Land, abounding here, above our necessary uses: (and due
Store reserved): And likewise (again), Furnishing the same, with all necessary
(and not superfluous) Forreyn Commodities: fet from far, or Forreyn Cuntryes.
This, was, in deed (as before is Recorded) a Kingly Providence: Kingly
Providence.
Reipub. Regnique Vtilitati Consulens, etc. Besides which great Vtility and
Profit publik, foresene: and by this means, enjoyed: he him self, used most
gladly the Advantage of that Security, in ministering of Justice: Or causing the
same to be executed, all his Kingdom over: Not Squeymi^hly, frowningly, or
skornfully shunning the ragged and tattered sleue of any Herem, our Souerayn
Elizabeth is a most g^^cious Charitable, and Careful Iusticer.
Suppliant, holding up to him a simple soyled Bill of Complaynt, or Petition,
and that, homely contrived: Or, afraid at, and Timerously hasting from, the
sickly Pale face, or feeble Lymmed Suter, extremely constrained, so, to speak
for him self: Nor, partially smoothering his own Conscience, to savor, or
mayntein the foul fault, and trespass unlawful, of any his Subjects: How
Mighty, or Necessary so ever, they (else) were: But, diligently made Search,
least, Pauperes, a Poten^ibus pr^eiudicium passi, opprimeren^ur.


Thus, did Publik-1.Security, from ^orreyn foe, abroad: And True 2. love, of his
own Subjects, garding him, at home: And the 3. Heavenly Spirit, directing all
his godly Purposes: Cause Justice and Equity, in all Quarters of this ALBION,
to flourish. For which, his Peaceable and prosperous Benefits, at the Eternal
King his hand, obtained: he became, not Insolent, or declyned to Tyrannic^^l
Regiment (as some Princes, in other Cuntries have made their lives,
^^^cotragicall,
) But with all his foresaid Invincible Sea Strength, abundant Wealth,
Triumphant Peace: with Security, and Ius^ice, over all his Monarchy preuayling:
his heart, was continually, and most ^ealously bent, to set forth the Glory,
Laud, and Honor of the Almighty Creator, the Heavenly and everlasting King: By
such principal and Princely means, as, (then,) were demed, to God, most
acceptable: And such, as many Monuments, yet, to our days, remaining, do of
him undoubtedly Testify: As this, for one: Ex Charta Fundationis Ecclesiae
Cathedr^lis Wigorniae.
ALTITONANTIS Dei largis^ua Clementia, qui est Rex Regum, Ego AEDGARVS Anglorum
Basileu^, omniumque R^gum Insularum, OCEANIQVE Al^e^ BRITANNIAM.
BRITANNIANI Circum^acentis, Cunctarumque Nationum quae infra eam includuntur
IMPERATOR and Dem^^us, gratias ago ipsi Deo Omnipotenti, Regi m^o, qui meum
IMPERIVM sic ampliauit and exaltauit super Regnum Patrum me^rum: Note now ou^
Ancient Li^i^^, by this S^xon King Possessed. But the Br^tish Arthur had
enlarged them much farther before his days: As by good Records^ and Foreign
Testimonies, in an other place is declared.
Qui, lic^t Monarchiam t^tius Angliae ad^p^i sint, a tempore ATHELSTANI, (qui
primus Regnum Anglorum, and omnes Nationes quae Britanniam incolunt, sibi Armis
subegit,) Nullus tamen eorum, vlira eius Fines, Imperium suum dilatare
aggressus est. Mihi autem concessit Propitia Diuinitas, cum Anglorum IMPERIO,
^omnia Reg^a Insularum OCEANI, cum suis ferocis^imis Regibus, vsque NORVEGIAM:
maximamque Partem Hiberniae, cum sua Nobilis^ima Ciuitate Dublinia, Anglorum
Regno subiugare. Quos etiam omnes, meis Imperijs colla subdere (Dei fauente
gratia) coegi. Quapropter, and Ego, CHRISTI Gloriam and Laudem exaltare, and
eius Seruitium amplificare deuotus, disposui: Christi Gloria, and Laus.

A^ Dom. 964. Regni AEDGARI 6. (...)


and per meos ^ideles Fautores, Dunstanum videlicet Archiepiscopum,
AEthelwoldum, and Oswaldum Episcopos, (quos mihi Patres Spirituales, and
Consiliatores elegi) magna ex part, secundum quod disposui, effeci. etc.

And again, this, in an other Monument. A. Omnipotentis Dei etc. ^VNDATIO
Ecclesia Cath^^rali^ ^^iens^^.
Ipsius Nutu and gratia suffultus, Ego AEDGARVS, Basileus Dilectae Insulae
ALBIONIS, subditis nobis sceptris Scottorum, Cumbrorum, ac Brytonum, and omnium
circumcirca Regi^num, quteta Pace Note here, how he was in S^^u^^ti^ of good
Peace, with all Forreyn Princes, his Neighbors: and yet used that Huge Navy
progre^^es, Yearly.
perfruens: studiosus solicit de laudibus Creatoris omnium occupor addendis:
Ne nunc Inertia, nostrisque diebus (plus aequo) seruitus eius tepescere
videatur. etc. Octauo He reckneth his Raygne even from the Death of his Father:
by reason of his Brothers Disorder, (^uen at the Day of ^is Coronation^)
V^i^e^sa^ly, of the whol^ State, mislyked. And the^eupon was that Phrase used,
Regn^ su^ ^um Fra^r^ and p^st. etc. in ^is ^p^taph Exp^e^^ed.
decimo mei Terrent IMPERII Anno etc. Anno Incarnationis Dominicae. 973.

Ego AEDGARVS, totius ALBIONIS Basilcus, hoc Priuilegium (tanta roboratum
Authoritate) Crucis Thaumate Confirmaui. etc.



So that, by all these Rehearsed Records, it is most evident, that the
Peaceable King Edgar, was one of those Monarchs, in whose hands (if life had
sufficed,) the The P^eeminence and P^^u^^^dge by GOD, and NATVRE, A^propriat to
this BRYTIS^ MONARCHY, is Incredible: and will be yet, for a While^
Incredible Value and Privilege, granted by God and Nature, unto this Brytish
Monarchy, might have been peaceably purchased: In such sort, as the very
Blessing and favor of the Divine Trinity, has laid means, for our Industry to
Attayn to, and enjoy the same, by.

And though sundry other valiant Princes, and Kings of this Land, I could
recite, which, in times past, have either by Intent gone about: or, by wise and
valyant exployt, have meetly well prospered, toward this Ilandish appropriat
Supremacy atteyning: Yet, Never, any other reasonable Means was used, Note
this: For it is SVMMA SVMMARVM. (Without any Controllment,) to be Fran^ly
Aucu^hed.
or by Humayn wit, and Industry, can be contrived, to all purposes Sufficient,
But only, by our SEA-FORCES preuayling: And so, by our Inuincib^^ enjoying
All, within the SEA-LIMITS, of our Brytish Royallty, Contained.

To which Incredible Political Mystery atteyning, No easyer, readyer, or
perfecter Plat and Introduction, is (as yet) come to my Imagination, than is,
The Present and Continual Service, of Threescore, good, and Tall, warlik
Ships, with Twenty smaller Barks^ and those 80, THE BRYTISH, SEA-LEGION.
Ships (great and small) with 6660 apt Men, furnished: and all, singularly well
appointed, for Service, (both on Sea and Land) faithfully and diligently, to be
done, in such Circumspect and Discrete Order, As, partly, I have in other
places declared: and farther (upon good Occasion Offered) may declare.

This Grand Navy, of peaceable king Edgar, of so many 4000: As they are
recorded of the sm^llest Number^
Thousand 1. Ships: And they furnished with a That, is but 25 Men, for ^uery of
those Ships, (one, with an other.) but most certain it is that they were very
many more Men.
Hundred Thousand 2. Men, (at the least): with all the Final 3. Intents of
those Sea-forces, (so Invincible,) 4. Continually maintained: the 5. Order of
Execution of their Service: The Godly and Imperial 6. Succes, thereof: are, (in
a manner,) Kingly lessons, and son^, Prophetical Encouragements, to us left:
Even Now.
(Even now) to be as 1. Provident for Publik Security, as he was: To be as 2.
Skillful of our Sea-Right, and Royal Limits: And wisely to find our selves,
as Hable to Recover and 3. Enjoy the same, as he was: who, could not chose, but
with the Passing and yearly Sailing about this Brytish Albion, with all the
Lesser Isles, next adjacent, round about it: He could not chose (I say) But by
such Full and Note this Ancient Peaceable Possession, for the Lawful Title to
our Sea Limits of the Brytish Monarchy:
Peaceable Possession find him self, (according to right, and his hearts
desire) the True and Souerayn Monarch, of all the Brytish Ocean, enuironing any
way, his Impire of Albion, and Ireland, with the lesser Islands, next adjacent.
With Memorial whereof, (as with one very precious Iuell Imperial,) he adorned
the Title and Crown of his Regality: As (with the Testimony annexed of the
States and Nobles of his Impire) to Commit to perpetual Memory, The Style of
his chief worldly Dignity, in this very Tenor of words (before, also,
Remembered:) NOTE The Queens Majesty's Royalty over the BRYTISH OCEAN SEA,
round about the BRYTISH IMPIRE.
EGO AEDGARVS, ANGLORVM BASILEVS, omniumque Regum Insularum, OCEANIQVE
BRITANNIAM Al^^^ (...)
CIRCVMIACENTIS, Cunctarumque Nationum quae infra eam includuntur, IMPERATOR ET
DOMINVS.

What need we, now, any better President: than of a King, so Iustitia and Pax
^sculatae sunt: Psalm. 84.
Just, as Edgar was, to learn, how Justly, our Plat, for the Pety-Nauy-Royall
is Prescribed, and laid out? And, of a King, so Iustitia and Pax ^sculatae
sunt: Psalm. 84.
Peaceable, as Edgar was, (And Therefore, Surnamed PACIFICVS,) To learn those
Princely Policies, which not only stand with the Due Terms of Forreyn Peace,
and Amity present, Royally preserved: But, also, carry with them, (Triumphantly)
The Deadly Darte, and Hedding Axe, inevitable to all forreyn Offenders, and
Homish Rebels?

SOMEWHAT MORE, he said herein: (which I here purposly omit:) But very much, is
to be said, in the Premises: (As by my said Instructor, I perceived not long
since:) which, to you, or other, in convenient Time and Place, (and after his
manner) he him self, can best in: (as, LONDON, YORK, WEST-CHESTER, and
BRISTOW:) Both in respect of Safe Custody, of the Publik-Threasor: And also in
respect of the Convenient Distances, from our Twenty Ports: And from the Fowr
Chief Quarters, and the Heart also, of this ALBION: So that, Both to the said
Exchecquers, and from them, all Payments, and Caryages, requisite, may be
conveniently made: 2. As also, of his Plat, and IDEA De Officijs, Or, De
Muneribus of the PETY-NAVY-ROYALL: In time of Peace, In time of Dowtfull
Inclination Foreign, and in the Time of Open War: And that, either Ordinary, or
Extraordinary, for the Day, for the Weke, for the Monthe, for the Quarter, and
for the Year. 3. Likewise, for the Certificat, of the Affairs, and State, or
Prejudicial, to the Prosperous Continuance of the Pety-Nauy-Royall, those his
weighty Seruyces, which partly before are spoken of, and other, which (Yet) are
to be spoken of. For, Respub. Omnis, Sua quaedam habet ARCANA.


) with Men of all these Cuntries, and farther, Great Affairs are by some of our
Cuntry-Men to be handled: If God continue his Gracious Direction, and Aid
thereto, as he has very Cumfo^tably begone: and that, by means not yet
published.




to Some, of Courteous KALID, his Disposition, etc. By which Titles of Matter,
left Vnspecifyed hitherto, It may Evidently appear, that my Instructor has (as
it were,) but opened the Door of his Philosophical and Political Brytish
Furniture: to be Favorably vewed of them, whose Insight, is Sharp, and
Profound: Whose Zeal, and Care also, for the State-Publik of this Monarchy, to
become most Christianlike Happy, (in all Respects,) is Ardent, and not
Lukewarm.

Seeing then, NO KINGDOM, in these Days, has more need of a PETY-NAVY-ROYALL,
and to be Continually at Sea maintained, for the Respects above rehearsed: No
Kingdom, has apter TIMBER for Shipping: And thereof (YET) store enough: No
Kingdom, has Skilfuller, and more SHIP-WRIGHTS: No Kingdom, has Subjects
better HABLE, and which more willingly will be Contributary for the sufficient
Setting forth, and mayntenance of such a PETY-NAVY-ROYALL, continually, at Sea
(and that, for the former Respects:) No Kingdom, has better store of APT and
willing MEN: as well courageous Ientlemen, as other: very manfully disposed, to
furnish the foresaid Navy with, for all kind of purposes: No Kingdom, has
better, or more Havens, and HARBOROVGHS, (and those, round about it) to Succor
a Navy in, from Dangers, or Distres of Sea: No King, nor Kingdom, has, by
Nature and Humayn Industry (to be used) any, more LAWFVLL, and more Peaceable
Means (made evident) whereby, to become, In wealth, far passing all other: In
Strength, and Force, INVINCIBLE: and in Honorable estimation, Triumphantly
Famous, over all, and above all other:
Than this has:

And, (To be brief) Seeing No Kingdom, is more Discrete, and willing to Use
the FRONT Capillata, post, est Occasio, Cal^a.
Opportunity, of any exceeding great and Publik Benefit procuring to the same,
than this Brytish Monarchy, is, or May be: Our hope, then is, That, upon the
Uniform, Brotherly, Willing, and Frank Consent, of all States, of Men and
People, of this Incomparable Realm of England: to this Godly, Politik, and
most Commendable Means: to 1. preserve Amity and Peace, with all Forreyn
Princes: And to Guard this State-Publik in 2. Security, from taking Injury of
any, or by any, (Fraudulently, or Forcibly,) And to 1. keep our own hands and
hearts, from Doing, or Intending Injury, to any Forreyner, on Sea or Land: Our
Hope is, (said he,) That upon this Godly 1. Intent, Discrete 2. Covenant, and
Publik Contributary 3. Oblation: the Omnipotent 4. Author of Heavenly Peace,
will so bend down his Merciful and gracious Eyes, upon us: and so manifestly
stretch forth his Almighty hand to Bles, Further, and Prosper the foresaid
Oblation, with all the Purposes and Commodities thereof expected, and likely to
ensue: that, all we may, with the Kingly Prophet David, (both old and young,
Rich and Poo^e,) most joyfully, and Triumphantly, ( IN PERFECT SECVRITIE,)
Sing, PSALM^ 147.
Lauda HIERVSALEM Dominum,
Lauda Deum tuum SION.
Quoniam confortauit Seras Portarum tuarum:
Benedixit filijs tuis in te.
Qui posuit fines tuos PACEM,
Et adipe Frumenti satiat te. etc.
Non fecit Taliter omni Nationi.
O Jerusalem, praise the Lord: Praise thy God, O Syon. For, he has
Strengthened the Bars of thy Gates, And has blessed thy Children within
thee: He has made all thy Borders PEACE: And with the good Nutriment of wheat,
does satisfy thee. etc. He has not done thus, to every Nation, else: Praise we
all, the Lord therefore.

Amen.
SOmewhat, I have now said, (quoth my Instructor) in this PETY NAVY MATTER: to
discharge me of my Duty, to the COMMON-WELTH, herein: And very sorry I am, that
I know not, as much, as this most weighty Case requires, to be Speed.
Speedily known: And that I am not able, aptly and Duly to Order and expres so
much, as I already know. And most of all, I Dowt, that some men will stick to
perform, or shrink to prefer, or be Careless to amend this Simple Plat: of me,
speedily, zealously, and vnartificially Anno Domini 1576. Augusti prinus sex
di^bus: And therefore, this Treatise in other places, is called Hexameron.
delivered to the pen, and very Briefly, expressed.

Moreover, (Said he) if it should not be taken in worse part, of OUR
SOVEREIGN, than, of the Emperor of Constantinople, Emanuel, the sincere
Intent, and faithful Advise, of Georgius Gemistus Pletho, was, I could
(proportionally, for the occasion of the Time, and place,) frame and shape
Though in sundry points, my Instructor did mislike Gemistus opinion: sometimes
not the soundest for the Peloponnesians commodity: and sometimes greatly
repugnant to the order most nedeful for this Brytish Policy: Yet, much thereof,
might be a good Advise for the framing of an Analogical Civil consideration,
in respect of the Intent, by Gemistus regarded.
very much of Gemistus those his two Greek Orations, (the first, to the
Emperor, and the Second to his Son, Prince Theodore:) for our BRYTISH ISLES,
and in better and more allowable manner, at this Day, for our People, than that
his Plat (for Reformation of the State, at those Days, (could be found, for
Peloponnesus, auaylable. But, Seeing those Orations, are now published: both in
Greek and Latin, I need not Dowbt, but they, to whom, the chief Care of such
causes is committed, have Diligently selected the Honey of those Flowers,
already, for the Commonwealths great Benefit. But, Gemistus said very well,
THEN:

GEORGII GEMISTI PLEthonis de Rebus Peloponnesi, ORATION. 1.
BEllum quidem cum Italis, Peloponnesum tenentibus a praestantissimis filijs
gestum, magna cum Laud, et Emolumento confectum est, (Imperator Auguste:) Cum
and plurima maximeque opportuna illorum Dominia, nostram in potestatem, longo
post tempore redierint: and ipsi, cum reliqua nobis omnia cesserint, tum in
vniuersum se nobis obtemperaturos receperint. Quibus ex rebus, vobis quidem hoc
pacto Imperium and confirmantibus and augentibus, decus et gloria: nobis autem,
SECVRITAS nascitur, and Vtilitas: Maiorumque in posterum consequendorum, (Si
Deus permiserit) Occasio. Mihi vero, Circa Annum Domini, 1400.
nunc ea tibi exponere in mentem venit, quae multis de Causis arbitror, si
obseruentur, multum his rebus esse profutura: sieve negligantur, magnam Salutis
partem detractura. Ac primum de ipsa Regione, quanti sit vobis facienda, pauca
quaedam dicam: non tam quod vestrum erga ipsam studium non videam, quam vt ipsa
recto ordine procedat Oration. Etenim, Nos quibus Imperatis, Graeci genere
sumus: vt partim, e Sermon, partim ex auita Disciplina constare potest.
Graecis vero vix vlla magis familiaris reperiri possit Regio quam PELOPONNESVS,
and quaecunque iuxta hanc ad Europam spectant, quaeque adjacent Insulae. Hanc
enim Terram, quantum humana potest memoria recolere, ijdem semper a nullis ante
possessam incoluerunt Graeci: Nec Aduenae eam occuparunt, eiectis aliis,
ipsique nonnunquam ab alijs eiecti: sed contra, semper hanc Regionem tenuerunt
Graeci, nec deseruerunt vnquam. Iam, inter omnes huius Regionis parts,
Peloponnesum, praecipuas ac nobilissimas Graecorum gentes protulisse traditur:
ex eaque Graecos profectos, maximas ac praeclarissimas quasque res gessisse.
Quid quod magnae quoque istius ad Bosporum sitae Constantinopolis.
Vrbis, (quae vestra nunc est Regia,) terram hanc, qui recte rem consideret,
quasi Matrem, non iniuria dixerit. Nam and qui ante, Byzantium incoluerunt,
Graeci fuerunt ac Doors: (Doors autem, Peloponnesios esse, Nemini dubium est:)
Et qui posterioribus Saeculis illustrem illam ex Italica Roma deduxerunt
Coloniam, tamque praeclaro Byzantium auxerunt Additamento, non sunt a
Peloponnesijs alieni. Siquidem, vt AEneadae and Sabini pari Iure permisti,
Romanam Vrbem foelicissimam incoluerunt, Ita Sabini censentur Peloponnesij de
Lacedaemonijs profecti. Quocirca, nec his de causis parui facienda tam vobis,
quam nobis, est haec Regio: Quandoquidem and maxim propria, curanda sunt
maxim: Et haec omnium est maxim Propria. Et, si de ipsius virtute, qua nulli
Terrae cedit, dicendum est, vt ea quae de Anni temporum temperie, deque Terra
nascentium, and omnium ad vitam pertinentium prouentu dici possint, nunc
omittam: AD SECVRITATEM sane,
nullam non Regionem haec superat: cum and Insula pariter tanta sit, and
Continens. Nec difficulter possint eius Incolae, si recte suppetentibus vtantur
adiumentis, cum apparatu minimo, si quis inuadat, repellere: Tum ad alios, vbi
videatur ipsi, accedere: itaque Regionis terminos non leuiter augere.
Praeterea, nunc Montium munimenta, qui per totam porriguntur terram, and vbique
(Arcium instar) eminent, sic vt hosts, etiamsi Campestri solo forte potiantur,
tota tamen excidant Regione. Quo fit, vt non tam familiaritatis, quam virtutis
ipsius causa curanda videatur haec Regio: "Quandoquidem possessiones potiores,
potius etiam studium solent requirere. Iam cum omnibus, qui inter Graecos
censentur, haec impendit Cura, tum Regibus maxim, quibus vniuersi Tutela, prae
caeteris, est commissa. Neminem porro superiorum Regum, propius quam Te, haec
Res attingit. Nam and cum Itali ditionem hanc tenerent, in eaque longo tempore
Regnassent, soli eam vestrae Familiae Principes recuperarunt.
Et ipse Tu, praeter alia multa magnaque Beneficia, praeclarum illud atque
ingens Opus nuper erexisti, ducto per Isthmum Murus per Isthmum ductus.
Muro: maxima and praestantissima Perpetuae Salutis occasion. Quocirca vos
decet, cum priorum Beneficiorum collocatione, haec etiam consequentia
coniungere: quo simul and ipsi rerum praeclararum augmento studere videamini,
and ipsa a vobis ante collata beneficia, perpetuitate Consequentium, salua
permaneant. Neque parum, tum SECVRITATIS, tum Emolumenti, magnae quoque isti
vrbi (vt arbitror) haec Regio recte constituta adferet: id quod, hoc quidem
loco pluribus explicare superuacaneum nobis videtur. Ac studium quidem summum
hanc mereri Regionem, satis a me, quantum res postulat, demonstratum existimo:
Quam autem c^piam diligentiam, cum prioribus vestris coniungi Beneficijs,
quaeque harum rerum corrigendae potissimum videantur, quoque illae pacto
compositae, plurimum sint fructus allaturae, nunc aperiam: si ea prius, quae in
his minus recte habent, explicuero. Primum itaque. etc.

And again: Quocirca, priusquam tale quid eueniat, Page 213.
Decet nos, dum in Tuto Sumus, and quae minus recte videntur se habere,
corrigere: and, quantum Liceat, Necessaria praeparare: ne, Si quis forte casus
accidat, eum difficulter feramus. Nam, in ipso quidem discrimine,
non satis commode correctionem, si quae requirunt, recipient. etc.

SECVRITATEM denique vniuersis praestant Milites, Page 214.
and Praefecti, quique alij alias Reipub. parts curant: singulaque tum parua,
tum magna conseruant: and praecipuus REX, omnibus Imperans, omniaque gubernans,
and conseruans etc.

Quod si quid sane aliud, melius pariter et facilius, ab alio subijciatur, Page
218.
illud sequendum erit. Contemnenda certe res ista non est: nec in hoc statu
prauo, simul and periculoso, reliquenda. Atqui nec melius nec vtilius quenquam,
quid aliud, eo, quod a me prolatum est, reperturum aio: Neque difficulter ad
effectum id perduci posse: aut potius, difficulter, hoc in statu, res istas
diutius, absque magno periculo and incommodo, durare posse. Tuum porro
duntaxat, Imperator, praecipuum oportet accedere calculum. Neque difficulter
facies, vt, cum ipse Rebus presis omnibus, quae optima simul ac Iustissima
videantur, ac tum public, tum priuatim omnibus vtilissima, constituas. etc.

Atque Ego quidem quae fore vtilia censeo, quibusque de Causis, dixi: Et, vt,
eadem etiam praestantissimis filijs tuis, hac Orationis forma exposui: ita,
Tuum praecipue requirunt Calculum: quem, tanquam ab aliquo sortita Numine.,
simul and honesta videantur, and ad exitum perducantur: Faxit autem Deus, vt
eum qui and prosit, and vndecunque recte se habeat, Calculum feras.



ANd Because, in Gemistus, his Second Oration, to Prince Theodore, (this
Emperor his Son) there are many things, (In my Instructor his Opinion)
worth the knowledge and Consideration: and not utterly unapt for this place:
And for that, it should be a Disgrace, so to mangle the whole matter, and a
hynderance to the understanding thereof: to break of, the particular Notes, so
often, from the other Circumstances of words, and Sentences annexed in the
course of the same Oration, as things fall out, Notable: And because, this
way, the very whole * Text of the said Oration, may easier be had, than from
beyond the Seas, (as they are,) in Greek and Latin prynted: I thought it some
Reasonable Cause, why, I should, here, set down the same Oration, whole: that,
whosoever should mete with the MEMORIALS of these Discourses, need not want the
same, if it be to his Liking.

(...) GEORGII GEMISTI PLEthonis ad Principem Theodorum de Rebus Peloponnes:
Oration Posterior: GVLIELMO CANTERO, Interpret.
Elisabetha Regina
CVm in Naui Gubernator, omnia pro suo solet arbitrio dirigere, quae ad
vectorum Salutem pertine^t: Tum in Exercitu, Dux, quae ad Militum victoriam.
(Alioqui nec vectoribus, nec Militibus, vel tantillo tempore res recte
procederent, nisi ab Vno vtraeque viro regerentur: and apertissime, maximis in
periculis, Monarchiam, simul tutissimam and vtilissimam deprehendimus:)
Veruntamen, et in Naui Licere videmus The man^^ how a Subi^^^ may dutifully ^^y
his mind, in Matt^^^ b^^^e, or above hi^ Ch^rge and gouer^m^^t.

Cicero his wo^d^^ to the li^e int^nt may a^tly h^^ew^th be conf^^^^^^

Te ipsum (...) l'ansa (...) anquam non ^^es consi^^o, quo (...) plurimu^: ^ami
(...)ni^ G^be^^^^ores in m^gnis ^empe^ta^ibus, a ^^ectorib^s adm^neri sol^nt)
hunc tuum tantum apparatum, tamque, praeclarum ne ad nihilum recidere patiare.
Tempus habes tale, quale nemo habuit vnquam. Hac gra^itate Senatus, h^c studio
Equestris Ordinis, hoc ardore Pop. To potes in perpetuum me^u and periculo
Rempub. liberare.

Cicero: Philippica. 7.


Vectorum alicui, qui consilio suo communem videatur Salutem iuuare posse: et
in excercitu, Militi similiter: illi quidem apud Gubernatorem, huic autem ante
Ducem, quae in me^tem venerint exponere. Illis porro cum audierint, vel
arripere Licet consilium, vel benign et sine acerbitate reijcere. Siquidem non
inique ferendum est, Siquis in Periculo communi, Salutis publicae curam ad se
quoque nonnihil arbitretur pertinere. Enimuero hac quoque in Gente nostra,
atque Vrbe, tibi quidem, vir Clarissime, totius est rei cura commissa: perque
multorum maiorum, Regum, Patrisque, etiam Regis, manus, haec ad te deuenit
nostrae Regionis haereditas: in qua tibi omnia, prout tibi ac nobis videantur
profutura, Licet omniu^ pleno consensu disponere. Cum autem tuae quidem sic se
res habeant, nostrae autem in magno versentur discrimine: (Siquidem, vndique
nobis, Terra Marique tenduntur Vide supra Page 53. L^n^a. 32.
Insidiae: adeoque Domi etiam a Barbaris simul and Gentilibus, maxim autem a
vicinis istis Barbaris, qui etiam reliqui Dominij maximam ac potissimam partem
nobis ademerunt: and Parapamisadae origin cum sint, and obiter ab Alexandro
Philippi F. deuicti, cum is ad Indos tenderet, a nobis nunc, tanquam Graecis,
longo quidem post tempore, multiplices autem horum poenas expetunt: Cumque
long praestent viribus, extrema nobis quaeque semper minantur.) Cum igitur
haec ita se habeant, non absurd mihi facturus videor, Si, cum de Salute
communi paulo melius fortasse, quam caeteri, sentire videar: ad te, Principem
nostrum, accedam, queque tibi simul et nobis omnibus existimem Salutaria fore,
subijciam. Illud autem primum a te petam,
si forte non Totus Sermo voluptate sit conditus, verum aliquid etiam subsultet
asperius, vt me praestantiora and vtiliora patiaris incundis praeferre. Nam ne
Medicos quidem video, cum Salus aegrotantium agitur, vel acerbissimis cibis,
potibus, and Pharmacis alijs abstinere: Contraque, Coquos plerunque, obsoniorum
Voluptate, corpus etiam corrump^re. Adeo non semper quae iucunda, sunt vtilia:
verum iuuant etiam acerbissima.

Atque hoc primum est existimandum, nec priuatis hominibus, nec Rebuspub. vel
in maximis difficultatibus, de meliori fortuna esse desperandum. Siquidem
permulti sunt in integrum restituti. Nam and Troiani, qui cum AEnea, capta a
Graecis patria, in Italiam sunt ex Phrygia delati, ita prosperam deinde sunt
experti fortuna^, Vt, cum Romam paulo post vna cum Sabinis, de Lacedaemonijs
profectis, pari iure permistis, incoluissent, ab hoc principio maximum pariter
and praeclarissimum obtinuerint Imperium. Et Persae, post Alexandri
Graecorumque dominium, Cum a Romany esset euersa Macedonum potentia, non
leuiter and ipsi Parthorum open suas recuperarunt Vires: sed vt etiam contra
Romanos, qui tum erant potentissimi, bellum gesserint: and vt nonnunquam
superati fuerint, ita postremo splendidam reportarint victoriam: ex eaque
multis annis Tributum quoque Romany imperarint. Quocirca nec nos decet
nosmetipsos abijcere, vel de Salute desperare: Sed cum and ipsi post has
aerumnas meliora speremus, illud etiam omni diligentia considerare, quibus
modis ad SECVRITATEM aliquam res nostrae reducantur, and meliorem pro facultate
nostra statum nobis comparemus. Vt autem meliorem sibi statum vel Ciuitas vel
Gens aliqua firmiter, (quantum quidem res humanae ferunt,) comparet, non alia
res efficit, quam REIPVBL: EMENDATIO. Nulla siquidem alia Ciuitatibus est vel
faelicitatis vel infaelicitatis causa, quam Resp. recte vel secus constituta.
Quod si qua Casu recte se Ciuitas habeat, id firmum non est, ac leui de causa
potest immutari. Plerunque aute^, vel bona (...).
Rep. conseruantur and crescunt Civitates: vel contra, corrupta, and ipsae
collabuntur ac pereunt. Nam and communiter Graeci non ante latissime patentem
obtinuerunt gloriam, quam Hercules Amphitryonis F. Iniustitia Sublata, bonam
Reipublicae constitutionem, virtutisque studium ipsis conciliauit. (Siquidem
ante Herculem quidem non valde fuit celebre Graecorum genus, cui Danai, and
Cadmi, ex Barbaria aduenae, imperarent: post Herculem autem, multas Graeci
magnasque tum a Graecis, tum a Barbaris retulerunt victorias:) and Lacedaemonij
non ante vel Graecorum facti sunt Principes, quam a Lycurgo praeclaram illam
Reip: constitutionem acciperent: vel Principatu pulsi exciderunt, quam eandem
negligerent, ac tum sibi Maris imperium vindicarent, qui terram eatenus
tenuerant: tum equitatu minimum valerent: quem vt alebant ditissimi quique, ita
belli tempore, alijs, cum armis qualibuscunque tradebant: tum sociis non
clementer amplius imperare^t. Quocirca sunt a Thebanis deuicti, ductu
Epaminondae, qui Doctrinam Doctrina Pythagorica Rebuspub. ^t^lissima^
Pythagoricam non segniter perceperat. Philippus quoque ab hoc Epaminonda, cum
Thebis Obses degeret, institutus, Graecorum Princeps euasit: nec non eius F.
Alexander, cum Philippi patris, tum Aristotelis insuper institutione, and
Graecorum Imperium, and Asiae Regnum superatis Persis sibi comparauit.
Quinetiam Romani ad maximum Principatum, Reip. bonitate peruenerunt: nec prius
res illorum labi coeperunt, quam Remp. immutassent. Saraceni denique isti olim
quidem parua quaedam erant Arabum pars, and Ron^nis fere parebant: Postquam
vero mutata Rep. leges quasdam ferri sibi passi sunt, quae vt non ad aliud
quicquam, saltem ad Ciuitatum augmentum and bellicas victorias viderentur
conducere: Primum Gentilium Arabum nacti sunt Imperium, deinde Romanorum
dominio maximam and potissimam ademerunt partem: tum Africam sibi adiecerunt:
postremo Persas in suam redegerunt potestatem. Sed and aliae Gentes aliquot,
horum vtentes moribus and ritibus, foelicitate frui videntur. Atque adeo isti,
qui nobis plurimum praestiterunt, Barbari his vtentes legibus maxima potentia
polluerunt. Eodem fere pacto, si quis reliqua consideret, and Gentes and vrbes
reperiet ex bonis vel malis Rebuspublicis, recte se vel secus habuisse. Quare,
si hoc videbitur considerandum, quibus modis tum ad Salutem perueniamus, tum
potiorem statum nobis comparemus: Emendanda duntaxat est Respublica, prauis
institutis in rectiora commutatis.

Iam, cum sint multa quae Rempub. constituant, eamque singula vel meliorem vel
peiorem efficiant, nimirum quae plurimis and potissimis constabit melioribus,
proba futura est Respub. quae ijsdem peioribus, improba. Ac primum, quia
Rerump. tria sunt genera, Monarchicum, Oligarchicum, and Democraticum:
Pluresque item singulorum species, quibus vel corrigitur vel corrumpitur Resp.
Prudentissimi sane quique Monarchiam, Consultoribus optimis et legibus probis,
MONARCHIA
ijsque ratis vtentem, cunctis praetulerunt.

Consultores.
Ac de Consultoribus quidem, primum, Eruditorum hominum laudatur moderata Copia.
Nam and vulgus, quoniam difficulter inter se intelligunt, multosque habet
indoctos, temerarios plerunque fert calculos: Et qui paucissimo constant
numero, cum Priuatim sectentur Lucrum, praua dant fere Consilia. At qui simul
and moderato numero fuerint, and non indocti, cum vt alius aliud consideret,
atque in medium proferat, ita Communi vtilitate communiter ducantur, optimi
erunt ac certissimi Consultores. Deinde hoc requiritur, vt mediocri sint
fortuna, nec vel ditissimi vel pauperrimi: siquidem illi, prae diuitiarum
studio, nihil fere suadent aliud, quam vnde Lucrum ipsis aliquod proueniat: hi,
prae inopia, nihil spectant aliud, quam vt Necessitati subueniant suae. At qui
se mediocriter habent, Communem potissimum Salutem curant. Ac de Consultoribus
quidem, hactenus.

Leges.
Leges vero, probae sunt, vt vno verbo dicam, quae sua singulis, tum in Vrbe,
tum in Gente quauis, officia definientes, alienis negotijs vetent se immiscere.

Rustici.
Atque in omni fere Ciuitate, Primum and maxim Necessarium est, et
Numerosissimum, Rusticorum genus: Agricolarum videlicet, Pastorum, quique alij
Terrae fructus proprijs manibus colligunt. Alterum est Opisicum genus,
Mercatorum, Institorum, and similium: quod primis illis ac reliquae Ciuitati
inseruit: Opifices.
dum Opifices quidem Supellectilem humanae vitae necessariam, Mercatores.
in medium producunt: Mercatores autem, quae singulis Regionibus vel desint vel
supersint, de vna in aliam transferendo Exaequant: and quoniam alij suis
coguntur rebus vacare, ipsi hanc Prouinciam suscipiunt: Institores.
Institores denique, de Rusticis quidem, vel Mercatoribus emunt vniuersa:
requirentibus autem singulis, quandocunque and quocunque velint numero,
Laborers.
diuendunt. Nonnulli etiam corporis vires elocantes, nunc his nunc illis
ministerium exhibendo victitant. Postremum est Principum genus, Principes.
qui vel Vrbem, vel Gentem totam conseruant, atque custodiunt. Quorum, vt
supremus est Rex, REX.
ita post illum, alij alias Vrbis vel Gentis sortiti parts, rite conseruant.
Cum enim hoc omnibus persuaderi nequeat, aequitatem absque iniuria sectandam
esse, nec tendendas cuiusquam bonis insidias: Nonnulli autem, vel primi vel
secundi generis, omissis operibus suis, aliorum inhient laboribus: Contra hos,
instituti sunt, ex amicis quidem, Iudices, Iudices.
and reliqui Praefecti: ex inimicis vero, Milites, Milites.
and horum Duces. Quibus, cum tanquam publicae intentis custodiae, aliunde
suppeditanda essent necessaria, Tributa Rusticis, in Dimensum Publicorum
Custodum, imperata sunt: Merces pariter et Praemium Custodiae futura.
Tributorum Origo.
Atque haec Tributorum est origo.

Cum porro, tria haec prima sunt hominum in vrbe genera, propria quaedam
singulorum esse debent officia: quae quidem proba Lex obire quemque iubet, nec
inter se confundere. Principes igitur nullum subeant Ministerium, quandoquidem
Imperio maxim contrarium est ministrare. Sunt autem inter Ministeria, cum alia
quae recensuimus, tum Institoria and Mercatura. At Prin^ipem i^bet Lex, nec
Mercaturam nec Institoriam facere, nec aliud quicquam non liberale tractare.
Similiter a Vulgo secernantur Milites; ac Seruatores a seruandis: and illi
quidem ab omni Collatione liberi Militent, ac Populum tueantur^ Hi vero suas
res agentes idonea, simul nec grauia Principum and Militum delectorum Dimenso,
Tributa pendant. Mayor vero pars Exercitus and potior, Ciuium sit ac
domesticorum, non Peregrinorum: siquidem raro fidi sunt Peregrini, multisque
mutationibus: interdum pro Seruatoribus atque Custodibus hosts existunt.
Domestici vero si recte curentur, magis firmi sunt atque fidi. De Rusticis
autem plerique militiae assueti, per coniugationes diuidantur, eorumque
alterutro communibus fere laborante sumptibus, vicissim alter laboret, alter
militet: sic vt pariter et familiae suae curam and Salutis Communis ijdem,
quantum fieri possit, gerant. Separentur autem in exercitu Pedites ab
Equitibus: Peditibus quidem in Turmas sub Ducibus, Equitibus autem in Alas sub
Magistris relatis, quo confestim possint, vbicunque fuerit opus, ordine adesse.
Neque simul vtraeque Copiae, Terrestres ac Nauales, cogantur: verum alterae
semper, eaeque Mark this ^i: for, i^ our ^landish State, certainly and
evidently, our greater advantage and le^ cos^ and en^omb^ance is to keep our
P^blike and v^iuersall Guard in a Na^y at Sea. As before is abundantly pro^ed.
And GEMISTVS his earnest desire to pre^er the Land force^, and Land Sold^ers
makes him to speak not so aptly and ^auorably as the Case might admit o^
skilful Seamen and Mar^ne^s: who alone are not the worker^ of great vi^^orie^
at Sea without the Sea Soldiers ^o^^stry and valiantnes concur^ent. For his
Cuntry, and at that Time (perhaps) it was be^^ ^o, to refuse the maintenance o^
a Navy. And after this manner, are many things in this oration: which at that
Time, and in that Place, were for the Peloponnesian^ more cruisable and
commodious, than the like we^e to be demed for this ^^^te. ^or, all, ^^re,
^ontained, is not to be of ^^ allow^d, or im^^ated: But here and there, the
Idea ge^erall, is to be answered with due application, particularly, for our
Cuntry, and these our Days.
Si id Vrbis and Gentis atque etiam Regionis patiatur Natura, potius
terrestres: ne cum vtrisque simus inferiores, neutros vincamus. Ac praestat
long * Terrestribus Copijs in militum ac Ducum virtute, quam Nautarum ac
aliorum hominum (...).
vilium art fiduciam ponere: ac terra potitos, indidem necessaria nancisci,
quam peregre petere: relictisque Mari proximis locis, nisi cogat extrema
necessitas, soli cum vicinis bello vacare: quam pluribus, tum cum vicinis, tum
cum exteris. Iam c^m Tributorum tria sint minimum genera, Primum Seruitus,
deinde certa sieve pecuniae, sieve aliarum rerum summa, tum quaedam rerum
nascentium pars: Grauissimum quidem Tributi genus est Seruitus, quippe quod non
opes arripiat, sed corpora: nec paruam ipsis praebet exactoribus molestiam,
quorum praesentiam quotannis requirit: certa vero summa, praeter seruitutem,
magnam etiam habet inaequalitatem, dum and necessario penditur, et saepenon pro
opibus: quando nec facile sit opibus cuiusque Tributum exaequare, nec
singulorum opes eandem semper obtineant magnitudinem. (Eadem quidem per parts
quotannis saepius a pluribus exacta, long maiorem difficultatem parit.) Rerum
autem nascentium quaedam pars cum seruitutis minus habet, tum quouis alio
Tributo, tantundem quod efficeret, multo leuior est, ipsa temporis ratione,
(quandoquidem, quo tempore fructus a singulis colliguntur, de ipsis petitur
fructibus:) nec non aequalitatem habet maximam, dum quisque pro opibus
persoluit: quo fit, vt optimum sit hoc Tributum, cum and leuissimum sit, vt
diximus, and aequissimum: and, si cum aequitate exigatur, Reipubl. vtilissimum.

Quae porro aequitas hic locum habeat, hinc licet animaduertere. Terrae fructus
tria potissimum requirunt, Operas, Sumptus operis praebendos, (vt boues,
vineas, Armenta, et similia) and horum Custodiam. Quapropter etiam Tribus iure
debentur, Operis, sumptuum Dominis, ac denique Custodibus vniuersorum et
Seruatoribus, quos Reges, Principes, aliosque Praefectos diximus. Rustici ergo,
qui suis laborant sumptibus, cum liceat ipsis quocunque loco, terram quouis
pacto colere, duabus fruentes partibus, altera operis, altera sumptibus debita,
Tertiam Reipubl. et Custodibus vniuersorum praestent: omni alia Collatione
quacunque omnique ministerio vacantes. Atque hoc sit iustissimum Tributum,
Praemium simul ac Dimensum publicis ministris futurum. Ac de Tributis quidem
hactenus.

Viuendi porro ratio, cum reliquorum Ciuium, tum Praefectorum maxim, non
sumptuosa, sed moderata sit: sic vt peregrinas quidem vestes et nugas alias
negligant: ad Bellum autem sint omnes compositi, quique huc pertinent
apparatus, diligenter procurent: quos quidem, c^m alio sumptus transferuntur,
diminui oportet ac deteri.

Terrae fructus nemini liceat, quocunque velit, nisi alteram partem pro
vectigali pendat, euehere. Ad socios quidem, euehere liceat. Sin quis ferro,
vel armis, vel alia re necessaria velit mutare, nihil pendat.

Moneta nec improba nec peregrina vtamur: ne videamur etiam praua and aliena
vti Republica. Siquidem non paruum in Republica momentum habet Monetae ratio.

Sontes ne Barbarico more mulctentur, vt post mulctam minimum deinceps peccent.
Nam qui videntur insanabiles esse, eos de medio praestat auferentes, animam
corpore liberare, qua non recte nouit vti: quam illos mutilantes, hanc tum
corpori mutilo atque inutili, tum reliquae Ciuitati alligare.

Atque hae quidem probae sunt Reipubl. Leges, aliaeque similes: Caput autem
horum est omnium, de Deo recte and public et priuatim sentire, maxim autem
haec tria: Primum, esse Deum quendam praestantissimam omnium Naturam: deinde,
hunc and homines curare, et res omnes humanas tum magnas, tum paruas regere:
tum arbitrio suo cuncta illum recte iusteque semper administrare, nusquam ab
officio deflectentem, vel alia de causa, vel hominum donis delinitum, quibus
non indigeat. Quae cum ita se habent, consequitur illud, vt in cultu sacra
donariaque modo and pietate adhibitis offerant, velut inde bonum omne
proficisci fatentes: nec vel minus praestantes, aut duarum, aut alterius saltem
duarum impietatis formarum opinionem sibi comparent: vel nimio sumptu, and
priuatas domos and Rempubl. perdentes, quasi donariorum quicquam proficeret
magnificentia: nec amplius quid offerre, sed redimere visi, tertio se
impietatis generi obstringunt. Has demum sententias public priuatimque
confirmatas, necessario virtus and honesti omne studium sequitur.

At vitium quoduis et maxima mortalium peccata, de contrarijs nascuntur
sententijs. Semper enim existunt nonnulli prauis opinionibus imbuti: and vel
nullum esse prorsus Deum arbitrantes, vel vt sit, res tamen humanas negligere:
vel denique vt sit atque curet, corrumpi nihilominus posse, sacrisque ac
donarijs delinitum, nonnunquam ab officio deflectere.

Ab his enim duabus inter se contrarijs de Deo sententijs, tanquam fontibus,
duo procedunt vitae genera, plurimum inter se dissidentia: quorum alterum
virtutem vel solum, vel summum ponit bonum, alterum Voluptatem.

Etenim cum Hominis natura, partim Diuina sit, partim humana, (quod omnibus and
Graecis and Barbaris vel aliqua praeditis mente visum fuit) Diuinitatem quidem
Animo, humanitatem autem exprimente Corpore. Qui quidem Diuinitatem Ducem
secuti, cum recte de cognata natura senserint, tum ad virtutis normam vitam
omnem direxerint, Boni sunt omnis inter homines Auctores: qui vero mortali ac
ferina part ducti, cum de Deo secus senserint, tum ad voluptatem retulerint
omnia, magnorum contra sunt Auctores Malorum.

Inter hos Medij sunt, and qui Gloriae student, and qui Diuitijs: cum
simulacrum illa sit virtutis, hae voluptates concinnet.

Et in eorum quidem numero, qui virtutem sunt amplexi, cum alij saeculis
omnibus extitere, tum Amphitryonis F. Hercules, quem diximus bona reipubl.
constitutione virtutisque studio Graecis conciliato, celeberrimos illos
reddidisse, cum sibi primum ipsi virtutem crebris laboribus and certaminibus
comparasset: Lycurgus item Lacedaemonius, qui fratre Rege sine liberis mortuo,
cum Coniunx, quae grauidam se norat, ad ipsum se, fetu abolito, Regnum vna cum
Matrimonio delaturum recepisset, re non concessa, quoniam Iustitiae repugnabat,
fratrisque filio tum vita conciliata, tum paterno dominio restituto, aliquanto
post tempore Legislator a suis constitutus, praeclara illa Reip. constitutione
introducta, celeberrimam ipsam vrbem cum inter Graecos tum inter Barbaros
reddidit: Alexander quoque Rex Macedonum, qui per virtutem simul and animi
magnitudinem, Graecorum Princeps effectus, ipsis pariter and Macedonibus, Asiae
comparauit imperium:

Nec non inter Barbaros, Persa Cyrus, qui Persas suos virtute propria cum
tyrannide M^dorum liberauit, tum and horum and Asiae reliquae dominos
constituit.

In altero vero numero cum alij recensentur, tum Alexander Troianus, Priami
filius, qui in Dearum iudicio, vitaeque generum electione, tum Iunone
contempta, virtutis Praeside, tum Auctore gloriae Minerua, Venerem voluptatis
Deam praetulit. Quapropter neglectis tum Regno a Iunone concesso, vita cum
virtute et foelicitate coniuncta: tum a Minerua oblata victoria bellica, vita
gloriosa: Helena vero Lacaena Tindarei F. Menelai Atridae coniuge, praemio tam
iniqui iudicij accepta, tanquam voluptatis colophone, vt corpore omnium
pulcherrima, sic animo turpissima and adultera, cum hac sese simul and Patriam
pessundedit. Sardanapalus item Assyrius, qui per Mollitiem et luxum, Asiae
Imperium Assyrijs quidem suis ademit, Medis autem concessit: Nec non de Romany
Nero, qui cum alijs grauibus ac nefandis perpetratis, tum occisa matre, seipsum
quoque tandem malum male perdidit. Nam Patriam cupiebat quidem, sed prae
Romanorum virtute, nondum poterat euertere. Ac saepe plures existunt huius
generis, tum inter Principes, tum inter Priuatos, alij grauius alijs peccantes:
in his etiam illi, qui Iustitiam quidem et Veritatem and Bonum Commune pro
vmbris ducunt, auro autem and similibus inhiant: foelicitatem quidem in
vestibus, auro, argento, luxuque quotidiano ponentes, Propriam vero simul and
liberorum, et Patriae totius Libertatem, ac SECVRITATEM negligentes. Quidam
etiam donec auro and similibus, res caret, ac per se consideratur,
vehementissime Iustitiam and Veritatem defendunt: Sed simul atque vel aurum,
vel Auri quid simile micuerit, mox and lingua ligatur, and os obturatur, ac de
Iustitia quidem silent: Ad contraria vero, omnis illa conuertitur vehementia.
Siquidem ab his and huius generis hominibus, cum reguntur Respub. semper sunt
infoelices, quando ne probissimae quidem latae leges habentur ratae, sed omnia
temere permiscentur. Leges Ratae.
Non enim tantum probas leges requirunt Respubl. sed etiam ratas: quales quidem
per virtutem Principum existunt: quam, tria praecipua Pietatis genera diximus
consequi.

Postquam autem alia re nulla, quam Salute, nunc indigemus, (non enim nos
latet, quo res ex amplissimo Romanorum Imperio deuenerunt, quibus duae tantum
in Thracia relictae sunt vrbes, et Peloponnesi pars aliqua, ac si qua restat
etiam Insula,) Salutem autem Ciuitatum duntaxat e proba Republ. diximus
proficisci: Respubl. nobis and legibus praestantissimis et Moderatoribus quam
fieri poterit optimis erit emendanda. Etenim quanto res nostrae peiori sunt
loco, and infirmiores cum potentioribus hostibus committimur, tanto magis
Rempubl. potiorem decet nos opponere, quae reliquorum exaequet imbecillitatem.

Quibus autem rationibus optima constituatur Respub. iam diximus: potissimis
quibusque and ad rem praesentem maxim pertinentibus expositis, ijsque non
valde difficilibus. Quae enim res ex vnius voluntate effectum suum vel
sortiuntur, vel amittunt, non debent pro valde difficilibus haberi. Vnius porro
voluntatem, tuam potissimum iudico. Etenim si tibi, qui Princeps noster es, and
maxima polles potentia; praeclarae alicuius rei gerendae Deus amorem
inspirauerit, cum virtutem atque honestatem exact secteris, non difficulter
hae res constitui poterunt, nec amplius erit de salute nostra desperandum.
Siquidem in hoc posita omnia sunt, ex eoque vel Salus nostra, vel Pernities
dependet. Etenim si quam rem praeclaram and magnam cupias gerere, nihil vel
praeclarius vel maius tum Salute Gentis, tum Regni SECVRITATE facile repereris.
Haec autem non nisi probae Reipubl. constitutione parantur. Ea porro non alia
ratione, quam quae modo fuit a nobis exposita, componitur: quamque omnes vbique
laudatae sunt Civitates secutae. Ac si duntaxat ipse volueris, and hoc fueris
animo, nullo negocio socios operis inuenies: probiores quidem primos muneribus
destinans, reliquos autem benefactis and mulctis corrigens: ac duobus his, tum
cupiditate bonorum, tum contra peccantes ira rite vsus. Siquidem nec absentia
bona cuiquam licet adipisci, nisi cum labor desideret: nec praesentia seruare,
nisi rationi ira obtemperet.

Ac Reipubl. Constitutionem, si videtur, a Consultoribus ordire: Consultores^
eosque tibi cum alijs, tum numero instructissimos, quemadmodum praecepimus,
constitue. Siquidem hinc aequum est incipere: cumque maiori parti visum quid
fuerit, ita demum rerum mutatione^ and emendationem aggredi. Neque illos
lateat, quanto res nostrae versentur in discrimine, quantumque salutis indigi
simus: nec eam nisi emendata Republ. possimus consequi. Nam and qui aegrotant,
si consueta viuendi ratione laeduntur, non aliter sanantur, quam cum hac
omissa, commodiorem deligunt.

Deinde, maiorem exercitus partem expurga: diuisis bifariam Peloponnesijs: in
Militantes, and Collationem pendentes, prout singulorum feret ratio: sic, vt
non amplius ijde^ simul et Militent et pendant. Etenim nec teipsum pariter et
gentem seruare poteris, nisi hosts deuiceris: nec hosts deuincere, nisi
exercitum potius beneuolum and animosum, quam copiosum habueris. Difficulter
autem, pendens Exercitus, beneuolentiam simul and animos conseruat: sed
vtrumque, fere, perdit.

Praefecti quoque secernantur a Mercatoribus: Praefecti.
and cunctis quidem imperetur, ne Mercaturam vel Institoriam deinceps
exerceant: sed se pro Praefectis gerant, Reipubl. custodiam et salutem
procurantes, non seruilia obeuntes officia, and quidem nequam seruorum, qui
ponderibus iniustis and quacunque re alia miseros Rusticos damno afficiunt. Sin
etiam de Mercatoribus aliqui fuerint ad Magistratus euecti, ij vel relicta
Mercatura, si fuerint idonei, munere fungantur: vel loco moueantur. Oportet
enim haec secerni, non Praefectos cum Mercatoribus permisceri, nec Milites
agros colere, nec Rusticis communem salutem committi: quae sunt omnia Reipubl.
prauissimae, quaeque nihil vnquam magnum vel praeclarum gesserit. Enimuero nec
Asinis ad Equorum vtimur opera, nec Equis ad Asinorum: adeoque nec Equis ijsdem
ad omnia, verum alijs bello, alijs ad sarcinas. At hoc discrimen, in hominibus
multo magis obseruandum erat. Tributis quoque multis istis, crebris, and
inaequalibus sublatis, illud omnium loco repone, quod rerum nascentium Tertiam
diximus aequissime complecti partem, leuissimum pendentibus and Reipublicae
vtilissimum idem futurum. Nam propter hoc Tributum, nec temere quis aufugiet,
nec ab exactoribus iniuriam accipiet, dum illi pendentibus quamplurima volunt
attribuere, quo videlicet simul Tributum crescat. De his autem Hilotis, primum
tuae familiae, quot videbitur opus, selige: reliquos deinde Praefectis et
Militibus primarijs, quanto voles numero concede. Tum vero cogantur singuli pro
Hilotarum asscriptorum numero Clientes alere, seruos videlicet militares: ne
pecuniam publicam temere profundant: quaeque hosts in votis habent, vt Salutis
Communis impensae turpiter dissipentur, ipsi videantur procurare.

Haec quoque Naturae consideres licet Exempla. This, Notwithstanding:
Difference and excellency of rich and curiously wrought apparel is allowed by
God, to the glorious state of Princes Courts, Math. 11.2.8. Luke. 7. d. 27.
Aquila Rex quidem est Auium, and Ioui fuit olim consecratus, minime tamen
varias aut fulgentes habet Alas. Pauo contra varius quidem est and fulgens, sed
minime Regia natura. Pluresque Aues aliae Pauone long viliores, colorum sunt
varietate distinctae. Quare videtur, qui vestibus praetextis ac similibus To be
proud of apparel, is most Pecock-like: but without pride, due difference, is
most needful in a Common Wealth: and the Sovereign Prince of any Realm,
therein to exc^ll his Subjects incomparably: chie^ly in the day^^ of Triumphs,
Feasts, (...)nities, etc. The Scriptures Divine do yield v^ examples: and other
histories plentifully.
superbit, tanquam Pauonis pulcritudine gloriari. Iam illud specta, sitne
honestius ac iucundius, huc praecipue tendentem, and bello quantum licet
consulentem, moderato tum vestitu, tum reliquo viuendi modo, hosts quidem
contemnere, de Imperio autem ac Regno Securum esse: an vest praetexta
inuolutum, tremere, et hosts metuere. Quod si porro Pastores essetis, vtro
modo lac impenderetis? Vtrum partem quidem alteram ipsi consumeretis, altera
vero canes robustos aleretis, qui a ferarum insidijs Ouile defenderent: vt eo
conseruato tum Pastores esse, tum fructibus diu frui possetis: an hoc neglecto,
partem quidem alteram ingurgitaretis and vestimenta prolueretis, altera vero,
Canum robustorum loco, Maelitaeos catellos and vulpes aleretis, aut Vrsos, vt
voracissimas Bestias, ita parum intentas custodiae?

Huc igitur omne studium convert, nihil omittens neque praetexens, sieve quid
aut priorum Regum alicui, aut ipsi tibi aliter olim fuit visum, sieve quibusdam
non est res placitura: sed cum omnia mouens, tum nihil non ad Communem salutem
pertinere visum tentans,
quando ne Medici quidem sua semper possunt seruare decreta, sed cum omnia
mouent, tum nihil ad sanitatem pertinens omittunt, ac secant etiam, vel vrunt,
manumque interdum vel Pedem insuper ob salutem totius corporis abscindunt.
Horum siquidem ipse quaedam, si videbitur, cum liceat, perages: nonnulla ab
Augusto Imperatore, and Patre, Salutis Publicae causa postulabis. Neque tibi
ille difficulter ea concedet, cum huc spectare cognouerit, Ingenium simul and
Impetum diuinum admiratus. Caeterum his, quae maxim and proxime videntur ad
Salutem tendere peractis, reliqua sine vlla difficultate deinceps, quaecunque
ad Reipubl. virtutem and ornatum pertinent, assequeris: ac tandem optimam
omnino Rempubl. nobis constitues. Quanto quidem mayor tibi a nobis habetur
honor, tanto etiam iacturam fore credes maiorem, si quid secus euenerit.
Enimuero te potissimum Salutis Communis decet curam gerere, nihil Cunctantem,
nec differentem. Siquidem nec licet cunctari, cum sit prae foribus periculum:
nec alioqui tale negotium conuenit differ. Nec imperite videtur Hesiodus
dicere:

SEMPER AT IGNAVVS CVM NOXIS PRAELIA MISCET.

AND with this pithy piece of wise warning, by HESIODVS (very aptly to our
present purpose) recorded, I will end this first Treatise: falling out, in very
good Opportunity, to be in stead of a Preface, for the better understanding and
enjoying the rest of the RARE MEMORIALS ensuing: collected, according to the
Title prefixed. For which Preface, being thus, (though with more zeal than
cunning) finished, I yield thanks most humbly to the Omnipotent Spirit of
Verity, the Spirit of all Comfort and Bountifulnes: which Directed and
inclined the Mind and Tongue of my Instructor, thus to prefer the SAFETY AND
POLITIKELY ASSVRED PEACE UNIVERSAL, OF THIS BRYTISH KINGDOM, before any other
Lucre, or Honor, Public or Private: As, without which PEACE AND TRANQVILLITY,
neither the COMMONS: nor, the LORDS SPIRITVALL OR TEMPORAL: no, nor yet our
most GRACIOUS ELIZABETH, can atteyne to the excellent Scope, and perfection of
Civil State: unto which, both, by the Law of God and Nature: and also by
Human Policy, all sound Commonwealths, and Bodies Politic, ought to direct
all their Actions Civil.

And I beseech you (Right Worshipful Sir,) not only to take these my speedy
Travails and Collections in good part, your self: But also, to whom so ever,
you will deliver any one of the Copies, (whereof, only one Hundred are to be
printed, by the warning of my Instructor:) You would be my Careful Orator, to
this purpose chiefly: That my good will, and exceeding zealous Intent herein,
dutifully to pleasure this BRYTISH MONARCHI^, might be thankfully accepted: and
so, my simple and very faithful Travails, to be rewarded. And finally, that
you would very earnestly request Hac, magnorum hominum sunt: H^c, apud Maiores
nostros factitata: Hac genera Officiorum qui persequuntur, cum summa ^tilitate
Reipublic^ y, magnam ipsi adipiscentur and Gratiam and Gloriam. Cicero. Offic.
lib. 2.
them, (for the COMMONWEALTHS CAUSE,) Speedily, Circumspectly, and Paradoxally
to vewe this plat. And then, to amend the Imperfection: and to Supply the wants
thereof: (the better now to be espied, by these few warnings,) and
prosperously, to farther some pithy Extract made of the whole matter: So much,
as they, both by their Politic skill, and auailable Authority, best can: And,
THEN, shall the foresaid PSALMODY, most aptly and heartily, of all true BRYTISH
AND ENGLISH SVBIECTS, be song: Lauda HIERVSALEM Dominum,
Lauda Deum tuum SION.
Quoniam confortauit Seras Portarum tuarum:
Benedixit filijs tuis in te.
Qui posuit fines tuos PACEM,
Et adipe Frumenti satiat te. etc.
Non-fecit Taliter omni Nationi.


Praise we all the Lord therefore. Amen.

Finished, Anno Domini. 1576. Augusto Mense.

PRINTED AT LONDON BY JOHN Day, Anno 1577. In September.

Cum Priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVL M. CHRISTOPHER Hatton, Esquyer, Capitayn of her
Majesty's Guard, and Ientleman of her Privy Chamber.
IF Private wealth, be leef and dear,
To any VVight, of Brytish Soil:
Ought Publik Weal, have any peer?
To that, is due, all Wealth and Toil.
Whereof, such Lore as I (of Anno. 1576.
late,)
Have lernd, and for Security,
By Godly means, to Guard this State,
To you I send, now, carefully.
Unto the Gardians, most wise,
And Sacred Senate, or Chief Power,
I durst not offer this Advise,
(So homely writ,) for fear of Lowr.
But, at your will, and discreet choice,
To keep by you, or to imparte,
I leave this zealous Publik voice:
You will accept so simple part.
M'Instructors friend did warrant me,
You would so do, as he did his:
That E. D. Esquire.
Ready friend, can witness be,
For Higher States, what written is:
Of Gratefulnes, due Argument.
If grievous wound, of sklandrous Darte,
At length to cure, they will be bent,
M'Instructor, then, will do his part,
In ernest wise, I know right well:
No Merit shall forgotten ly.
Thus much, I thought, was good to tell:
God grant you Blis, above the Sky.



