A KNIGHTS Coniuring. Done in earnest: Discovered in Jest.

By Thomas Dekker.

LONDON, Printed by T. C. for William Barley, and are to be sold at his Shop
in Gracious street* 1607.

TO THE VERY worthy Gentleman, Sir Thomas Glouer, Knight.
SIr, the love I owe your name (for some favors by me received from that
noble-minded Gentleman (your kinseman) wh^ is now employed upon an honorable
voyage into Turkey) makes my labors presume they shall not be unwelcome to you.
If you please to read me over, you shall find much morrall matter in words
merrily ^et down: and a serious subject inclosde in applications that (to some,
whose salt of judgment is taken off) may appear but triuiall and ridiculous.
The stream of custom (which flows through al kingdoms amongst scholars in
this fashion) bears me forward and up in this boldness: It being as common to
seek patrons to books, as Godfathers to children. Yet the fashion of some
patrons (especially those that doat more upon money, who is a common harlot;
then on the Muses who are pure maids, but poor ones) is to receive books
with cold hands and hot livers: they give nothing, and yet have red cheeks for
anger, when any thing is given to them. I take you (Sir) to be none of that
race: the world bestows upon you a more worthy Caracter. If the Art of my Pen
can (by any better labor) heighten your name and memory, you shall find my
love.

Most ready to be all, yours, Tho: Dekker.

To the Reader.
AN Epistle to the Reader, is but the same property, that a linck is to a man
walking home late: he hopes by that, and good words (tho he be examined) to
pass without danger, yet when he comes to the gates, if he meet with a
porter that is an Ass, or with a constable, that loves to lay about him with
his staff of authority, more then he needs, then let the party, that
stumbles into these provinces or puddels of ignorance, be sure either to be
struck down with barbarism (which cutteth worse then a brown bill) or to be
committed and have the seuerest censure laid upon him; let him be never so
well and so ciuilly bound up in fair behavior: though he be a man even
printed in the best complements of courtesy; tho he give never so many and so
sweet languages, yea and have all the light of understanding to lead him home;
yet those Spirits of the night, will hale him away, and cast him into
darkness. In the selfsame scuruey manner do the world handle poor books:
when a Reader is entreated to be courteous, he grows v^ciuil: if you sue to
his worship, and give him the style of Candido Lector^; then he is proud, and
cries mew: If you write merrily, he calls you Bu^^on; seriously, he swears such
stuff cannot be yours. But the best is, that as in Spain you shall have
fellows for a small piece of silver, take the S^rappado, to endure which
torture, another man could not be hyrde with a kingdom; so they that have once
or twice lain upon the rack of public censure, of all other deaths, do least
fear that upon the Press* Of that Wi^g

I hold my self one: and therefore (Reader) do I once more stand at the mark
of Criticisme (and of thy bolt) to be shot at, I have Armor enough about me,
that warrants me^ not to be fearful, and yet so well tempered to my courage,
that I will not be too bold. Envy (in these civil wars,) may hit me, but
not hurt me: Calumny may wound my name, but not kill my labors; proud of
which, my care is the less, because I can as proudly boast with the Poet, that
Non (...) be ^words^ mori.

Tho: Dekker.

A KNIGHTS Coniuring.
CHAP. I.
To enlarge Gold, there is a petition writ,
The Devil knows not how to answer it:
He chafes to come in print: In which mad Strain,
(Roaring) he hea^long runs to Hell again.
IN one of those mornings of the year, wherein the Earth breathes out richer
pe^fumes then those that prepare the ways of Princes: by the wholesomnesse of
whose Sent, the distempered winds (purging their able bodies) ran too and fro,
whistling for joy through the leaves of trees; whilst the Nightingale sat on
the branches complaining against lust; the Sparrow cherping on the tops of
houses, proud that lust (which he loves) was maintained there: whilst sheep
lay nibling in the valleys, to teach men hu^mility; and goats climbing up to
the tops of barren mountains, browzed there upon weeds and barks of trees,
to show the misery of Ambition: Just at that time when Lambs were wanton as
young wives, but not lascivious* when shepherds had care to feed their flocks,
but not to fliec^ them: when the Lark had with his music called up the Sun,
and the Sun with his light, started up the husband man: then, even ^hen, when
it was a morning to tempt Jove to leap from heaven, and to go a wenching; or
to make wenc^^s leave their soft beds, to have green gowns given them in the
fields. Behold on a sudden the caves where the most unruly and boisterous
winds lay imprisoned, were violently burst open: they being got loose; the
waters roard with fear of that insurrection, the element shot out thunder in
disdain of their threatening: the sturdiest oaks were the^ glad to bow and
stand quiuering; only the haw-thorne and the bryer for their humblenes were
out of danger: So dreadful a fury lead forth this tempest, that had not the
Rainebowt been a watermarke to the world, Men would have looked for a second
Deluge: for shower came down so ^ast, as if all clouds had bin distild into
water, and would have hid their curled heads in the Sea, whilst the waves (in
corn to see themselves so beaten down) boylde up to such height, as if they
meant that all men should swarm in heaven, and ships to sail in the Sky. To
make these terrors more heavy, the Sun pulld in his head, and durst not be
seen, darkness then in ^riumph, spread her pitchie wings, and lay upon all the
earth: the blacknes of Night was doubled upon high Noone: Beasts (being not
wont to behold such sightes,) bellowed and were mad: women ran out of their
wits, children into their mothers bosoms: Men were amazed* and held up their
hands to heaven, yet were verily persuaded that heaven was consumde to
nothing, because they could not see it: but to put them out of that error, Jove
threw down his forked darts of lightning so thickly, that ^imple fellows
swore there could be no more fire left in heaven: So that the world showed as
if it had bin half drowning, and half burning: the waters striving to have
victory over the flames* and they sweating as fast to drink dri^ the waters. To
conclude, this Tragedy was so long a playing, and was so dismal, the Scoene
was so turbulent and was so affrighting: This battle of Elements, bred such
another Chaos, that (not to be ashamde to borrow the words of so rare an
English Spirit,) Did not GOD say
Another Fiat, It had n'ere been day.


The storm being at rest, what buying up of Almanacks was there to see if the
weather-casters had played the Doctors to a hair, and told this terrible
disease of Nature right or no: but there could be found no such matter: the
celestial bodies for any thing St^r-ca^chers knew, were in very good health:
the 12. Signs were not beaten down from any of the houses in heaven: the Sun
looked with as cherry cheeks as ever he did: the Moon with as plump a face: It
could not be found by all the figures which their Prognostications cast up
their accounts by, that any such heavy reckoning was due to the wickedness of
the world: whereupon all men stood staring one in another face, not knowing how
to turn this hard matter into good English. At length, the gunpowder was
smelt out, and the train discovered. It was known for certain, that (tho
there was no pla^e lost) there was coniuring abroad, and therefore that was the
dambd devil in the vault that digd up all this mischief. But wherabouts think
you, was this Coniuring? Mary it goes for current all over Powles churchyard
(and I hope there comes no lies) that this Coniuring was about a Knight. It was
not (let me tell you) a Knight of worship, or a Knight that goes by water, or
rides by land to Westminster: but it was a Westminster Hall knight, a swearing
knight, or (not to allow him that honor, for he is no true knight that cannot
^weare) this was a knight forsworn, a poor knight, a periurde knight, a
knight of the Po^^. This yeoman of both Counters, had long ago bin sen^ with a
letter to the Devil, but no answer could ever be heard off: so that some mad
fellows laid their heads together, and swore to fetch him from Hell with a
vengeance, and for that cause kept they thi^ Coniuring.

The occasion of sending the letter grew thus: the temple of the Muses (for
want of looking to) falling to decay, and many (that seemd to hate Bar^arisme
and Ignor ance) being desirous to set workmen about it, and to repair it, but
having other buildings of their own in hand, utterly gave it over. A Common
Council was therefore called of all those that liu'de by their wits, and such
as were of the livery of Learning, amongst whom, it was found necessary,
(sithence those that had money enough were loath to part from it,) that to ease
the private puise, a general subsidy as it were, should be leuyed through all
the World, for the raizing of such a competent Sum as might maintain the
said Almes-house of the Nine Systers, in good fashion, and keep it from
falling. The collectors of this money, labourde till they swet^e, but the
Harvest would not come in, nothing could be gathered. Gentlemen swore by their
blood, and by the tombs of their ancestors, they would not lay out a penny: they
had nothing to do (they said) with the Muses, they were mere strangers to
them, and why should they be assessed to pay any thing toward the relief of
such lazy companions? there was no wit in it. A number of Noble men were of the
same opinion. As for Lawyers, they knew there was no Statute in any Kings
time, could compel them to disburse; and besides they were every day
purchasing themselves, so that it were folly to look for any money from them.
Soldiers swore by their Arms (which were most lamentably out at elbowes) that
they would be glad of money to bu^prouant: Peace they said, had made them begg^r
and suffered them almost to starve in her streets yet some of them went upon
lame wodden legs, because their Country might go sound and upright upon their
own: they (pore wretches) wanted Action, and yet had a number of Actions
against them, yea and were ebbed so low, that Captens gave over their charges,
and were lead by Serieants, no silver therefore could be coynde out of them.
Scholars could have found in their hearts to have made money of their books,
gowns, corner caps, and bedding, to have paid their share toward this work
of Charity, but men held all that was theirs (how good soever,) in such vile
contempt, that not even those who upon a good pawn will lend money to the
Devil, (I mean Brokers) would to them part with any coin, upon any Interest,
so much did they hate the poor wenches and their followers.

This matter being openly complainde upon, at the Parliament of the Gods, It
was there presently enacted, that Apollo (out of whose brain Wisemen come into
the world) should with all speed descend, and prevent this mischief: least
Sacred Knowledge, having her Intellectual soul banished from the earth,
having no house to dwell in there, the earth should (as of necessity it would)
turn into the first Chaos, and Men into Giants, to fight again with the Gods.
Mercury likewise, for the same purpose, was forthwith sent from the whole
Synod, as Ambassador to Plutus (who is mon^ymaister of those Low Countries
of Lymbo) to ^^rswade him by all the eloquence that Hermes co^ld use, that Gold
might be suffered to have a little more liberty: And that scholars for want of
his sweet and royal company, might not be driven to walk in threadbare
cloakes, to the dishonor of Learning; nor go all their life time with a
lantern and candle to find the Philosophers stone (out of which they are able
if they could hit it, to strike such sparks of gold, that all the world should
be the wa^mer for it, nay to beggar the Judges) yet in the end to die arra^t
beggars themselves. For you must understand, that tho the Muses are held of no
reckoning here upon earth, but are set below the Salt, when Asses sit at the
upper end of the table, yet are they borne of a heavenly race, and are most
welcome guests even to the banquets of the Gods.

The divine Singer (Apollo) according to the Decree of the Celestial upper
House, is now alive come upon earth: the fountains of Science flow (by his
influence) and swell to the brim: Baye trees to make garlandes for Learning,
are new set, and already are green, the Muses have fresh colors in their
cheeks; their Temple is promised to be made more fair: there is good hope
that Ignorance shall no longer wear Satin. But for all this, Mercury with all
his Coniuring, cannot raise up the yellowe spirit of Gold out of Hell, so
perfectly as was expected: he puts up his bright and a^ia^le face above ground,
and shrincks it down again, ere one can ca^^^e him by the locks. Which
mockery the world taking note of, a mad Greek that had drunk of the Holy
water, and was full of the Divine Fury, taking a deep bowl of the Helliconian
liquor in his hands, did in a bravery write a Supplication in the behalf of
Gold for his enlargement, vowing that he would spend all his blood into yncke,
and his brains to cotton, but he would have an answer, and not according to
the manner of Suitors, be borne off with delays.

The petition being engrossed, he thought none could run faster to hell, nor be
sooner let in there, then either a Pander, a Broker, or a knight of the Post,
had made choice therefore of the last because of his name, and sent it by him,
who belike having much to do with the Devil, could not of a long time be
heard of, and for that cause was all that Coniuring, which I spoke of before.

Whereupon (entering into consideration, what shifts and shapes men run into,
what baseness they put on, through what dangers they venture, hold much of their
fames, their conscience, their lives, yea of their houses, they will lay out
to purchase that piece of Heavenly earth (Gold,) the strange Magic of it
drove me straight into a strange admiration. I perceiu'de it to be a
witchcraft beyond man's power to contend with: a Torrent whose winding creekes
were not with safety to be searched out: a poison that had a thousand contrary
workings on a thousand bodies: for it turns those that keep it prisoner in
chests, into Slaves, and Idolaters, they make it their god and worship it; and
yet even those that become such Slaves unto it, does it make sovereign
commanders over a world of people: some for the love of it would pluck down
heaven, others to overtake it, run quick to hell. But (alas) if a good head
hammer out these Ir^ns with skill, they are not so hard: It is not so monstrous
a birth to see Gol^ create men so de^ormed: for this strompet the world has
tricks as wanton as these: he that every night lies by the sides of one fairer
then Vulcans wife, has been taken the next morning in the Sheets of a
Blackamore: Nay even in those currants that run fullest of Ceremony, there is a
flowing over of Apishnes and folly: for (like Riders of great horses) all our
Courses are but Figures of 8: the end of one giddie Circle, is but a falling
into a worse, and that to which on this day we allow a religiou^ observance, to
morrow do we make the selfsame thing ridiculous, For you see at the end of
great Battles we fall to bury the dead, and at the end of Burialls, we
sit down to Banquets: when banquets have been played about, Drinking is the
next weapon; from the fire o^ drinking, flames out Quarrel; Quarrel breaks
forth into Fighting, and the stream of Fighting runn^s into Blood.

This Forr^st of Man and beast (the World) being then so wild, and the most
perfect Circles of it, drawn so irregualler (...) It can be no great sawcines
in me, if snatching the Constables staff out of his hand, I take upon me to
make a busy privy s^^rch in the Suburbs of Satan, for the
supplication-caryer, and to publish the answer to the world, that should come
with him. Into the which troublesome sea, I am the more desperately bold to
lanch forth, and to hoyst up the full sails of my inue^tion, because (as Rumor
goes gossiping up and down) great wagers were laid in the world, etc: that
when the supplication was sent, it would not be received, or if received, it
would not be read over; or if read over, it would not be answered: ^or Mammon
being the god of no beggars, but Burgomasters and rich Cormora^ts, was worse
thought of then he deserved: Every man that did but pass through Paul's
churchyard, and had but a glance at the title of the petition, would have
betted ten to five, that the Devil would hardly, (like a Lawyer in a busy
Term) be spoken with, because his Client had not a penny to pay Fees, The
Devil ^he b^st fe^^er, and very apt to q^arrell.
but sued in Forma pauperis.

Had it been a Challenge, it is clear, he would have answered it: for he was
the first that kept a Fence school, when Cayn was alive, and taught him that
Embrocado, by which he killed his brother: Since which time, he has made ten
thousand Freeschollers as cunning as Cayn. At sword and buckler, little Dauy
was no body to him, and as for Rapier and Dagger, the Germane may be his
iourneyman. Mary the question is, in which of the Playhouses he would have
performed his Prize, if it had grown to blows, and whether the money being
gathered, he would have cozende the Fencers, or the Fencers him, because Hell
being under every one of their Stages, the Players (if they had owed him a
spite) might with a false trap-dore have slipped him down, and there have kept
him as a laughing stock to all their yawning Spectators. Or had his
I^^er^allship ben arrested to any action how great so ever, all the Law in
Westminster^hall could not have kept him from appearing to it (for the Devil
scorns to be nonsuited) he would have answered that too: He can se^ ^on^ to
picad for him.
But the mischief would have been, where should he have got any that would
have pleaded for him? who could have endured to see such a damnable Cliant
every morning in his chamber? what waterman (for double his fare) would have
landed him at the Temple, He keeps no Watermen.
but rather have struck in at White-Fryers, and left him there a shore with a
Pox to him? Tush: there was no such matter, the stream he was to enter into,
was not so daungero^s, this Coyner of Light Angels knew well enough how the
Exchange went, he had but bare words lent unto him, and to pay bare words
again (though with some Interest) it could be no loss.

He resolved therefore to answer his humble Orator: But being himself no^
brought up to learning (for the Devil can neither write not read) yet he has been at all the Universities in Christendom, and thrown damnable Heresies (like
bo^es for dogs to gnaw upon, amongst the Doctors themselves:) but having no
skill but in his own Horn book, it troubled his mind where he should get a
penman (...)
fit for his tooth to scrible for him, all the Scriueners i^th town he had at
his beck, but they were so set a work with making bonds between Usurers and
Vnthristy heirs, between Marcha^ts and Tradesmen, (that to cousen and undo
others, turn Bank-rowtes themselves, and defeat Cred^^ouis) and with drawing
close conueyances between Land-lordes and Bawdes, that now sit no longer upon
the Skyrtes of the City, but iette up up and down, even in the cloak of the
City, and give more rent for a house, then the prowdest London occupyer of
them all, that Don Lucifer was loath to take them from their Nouerints, because
in the end he knew they were but his Factors, and that he should be a
part-owner in their lading, himself; Lawiers clarks were so durtied up to the
hammes, with trudging up and down to get pelf, and with fishing for gudgeons,
and so wrung poor ignorant Clyents purses, with exacting unreasonable Fees,
that the Paye-maister of Perdition would by no means take them from their wide
lines, and bursten-bellyed straggling ^ffs, but stroking them under the
chinnes, called them his white boys, and told them he would empty the ynkepot
of some others.

Whether then marches Monsieur Malefico? Mary to all the writing
Schoole-maisters of the town, he took them by the fists, and lik'de their
hands exceedingly (for some of them had ten or twelve several hands, and
co^ld counterfeit any thing, but perceiving by the copies of their
countenances, that for all their good letters, they writ abominable bad
English, and that the world would think the Devil a Dunce, if there came
false Orthographi^ from him (though ^here be no truth in his budget) away he
gallops from those tell-tales (the Schoolmaisters) damning himself to the pit
of Hell, if any scribbling petition writer, should ever get a good word at his
hands.

I hearing this, and fearing that the poor Suppliant should loose his longing,
and be sent away with Sinihilattuleris, resolved to do that for nothing, which
a number would not for any money.

I sell to my ^ooles, (pen, ink, and paper) roundly, but the Headward^n of the
Horners (Signior Beco Dia^olo) after he had cast up what lay in his stomach,
suspecting that I came rather as a spy to betraye him, then as a spirit to
run of his errands, and that I was more likely to have him to Barber Surgeons
hall, there to Anatomize him, then to a Barbers shop to trim him neately,
would by no means have the answer go forward: Notwithstanding, having
examined him upon Interrogatories, and thereby sifting him to the very bran, I
swore by Hellicon, (which he could never abide) that beca^^e it is out of
fashion to bring a Devil upon the Stage, be should (spite of his spitting fire
and Brimstone,) be a Devil in print. Enraged at which, he flu^g away in a
fury, and leapt into Barathrum, whilst I mustred all my wits about me, to
fight against this Captain of the damned Crewe, and discover ^is Stratagems.

CHAP. II.
Don Luciser^ acquaintance soon is got,
At London or at Westminster: where not?
Hells Map is drawn, In which it does appear,
Where Hell does lie, and who they are, live there.
WOnder is the daughter of Ignorance, none bu^ ^ooles will marvel, how I and
this Grand Sophy of the whore of Babylon came to be to familiar together, or
how we met, or how I knew where to find him, or what Charms I carried about
me whilst I talked with him, or where (if one had occasion to use his
Diuellsh^p) a Porter might fetch him with a wet finger.

Tush, these are silly inquisitions; his acquaintance is more cheap, then a
common Fiddlers; his lodging is more known then an English bawdes, The Devils
Rendev^us.
a midwiues, or a physicians; and his walks more open to all Nations, the^
those upon the Exchange, where at every step a man is put in mind of Babell,
there is such a confusion of languages. For in the Term time, my Cauailiero
Cornuto runs sweating up and down between Temple bar and Westminster hall,
in the habit of a knight Errant, a swearing knight, or a knight of the Post:
All the Vacation you may either meet him at the Dycing Ordinaryes, like a
Captain, at Cockpits, like a young country Gentleman; or else at
Bowling-Alleys in a flat cap, like a shopkeeper: every market day you may take
him in Cheap ^side, poorly attyrde like an Ingrosser, and in the afternoones,
in the two peny^ rooms of a Playhouse, like a Puny, seated Check by Iowle
with a Punke: In the heat of Summer he commonly turns Intelligencer, and
carries tales between the Archduke and the Grave: In the depth of Winter, he
sits tippling with the Flemmings in their towns of Garrison.

Having therefore (as Chamber-maides use to do for their Ladies faces over
night) make ready my colors, the pencell being in my hand, my Card lined, my
Needle (that capers over two and thirty points of the Compass) touched to the
quick, East, West, North, and Sout^, the four Trumpetters of the World, that
never blow themselves out of breath, like four dropsy Dutch Captains
standing Cent^nells in their quarters, I will ingenuously and boldly give you
the Map of a country, that lies lower then the 17. valleys of Be^gia, yea lower
then the Cole-pits of New castle, is far more dark, far more dreadful,
and fuller of knauerie, then the Colliers of those fire-workes are.

The name of this strange Country is Hell, Description of Hell.
In disouery of which, the Quality of the kingdom, the condition of the Prince,
the estate of the people, the Traffic thither, (marie no transporting of
goods from thence) shall be painted to the life. It is an Empire, that lies
under the Torria Zone, and by that means is hotter at Christmas, then it is in
Spain or France (which are counted plaguey hot Countries) at Midsommer, or
in England when the Dogge-daies bite sorest: for to say truth (because it is
sin to belie t'i^s^ Dinell) the Universal Region is built altogether upon
Stoues and Hotte-houses, you cannot set loote into it, but you have a Fieri
facias seru'de upon you: for like the Glasse-house Furnace in Blacke-friers,
the bone-fires that are kept there, never go out; insomuch that all the
Inhabitants are almost broyld like Carbonadoes with the sweatting sickness, but
the best is, (or rather the worst) none of them die on it.

And such dangerous hot shortes are all the women there, that whosoever meddles
with any of them is sure to be burnt: It stands farther off then the Indies:
yet to see the wonderful power of Navigations, if you have but a side-winde,
you may ^aile sooner thither, than a married man can upon St; Lukes day to
Cuckolds haven, from St: Katherins, which upon sound experience, and ^y the
opinion of many good Mariners, may be done in less than haife an hour. If
you travel by land to it, the ways a^e de^icate, even, spacious, and very
fair, but toward the end^ very foul: the paths are beaten more ba^e then the
living; of Churchmen. Y^u never, turn, when you are traveling thither, but
keep altogether on the left hand, so that you cannot lose your self, unless
you desperately do it of purpose.

The miles are not half so long as those between Colchester and Ipswich in
England, nor a quarter so durty in the wrath of Winter, as your Fren^^ miles
are at the fall of the leaf.

Some say, it is an Island, embrac'de about with certain Rivers, called the
waters of Sorrow: Others prove by infallible Demonstration, that it is a
Continent, but so little beholding to Heaven, that the Sun never comes
amongst them.

How so ever it be, this is certain, What Persont are there
that it is exceeding rich, for all Usurers both Jews and Christians, after
they have made away their Souls for money here, meet with them there again:
You have of all Trades, of all Professions, of all States some there: you have
Popes there, as well as here: Lords there, as well as here: Knights there, as
well as here: Aldermen there, as well as here: Ladies there, as well as here:
Lawyers there, as well as here: Soldiers march there by myllions, so do
Citizens, so do Farmers, very few Poets can be suffered to live there, the
Colonel of Coniurers dryues them out of his Circle, because he fears they will
write Libells against him: yet some pitti^ull fellows (that have faces like
fire-drakes, but wits cold as whetstones, and more blunt) not Poets indeed,
but ballad makers, rub out there, and write Infernalls: Marry players swarm
there as they do here, whose occupation being smelt out, by the Cacodaemon,
or head Officer of the Country, to be lucratiue, he purposes to make up a
company, and to be chief sharer himself, De quibus su^ loc^, of whose doings
you shall hear more by the next Carrier: but heeres the mischief, you may
find the way thither, though you were blinder then Super stition, you may be
set ashore there, for less then a Scullers fare: Any Vinteners boy, that has
been cup bearer to one of the 7. deadly sins but half his years, any
Merchant of maiden-heads, that brings commodities out of Virginia, can direct
you thither: But neither they, nor the weather-beatenst Cosmographicall
Starre-catcher of em all, can take his oath, that it lies just under such an
Horizon, whereby many are brought into a Fools Paradise, by gladly believing
that either there is no such place at all, or else that it is built by
Inchauntment, and stands upon Fayrie ground, by reason such pinching and
nipping is known to be there, and that how well-fauoured soever we depart
hence, we are turned to Changelings, if we tarry there but a minute.

These Territories, notwithstanding of Tartarie, will I undermine and blow up
to the view of all eyes, the black and dismal shores of this Phlegetonticke
Ocean, shall be in ken, as plainly as the white (now vnmaidend breasts of our own
Island) China, Peru, and Cartagena, were never so ri^led: the winnings of Cales,
was nothing to the winning of this Troy that is all on fire: the very bowels of
these Infernal Antipodes, shall be ripped up, and pulled out, before that great
Dego of Devils his own face: Nay, since my flag of defiance is hung forth, I
will yield to no truce, but with such Tamburlaine-like fury, march against
this great Turk, and his legions, that Don Beelzehub shall be ready to damme
himself, and be horne-mad: for with the coniuring of my pen, all Hell shall
break loose.

Assist me therefore, thou Genius of that ventrous, but jealous Musicion of
Thrace (Euridices husband,) who being besotted on his wife, (of which sin none
but Cuckoldes should be guilty) went alive (with his Fiddle at's back) to see
if he could bail her out of that Adamantine pri^on; the fees he was to pay
for her, were Iigs and country daunces: he paid them: the forfeits, if he put
on yellow stockings, and looked back upon her, was her everlasting lying there,
without bail or Mayneprize: the loving Coxcomb could not choose but look
back, and so lost her, (perhaps he did it, because he would be rid of her.)
The Moral of which is, that if a man leave his own business, and have an eye
to his wives doings, she will give him the slip, though she run to the Devil
for her labor. Such a journey (sweet Orpheus) am I to undertake, but Jove
forbid my occasion should be like thine, for if the Marshall himself should
rake Hell for wenches, he could not find worse, (no nor so bad) there, as are
here upon earth. It were pity that any woman should be damned, for she would
have tricks (once in a moon,) to put the Diue I out of his wits. Thou (most
clear throated singlngman,) with thy Harp, (to the twinkling of which,
inferior Spirits skipt like Goats ou^ the Welsh mountains) had privilege,
because tho^ were a Fiddler to be saucy, and to pass and repass^ through every
room and into every noo^ (...) the Devils wine-celler: Inspire me therefore
with thy cunning that carried thee thither, and thy courage that brought thee
from thence, teach me which way thou went in, and how thou scapt'st out,
guide me in true fingering, that I may strike those tunes which thou plaid'st,
(every dinner and supper) before that Emperor of Low Germany, and the
brabbling States under him: Lucifer himself danced a Lancashire Horne-pipe,
whilst thou were there. If I can but Harp upon thy string, he shall now for
my pleasure tickle up the Spanish Pauin. I will call upon no Midwiues to help
me in those Throws, which (after my brains are fallen in labor) I must
suffer, (yet Midwiues may be had up at all hours,) nor upon any coniurer, (yet
Coniurers thou know, are fellow and fellow-like, with Mounsieur
Malediction, as Puncks are, who raise him likewise up continually in their
Circaean Circles) or as Brokers are, who both day and night study the black
Art: No, no, (thou Mr: of thy Musical company,) I sue to none, (but to thee,
because of thy Pricksong:) For Poetry (like Honesty and old Soldiers) goes
upon lame feet, unless there be music in her.

But the best is, Facilis descensus Auerni, It Is but slipping down a hill, and
you shall fall into the Devils lap presently. And that is the reason,
(because his Sinfulness is so double diligent, as to be at your elbowe with a
call, wherein he gives good examples to Drawers, if they had grace to follow
his steps) that you swallow down that News first, which should be eaten
last: For you see at the beginning, the Devil is read^e to open his mouth for
an Answer, before his hour is come to be set to the Bar.

Since therefore, a Tale of the whole voyage would make any liquorish mouthed
News-monger like his lips after it, no man's teeth shall water any longer, he
shall have it; for a very brief Cronicle shall be gathered, of all the
memorable occurrents, that presented themselves to the view of our wandering
Knight in his journey, the second part of Erra Paters Almanac, whose shoes
Platoes Cap was not worthy to wipe, shall come forth, and without lying, (as
you Calendermongers use to do,) tell what weather we had all the way he went,
to a drop of rain: we will not loose him from the first minute of his iumping
a ship-bo^^d, to the last of his leaping a shore, and arrival at Tamor Chams
Court (his good Lord and Master) the Devil.

CHAP. III.
Hells Post through London rydes: by a mad crewe,
He Is called into a Tavern: In which view
They drink and rail: each of them by the Post
Sends a strange message to his Fathers Ghost.
THe Post therefore, having put up his packet, blows his horn, and gallops
all the way like a Citizen, so soon as ever he is on horseback, down to
Billingsgate, for he meant when the Tide seru'de to angle for Souls, and some
other fresh fish in that goodly fish pond the Thames, as he passed over it, in
Grauesend-barge: that was the water-coach he would ride in, there he knew he
should meet with some voluntaries that would venture along with him: In this
passage through the City, what a number of Lord Mayors, Aldermens, and rich
Commoners sons and heirs kept hollowing out at Tauernwindows to our knight,
and wafted him to their Gascoigne shores, with their hats only (for they had
molten away all their feathers) to have him strike fail, and come up to them:
he vaild, and did so: their fantastic salutations being complemented, with
much entreaty (because he stood upon thorns) he was aduaunc'd (in regard
of his Knighthood) to the upper end of the b^ord: you must take out your
writing tables, and note by the way, that every room of the house was a Cage
full of such wild foul, Et crimine ab vno disce omnes, cut up one, cut up
all, they were birds all of a beak, not a Woodcocks difference among twenty
douzen of them; every man had before him a bale of dice, by his side a brace of
Punks, and in his fist a nest of bowls. It was springtide sure, for all were
full to the brimmes, with French being turned into English, (for they swum up
and down the River of Burdeux) signified thus much, that dycing, drinking, and
drabbing, (like the three seditious Jews in Jerusalem,) were the civil plagues
that very vnciuily destroyed the Sons (but not the sins) of the City.

The blood of the grape coming up into their cheeks, it was hard to judge,
whether they blushed to see themselves in such a pickle, or looked red with
anger, one at another: but the troth is, their faces would take any dye but a
blush ^colour, and they were not made of the right mettle of courage to be
angry, but their wits (like wheels in Brunswick clocks) being all wound up, so
far as they could stretch, were all going, but not one going truly.

For some cursed their birth, some their bringing up, some rayled upon their
own Nation, others upon Strangers. At the last, one of these Acolasti, playing
at doublets with his pue-fellowe, (which they might well do, being almost
driven to their shyrtes,) and hearing upon what Theme the rest sung Ex
tempore, out-draws his poniard, and stabbing the tables, as if he meant to have
murdered the thirty men, swore he could find in his heart to go presently
(having drunk vpsy Dutch,) and piss even upon the Curmudgion his Fathers
grave: for, says he, no man has more undone me, than he that has done most
for me, i will stand to it, it is better to be the son of a Cobbler, then of a
common council man: if a Cobblers son and heir run out at heels, the
whoreson patch may mend himself; but we, whose friends leave us well, are
like howre-glasses turn'de up, though we be never so full, we never leave
running, till we have emptied our selves, to make up the mouths of slaves,
that for gain are content to lie under us, like Spaniels, fawning, and receive
what falls from our superfluity. Who ^reedes this disease, in our bones?
Whores? No, alack let us do them right, Wise mothers make foolish children.
it is not their fault, but our mothers, our cockering mothers, who for their
labor make us to be called Cockneys, or to hit it home indeed, those golden
Asses our Fathers.

It is the old Man, it is Adam, that lays a curse upon his Posterity: As
for my Dad, it is well known, he had hippes reeling at Sea, (the vnlading of
which gives me my load now, and makes me stagger on land,) he had ploughes
to tear up dear years out of the guts of the earth in the country, and Yeomens
sons, North countrymen, fellows (that might have been Yeomen of the Guard
for feeding) great boys with beards, whom he took to be Prentizes, (mary
never any of them had the grace to be free,) and those lads like Sarieants)
tore out men's throats for him to got money in the City: he was richer then
Midas, but more wretched then an Alchumist: so covetous that in gardning time,
because he would not be at the cost of a load of Earth, he par'de not his
nails for seven years together, to the intent the durte that he filch't
under them, should serve for that purpose: So that they hung over his Fingers,
like so many shooing-hornes: do but imagine how far ever any man ventred
into hell for money, and my Father went a foot farther by the standard, and why
did he this, think you? he was so sparing, that he would not spend so much
time as went to the making up of another child, so that all was for me, he
cozened young Gentlemen of their Land, only for me, had acres morgag'd to him
by wise-acres, for ^. hundred pou^ds, paid in hobby-horses, dogs, bells, and
lutestrings, which if they had been sold by the dru^, or at an out-rop, with
the cry, of No man better? would never have yielded 50. li. and this he did
only for me, he built a Pharos, or rather a Blockhouse beyond the gallows at
Wapping, to which the black fleet of Cole-carriers that came from Newcastle,
struck fail, were brought a bed, and discharg'de their great bellies there,
like whores in hugger-mugger, at the common price, with twelve pence in a
chauldern over and above, thereby to make the common wealth blow her nails
till they ak'de for cold, unless she gave money to sit by his fire, only for
me: the poor cursed him with bell, book and candle, till he looked blacker
with their execration, Miserable fathers make wretched sons.
the^ if he had bin blasted, but he car'de not what dogs bark't at him, so
long as they bit not me: his hous-keeping was worse then an Irish Kernes, a Rat
could not commit a Rape upon the paring of a moldy cheese, but he died for it,
only for mysake, the lean lade Hungarian would not lay out a penny pot of sack
for himself, though he had eaten stinking fresh herring able to poison a dog,
only for me, because his son and heir should drink eggs and muskadine, when
he lay rotting.

To conclude, he made no conscience, to run quick to the Devil of an errand,
so I had sent him. Might not my father have been begged (think you) better
the^ a number of scuruy things that are begd? I am persuaded, fools would be a
rich Monopoly, if a wise man had em in hand: would they had begun with him,
I Will be sworn, he was a fat one: for had he filled my pockets with silver, and
the least corner of my coxcomb with wit how to save that silver, I might have
been called upon by this, whereas now I am ready to give up my cloak: Had he set
me to Gr^ner-schoo^e, as I set my self to dancing school, in stead of
treading Carontoes, and making Fiddlers fat with rumps of capo^s, I had by this
time read Homilyes, and fed upon Tith-pigs of my own v^caridge, whereas now, I
am ready to get into the Pr^digals service, and cat loves nuts, that is to say,
Acorns with swine: But men that are wisest for officers, are commonly arrand
woodcocks, for Fathers: He that prouides living for his child, and robs him of
learning, turns him into a Beetle, that flies from perfumes and sweet Odours,
to feed on a cow-sheard; all such rich men's darlings are either christened by
some left handed Priest, or else born under a threepeny Planet, and then they will
never be worth a groat, though they were left Landlords of the Indies. I
confess, when all my golden veins were shrunk up, and the bottom of my
Patrimony came within 200. pound of vnraueling, I could for all that have bin
dubbed: But when I saw how mine uncle played at chesse, I had no stomach to be
knighted. Why, says the Post? Mary quoth he, because when I prepared to fight
a battle on the Chesse-board, a Knight was always better then a Pawn: but
the Usurer mine uncle made it plain, that a good pa^ne now was better then a
Knight.

At this the whole Chorus, summos mouere Cachinnos, laughed till they grind
again, and called for a fresh gallon, all of them falling on their knees, and
drawing out silver and guilt rapiers, the only momuments that were left of
hundreds and thousands in Pecunijs numeratis. swore they would drink up these
in deep Healthes, to their howling Fathers, so they might be sure the pledging
should choke them, because they brought them into the Inn of the World, but
left them not enough to pay their ryotous reckonings, at their going out.

The knight was glad he should carry such welcome news with him, as these, to
the clouen-footed Synagogue, and tickled with immoderate joy, to see the world
run upon such rotten wheels. Whereupon pleading the necessity of his
departure, he began first to run over his Alphabet of Congees, and the^ with a
French Basilez, slipped our of their company.

But they knowing to what cape he was bound, bu^g upon him, like so many
beggars on an Almoner, importing, and coniuring him, by the love he did owe to
Knighthood, and Arms, and by his oath, to take up doun-cast Ladies, whom they
had there in their companyes, and whom they were bound in Nature and humanity
to relieve: that he would signi^y to their fathershow course the thread of life
fell out to be now toward the Fagge en^e: therefore, if any of them had
(inth'daies of (...) abomination, and idolatry to money) bound the spirit of
gold, by any charms, in Caves, or in iron setters under the ground, they
should for their own souls quiet, (which questionless else would whine up and
down) if not for the good of their children, release it, to set up their
decayed estates. Or if there had bin no such coniuring in their life times, that
they would take up money of the Devil (though they forfeyted their bonds, and
lay by it for ever, or else get leave with a keeper, to try how much they might
be trusted for among their old customers upon earth, though within two days
after, they proved Bankrupts by Proclamation. The Post-maister of Hell plainly
told them, that if any so seditious a fellow as Golge, were cast in prison:
their fathers would never give their consent to have him ransomed: because
there is more greedines among them below, then can be in the Hyeland-countreys
above: so that if all the Lordships in Europ were ofsfred in Morgage for a
quarter their value, not so much as 13. pence half penie can be had from
thence, though a man would hang himself for it: And as for their Fathers
walking abroad with keepers, alas they lie there upon such heavy Ex^cutions,
that they cannot get out for their souls. He counsels them therefore to draw
arrows out of another quiver, for that those marks stand out of their reach,
the ground of which counsel, they all vow to trauerse: Some of them resolving
to cast out liquorish baits, to catch old* (but fleshly) wealthy widows, the
fire of which Sophysticated love, they make account shall not go out, so long as
any drops of gold can be distilld from them: Others swear to live and dye in a
man of Were, though such kind of Theeuery be more stale then Seabeefe: the
rest that have not the hearts to shead blood, having reasonable stocks of wit,
means to employ em in the sins of the Suburbs, though the Poxelyes there as
deaths Legyer: For since^ Man is the clock of Time, they will all be Times
Sextens, and set the Dyall to what hours they list.

Our Vaunt' currer applauded the lots which they drew for themselves, and
offered to pay some of the Tauern Items: but they protesting he should not spend
a Baw-bee, as he was true knight consedere Duces, they sat down to their
Wine, and he hasted to the water.

CHAP. IIII.
Hells Post lands at Graues-end: see's Dunkirk, France,
And Spain: then up to Venice does advance:
At last he comes to the Banck-side of Hell:
Of Charon and his boat, strange news does tell.
BY this time is he la^ded at Grauesend, (for they whom the Devil dryues,
feel no Lead at their heels,) what stuff came along with him in the Barge,
was so base in the weauing, that it is too bad to be set out to sale: It was
only Luggadge, therefore throw it ouerboord. From thence hoysting up sail
into the Maine, he struck in among the Dunkerks, where he encountered such a
number of all Nations, with the dregs of all Kingdoms, vices dropping upon
them, and so like the Blacke-Gentleman his Master, that he had almost thought
himself at home, so near do those that lie in Garrison there, resemble the
Desperuatoes that fill up Plut^es Muster-booke: But his head beating on a
thousand Anuiles, the scolding of the Cannon drew him speedily from thence: So
that creeping up along by the rank Flemmish shores (like an Eues dropper) to
whisper out what the brabbling was, he only set down a note for his memory,
that the States sucking Poison out of the sweet flowers of Peace, but keeping
their coffers sound and healthful by the bitter Pills of War, made their
coun^rey a pointing stock to other Nations, and a miserable Anatomy to
themselves.

The next place he called in at, Fashions borne in France, and sent to be nursed
in England.
was France, where the Gentlemen, to make Apes of Englishmen, whom they took
daily practicing all the foolish tricks of fashions after their
Mounsieur-ships, with yards in steed of Leading Staves, mustred all the French
Tailors together, who, by reason they had thin hair, wore thimbles on their
heads, in stead of I (...) caps, every man being armed with his (...) Iron,
which he call's there his goose ((...)* of them being in France: All the
crosse-capere^s b^^ing placed in strong ranks, and an excellent o^ation cut
out and stitch't together, persuading them to sweat out their brains, in
devising new cuts, new french collers, new french cod-peec^s, and new french
panes in honor of Saint Dennys, only to make the gydd^-pated Englishman
consume his revenues, in wearing the like clothes, which on his back at the
least, can show but like cast suits, being the second edition, whilst the
poor French peasant iets up and down, (like a Pantaloun) in the old
theed-bare claoke of the Englishman, so that we^ buy fashions of them to
feather our pride, and they borrowe rags from us to cover their beggary. Pride
the Spaniards bastard, kephere.
The Spanyard was so busy in touching heaven with a lance, that our Knight of
the burning shield, could not get him at so much leisure, as to eat a dish of
Pilchers with him. The gulf of Venice he purposes shall therefore swallowe a
few hours of his observation, where he no sooner sets sooting on shore, but
he encounters with Lust, so ciuilly suited, as if it had been a Merchants wife:
Lust the Italians mistress, is now common with the E^glishman.
Whore-mongers there, may^vtter their commodities as lawfully as Costermongers
here, they are a ^ompany as free, and have as large privileges for what they
do, as any of the twelve Companyes in London. In other Countries Lechery is
but a Chamber-mayde: Here, a great Lady: She Is a retaylor, and has warrant to
sell souls, and other small wares, under the Seal of the City: Damnation
has a price set upon it, and dares go to Law for her own: For a Curtizans
action of the Case, will hold as well as a Usurers plea of debt, for ten in the
hundred. If Bride-well stood in Venice, a golden key (more easily then a
picklocke) would open all the doors of it: For Lechery here lies night and
day with one of Prides daughters (Liberty) and so far is the infection of
this Pestilence spredde, that every boy there has much harlot in his eyes:
Religion goes all in changeable silks, and wears as many maskes as she do'es
colors: Churches stand like Rocks, to which very few approach, for fear of
shipwreck.

The seven deadly sins, are there in as great authority, Dronkenues has
(...) a from the Low countries into great Britain.
as the seven Electors in Germeny, and women in greater then both: In so much
as drunkenness, which was once the Dutch-mans headake, is now become the
Englishmans: so ielouzy, that at first was whipped out of Hell, because the
tormented even Devils, lies now every hour in the Venetians bosom: Every Noble
man grows there like a Beeche tree, for a number of beasts couche under his
shade: every Gentleman aspires rather to be counted great then good, weighing
out good works by pounds, and good deeds by drams: their promises are Eeues,
their performances hollidayes, for they work hard upon the one, and are idle
on the other. Three things there are dog-cheap, learning, poor men's sweat,
and oaths: Farmers in that country are pe^^ie Tyrants, and Landlords Tyrants
over those Farmers, Epicu^es grow as fat there, as in England, for you shall
have a slave eat more at a meal, the^ ten of the Guard, and drink more in two
days, then all Maning-tree does at a Whitsun-ale. Our Rank^yder of the Stygian
borders seeing how well these Pupils profited under their Italian
Schoolmaster, and that all countries liu'de obedient to the Luciferan ^awes,
resolved to change Post-horse no more, but to conclude his Peregrina^ion,
having seen fashions, and gotten Table-talke enough by his travel. In a few
minutes therefore is he come to the banckside of Acheron, where you are not
bayted at by whole kennels of yelping watermen, as you are at
Westminster-bridge, and ready to be torn in pieces to have two pence rowed out
of your purse: no, Shipwrights there could hardly live, there is but one boat,
and in that one Charon is the only Ferry-man, so that if a Cales Knight should
bawle his heart out, he cannot get a pair of oars there, to do him grace
with (I ply'de your Worship first,) but must be glad to go with a Sculler: By
which means, though the fare be small (for the watermans wages was at first
but a halfpenny, then it came to a penny, it is now mended, and is grown to
three hal^e pence, for all things wax dear in Hell, as well as upon earth, by
reason it is so populous,) yet the gaynes of it are greater in a quarter, then
ten Western Buges get in a year: Dotchet Ferry comes nothing near it.

It is for all the world, like Graues-end Barge: and the passengers privileged
alike, for there is no regard of age, of sex, of beauty, of riches, of valor,
of learning, of greatness, or of birth: He that comes in first, sits no better
then the last.

Will Summers gives not Richard the third the cushions, the Duke of Guyze and
the Duke of Shoreditche have not the bradth of a benche between them, Jane
Shore and a Goldsmiths wife are no better one then another.

Kings and Clownes, Mors Scep^^^, Legioni^^^ aquat.
Soldiers and Cowards, Churchmen and Sextons, Aldermen and Cobblers, are all
one to Charon: For his Naulum, Luck (the old Recorders fool) shall have as
much mat, as Sir Lancelot of the Lake: He knows, though they had an oar in
every man's Boat in World, The Waterman of Hell, is, as Churlish a knave, as our
Waterman.
yet in his they cannot challenge so much as a stretcher: And therefore (though
he sails continual with wind and Tide, (he makes the prowdest of them all to
stay his leisure. It was a Comedy, to see what a crowding (as if it had been at
a new Play,) there was upon the Acheronticque Strond, (so that the Post was
feign to ^arry his turn, because he could not get near enough the shore: He
purposed therefore patiently to walk up and down, til the Coast was clear,
and to note the condition of all the passengers. Amongst whom there were
Courty^^s, The Passengers.
that brought with em whole Truncks of apparel, which they had bought, and
large pattents for Monopolies which they had begged: Lawyers laden with leases,
and with purchased Lordships, Churchmen so pursy and so windlesse with bearing
three or four Church li^ings, that they could scarce speak: Merchants laden
with baggs of gold, for which they had robbed their Princes Custom: Scholars
with Aristotle and Ramus in cloake-bags, (as if they meant to pull down the
Devil) in disputation, being the subtillest Logician, but full of Sophistry:
Captains, some in guilt armor (vnbat^red,) some in buffe Ie^kens, plated over
with massy silver lace, (raiz'd out of the ashes of dead pay,) and banckrupt
citizens, in swarms like porters, sweating basely under the burdens of that,
for which other men had sweat honestly before. All which ( like Burgers in a
Netherland town taken by Freebo^ters,) were compelld to throw down bag and
baggage, before they could have pasporte to be shipped into the F^emmish Hoye of
Hell: For if every man should be sufferd to carry with him out of the world,
that which he took most delight in, it were enough to drown him, and to cast
away the Vessel he goes in: Charon therefore strippes them of all, and
leaves them more bare then Irish beggars: And glad they were (for all their
howling to see themselves so fleeced,) that for their silver they could have
wa^tage over. In therefore they thrung, some wading up to the knees, and those
were young men: they were loath to make too much haste, swearing they came
thither before their times.

Some, up to the middles, and those were women, they seeing young men go
before them, were ashamed not to ve^ture farther than they. Others waded to the
chin, and those were old men, they seeing their gold taken from them, were
desperate, and would have drowned themselves; but that Charon slipping his Oar
under their bellies, tossed them out of the water, into his Wherry. The boat is
made of nothing but the wormeaten ribs of coffins, The stuff of which the
Wherry is made.
nailed together, with the splinters of fle^hlesse shinbones, dig'd out of
graves, being broken in pieces. The sculs that he rows with, are made of
Setxons spades, which had bin hung up at the end of some great plague, the
bench he sits upon, a rank of dead men's sculs. The worst of them having bin an
Emperor, as great as Charlemaine: And a huge heap of their beards serving for
his cushion: the Mast of the hot is an arm of an Yew tree, whose boughs (in
stead of Rosemary) had wont to be worn at burials? The sail, two patcht
winding sheets, wherein a Broker and an Usurer had bin laid: for their linen,
will last longest, because it comes commonly out of Lauender, and is seldom
worn.

The waterman himself is an old grisly-fac'd fellow: a beard filthier then a
Bakers mawkin that he sweepes his oven, What manner of fellow the sculler is.
which hung ^ull of knotted Elf-locks, and serves him for a Swabber in foul
weather to cleanse his Hulk: A pair of eyes staring so wide (by being blear'd
with the wind) as if the lidds were lifted up with gags to keep them open: More
salt Rue maticke water runs out of them, then would pickle all the Herrings
that shall come out of Yarmouth: A pair of hands so hard and scaled over with
durte, that Passengers think he wea^es Gauntlets, and more stinkingly musty
are they then the fists of Night-men, or the fingers of bryb^rie, which are
never clean: His breath belches out nothing but rotten damps, which lie so
thick and foggie on the face of the Waters, that his Fare is half choked,
ere they can get to Land: The Sea-coale furnaces of ten Brew-houses, make not
such a smoke, nor the Tallowe pans of fifteen Chaundlers (when they melt,)
send out such a smell; He Is dreadful in looks, and currish in language, yet
as kind as a Courtyer where he tak^s. He ^its in all storms bare headed, His
appar^^^.
for if he had a cap, he would not put if off to a Pope: A gown gyrt to him
(made all of Wolves skins) tanned, (figuring his greedynesse) but worn out
so long, that it has almost worn away his elbowes: He Is thick of hearing to
them that sue to him, but to those against whose wills he is sent for, a
Fiddler ^eares not the crecking of a window sooner.

As touching the River, look howe' Mooreditche shows, when the water is
three-quarters out, and by reason the stomach of it is ouer-laden, is ready to
fall to casting, so does that, it stincks almost worse, is almost as poisonous,
altogether so muddie, altogether so black: In taste very bitter, (yet to those
that know how to distill these deadly waters,) very wholesome.

CHAP. V.
The Post and Charon talk, as Charon rows,
He Fee's Helis Porter, an^ then on he goes:
Sessions in Hell: Souls brought unto the bar,
Arraigned and judged, A Catalogue who they are.
CHaron, having discharged his ^raight, the Packet carryer (that all this while
waited on the other side,) cry'de A boat, a boat: His voice was known by the
Tune, and (weary though he were,) over to him comes our Ferry-man. To whom (^o
soon as ever ever he was let ( Charon complains what a bawling there has
been, with what Fares he has been posted, and how much tugging (his boat
being so twack^) he has split one of his Oars, and broken his Bid^ook, so that
he can row but lazily til it be me^ded.

And were it not that the Souls p^yes excessive Rent for dwelling in the body,
he swears (by the Stygian Lake) he would not let em pass thus for a trifle,
but raise his price: why may not he do it as well as Puncks and Trades men?
Here vpo'n he brags what a number of gallant fellows and goodly wenches went
lately over with him, whose names he has in his book, and could give him, but
that they earnes^lie entreated not to have their names spr^d any farther (for
their heirs sakes, because most of them were too great in some men's books
already. The only wonder (says Charon) that these Passengers drive me inio,
is, to see how strangely the wo^ld is altered since Pluto and Proserpina were
married: For whereas in the old time, men had wo^t to come into his boat all
slash't, (some with one arm, some with never a leg, Miscent Aconita M^uercae.
Filius ante diem patris inquirit in anno.
and others with heads like calves, cleft to their shoulders, and the mouths
of their very wounds gaping so wide, as if they were crying, A boat, a boat,)
now contrariwise, his fares are none but those that are poisoned by their wives
for lust, or by their heirs ^or living, or burnt by Whor^s, or reeling into
Hell out of Tauerns: or if they happen to come bleeding, their greatest glory
is a stab, upon the giving of a lie.

So that if the 3. Destinies spin no finer threads then these, men must either (
like Aesculapius) be made immortal for mere pity sake, and be sent up to
Jupiter, or else the Land of Black-amoores must be made bigger: for the Great
Lord of Tartarie will shortly have no room for all his Retayners, which would
be a great dishonor to him, considering he is now the only hous-keeper.

By this time, Charon looking before him (as Watermen use to do) that is to
say, behind him, spied he was hard at shore: whereupon seeing he had such
doings (that if it held still) he must needs take a servant, (and so make a
pair of oars for Pluto) he offered great wages to the Knight passant, to be
his iourney-man: but he being only for the Devils land service, told him he
could not give over his service, but assuring him, he would inform his Mr:
(the King of Erebus,) of all that was spoken, he paid the boat hyre fitting
his Knighthood, leapt ashore, and so parted.

The ways are so plain, and our travelers on foot so famyliar with them,
that he came sooner to the Court gate pf Auernus, then his fellow (the
Wherry-man) could fasten his hook on the other side of Acheron: the Porrer
(though he knew him well enough, and fawned upon him,) would not let him
pass, The Porter of Hell.
rill he had his due: for every officer there is as greedy of his Fees, as
they are here. You mistake, if you imagine that Plutoes Potter is like one of
those big fellows that stand like Giants at Lords gates (having bellyes
bumbasted with ale in Lambs-wool) and with Sacks: and checks strutting out
(like two footeballes,) being blown up with powder beef and brewis: yet
he is as surly as those Key-turners are, but looks as little more scuruily:
No, no, this door keeper waytes not to take money of those that pass in, to
behold the Infernal Traged^es, neither has he a lodge to dyne and sup in, but
only a kennell, and executes ^^s bawling ^ffice merely for victuals: his name
is Cerberus, but the household call him more properly, The Black dog of Hell:
He has three heads, but no hair upon them, (the place is too hot to keep
hair on) for in stead of hair they are all rurl'd over with snakes, which
reach from the crowns of his three he ads along the ridge of his back to his
very tail, and that's wreathed like a dragons tail: twenty couple of hounds
make not such a damnable noise, when they howl, as he does when he barks: his
property is to wag his tail, when any comes for entrance to the gate, and to
lick their hands, but upon the least offer to escape out, he leaps at their
throats; sure he is a mad dog, for wheresoever he bites, it rankles to the
death: His eyes are ever watching, his ear^s ever listening, his paws ever
catc^ing, his mouths are gaping: Insomuch, that day and night, he lies howling
to be sent to Paris Gara^n, rather then to be vs'de so like a curre as he is.

The Post, to stop his throat, threw him a Sop, Bribes in Hell.
and whilst he was devouring of that, he passed through the gates. No sooner
was he entered, but he met with thousands of miserable souls, pyneond and dragd
in chains to the Bar, where they were to receive their trial, with bitter
lamentations bewayling (all the way as they went) and with loud ex^crations
cursing the bodies with whom they sometimes frolickly kept company, for leading
them to those impieties, for which they must now (even to their utter undoing)
deerly answer: it was quarter Sessions in Hell, and though the Postmaster had
bin at many of their arraignments, and knew the horror of the Executions, yet
the very sight of the prisoners struck him now into an astonishable amazement.

On not withstanding he goes with intent to deliver the Supplication, but so
busy was Bohomoth (the prince of the Devils) and such a prease was within the
Court, and about the Bar, that by no thrusting o^ shouldring, could he get
access; the best time for him must be, to watch his rising at the adiourning
of the Sessions, and therefore he skrewes himself by all the insinuating Art
he can, into the thickest of the crowd, and within reach of the Clarke of the
Peaces voice, to hear all their inditements.

The Judges are set, Sessions in Hell.
(being three in number) severe in look, sharp in justice, shrill in voice,
vnsubiect passion; the prisoners are souls that have committed treason against
their creation: they are called to the bar, Sin is the Jury.
their number in finit, their crimes numberless: The Jury that must pass upon
them, are their sins, who are impanel'd out of the s^uerall countries,
Conscience gives in evidence.
and are sworn to find whose Conscience is the witness, who upon the book of
their lives, where all their deeds are written, gives in dangerous evidence
against them, the Furies (who stand at the elbow of their Conscience) are there
ready with stripes to make them confess, for either they are the Beadels of
Hell that whippe souls in Lucifers Bride-well, or else his Executioners to put
them to worse torments: The Inditements are of several qualities, according to
the several offenses; Some are arraigned for ambition in the Court; The
several inditements.
Some for corruption in the church; Some for cruelty in the camp; Some for
hollow-hartednes in the City; Some for eating men alive in the Country, every
particular soul has a particular sin, at his heels to condemn him, so that
to plead not guilty, were jolly: to beg for mercy, madness: for if any
should do the one, he can put himself upon none but the devil and his
Angels: and they (to make quick work) give him his Pasport. If do the other,
the hands of ten kings under their great Seals will not be taken for his
pardon. For though Conscience comes to this court, poor in attire, diseased in
his flesh, wretched in his face, heavy in his gate, and hoarse in his voice,
yet carries he such stings within him, to torture himself, if he speak not
truth, that every word is a Judges sentence, and when he has spoken, the
accursed is suffered neither to plead for himself, nor to see any Lawier, to
argue for him.

In what a lamentable condition therefore stands the unhappy pris^n^r, The
misery of a prisoner in that Jury.
his Inditemnt is impleadable, his euidence^irre^utable, the fact impardonable,
the Judge impenitrable, the Judgment formidable: the torments insufferable,
the manner of them invtterable: he must endure a death without dying, Torments
ending with worse beginnings, by his shrikes others shall be affrighted,
himself afflicted, by thousands pointed at, by not one amongst milions pitied,
he shall see no good that may help him, what he most does love, shall be taken
from him, and what he most does loath, shall be powered into his bosom. Add
hereunto the faide cogitation of that dismal place, to which he is condemned,
the remembrance of which is almost as dolorous, as the punishments there to be
endured. In what colors shall I lay down the true shape of it? Assist my
invention.

Suppose that being gloriously attired, deliciously feasted, attended on
maiestically, Music charming thine ear, beauty thine eye; and that in the
very height of al worldly pomp that thought can aspire to, thou should be
tumbled down, from some high goodly pinnacle (builded for thy pleasure) into
the bottom of a Lake, whose depth is immeasurable, and circuit
incomprehensible: And that being there, thou should in a moment be ringed
about, with all the murderers that ever have bin since the first foundation of
the world, with all the Atheists, all the church-robbers, all the Incestuous
Rauishers, and all the polluted villains, that ever sucked damnation from the
breasts of black impiety, that the place it self is gloomy, hideous, and in
accessible, pestilent by dampes, and rotten vapors, haunted with spirits, and
pitched all over, with clouds of darkness, so clammy and palpable, that the eye
of the Moon is too dull to pierce through them, and the fires of the Sun too
weak to dissolve them, then that a Sulphurous stench must still strike up into
thy nosthrils, Adders and Toads be still crawling on thy bosom, Mandrakes and
night Ravens still shriking in thine ears, Snakes ever sucking at thy breath,
and which way soever thou turnest, a fire flashing in thine ^ies, yet yielding
no more light than what with a glimse may show others how thou art tormented,
or else show unto thee the tortures of others, and yet the flames to be so
devouring in the burning, that should they but glowe upon Mountains of Iron,
they were able to melte them like Mountains of Snow. And last of all, that all
these horrors are not wouen together, to last for years, but for ages of
worlds, yea for worlds of ages; Into what gulf of desperate calamity, would
not the poorest beggar now rhrowe himself headlong: rather then to taste the
least dram of this bitterness: If imagination can give being to a more miserable
place then this described? Such a one, or no worse then such a one, is that,
into which the guilty Souls are led captive, after they have this
condemnation.

And what tongue is able to relate the groans and vlulations of a wretch so
distressed, a hundred pens of steel would be worn blunt in the description,
and yet leave it unfinished.

CHAP. V.
The Writ for Gold senlargement now is read,
And by the Prince of Darkness answered:
The Devil abroad his commendations sends:
All Traitors are his Sons, Brokers his friends.
LEt us therefore sithence the Infernal Sessions are rejourned, and the Court
breaking up, seek out his knightship, who having waited all this while for the
Devil, has by this time deliuer^d to his paws the S^pplication, about Gold,
and so Matuolio his Secr^tary is reading it to him, but before he was up to the
middle of it, the work-maister of Witches, snatched away the Paper, and thrust
it into his bosom in great choler, railing at his Letter carryer, and
thr^atning to have him la'sh^ by the Furies, for his l^ytring so long, or
Cauteriz'de with hot Irons for a Fugitu^. But Mephostophiles discoursing from
point to point, what pai^es he had taken in the Su^uey (...) ^uery Country,
and how he had (...) Sergeant Satan gave him his bles^ing, and told him that
during his absence, the Wryler that penned the Supplication had been landed
(...) Charon, of whom he willed to enquire within what part of their domini^n
he had taken up his (...) this (...) to answer every word by word of mouth,
yet because he knows, tha^ at the return of his Post^ ship, and walking upon
the Exchange of the World, (which he charges him to hasten, for the good of
the Stygian kingdom, that altogether stands upon quick tafficque they will
flutter about him, crying, What news? what news? what squibs, or ra^ther what
pieces of ordinance does the McGunner of Gehenna discharge against so saucy a
suitor, that by the Artill^rie of his Secretaries pen, has shaken the walls
of his Kingdom, and made so wide a breach, that any Sir Giles may look into
his, and his Officers doings: to stop thou mouths with some thing, stop them
with this: That touching the enlargement of Gold: (which is the first branch of
the Petition:) So it is, The Devils answer to the Petition.
that Plutus his kinsman (being the only setter up of tempting Idolles,) was
borne a Cripple, but had his eye sight as fair as the day, for he could see
the faces and fashions of all men in the world in a twinkling. At which time,
for all he went upon Crutches, he made shifte o walk abroad with many of his
friends, Marry they were none but good men. A Poet, or a Philosopher, might
then have sooner had his company, than a Justice of Peace: Gold at the first
was lame and went up and down with goodmen, but now he is blind, and cares
not what fool leads him.
Virtue at that time, went in good clothes, and vice fed upon beggary. Al^hes
baskets, honesty, and plain dealing, had all the Trades in their own hands,
So that Unthrifts, Cheaters, and the rest of their Faction, (though it were the
greater) were borne down, for not an Angel durst be seen to drink in a
Tavern with them: whereupon they were all in danger to be famisht: Which
enormity Jupiter wisely looking into, and seeing Plutus dispersing his gifts,
amongst none but his honest brethren, struck him (either in anger or envy)
stark blind, so that ever since he has play'de the good fellow, for now
every gull may lead him up and down ^ike Guy, to make sports in any drunken
assembly, now he regards not who thrusts his hands into his pockets, nor how
it is spent; a fool shall have his heart now, as soon as a Physician: And an
Ass that cannot spell, go laden away with double Ducke^rs from his Indian
storehouse, when Ibis Homere, that has layne sick seventeen years together
of the Vniue^sitie plague, (watching and want) only in hope at the last to
find some cure, shall not for an hundred weight of good Latin, receive a two
penny weight in Silver, his ignorance (arising from his blindenes) is the only
cause of this Comedy of errors: so that until some Quack-saluer or other
(either by the help of Tower hill water, or any other, either Physical or
Chirurgicall means) can pick out that pin and web which is stuck into both
his eyes, (and that will very hardly be.) It is irreuocably set down, in the
Adamantine book of Fate, that Gold shall be a perpetual slave to slaves, a
drudge to fools, a fool to make Woodcocks merry, whilst wisemen mourn: or if
at any time he chance to break prison, and fly for refuge into the Chamber of
a Courtier, to a mere hawking country Gentleman, A Curse laid upon gold.
to a young student at the law, or to any Trades-mans eldest son, that rides
forth to cast up his Fathers reckonings, in fortified Tauerns, Such mighty
search shall be made for him, such Hue and Cry after him, such mis-rule kept,
until he be smelt our, that poor Gold must be glad to get him out of their
company, Castles cannot protect him, but he must be apprehended, and suffer
for it. Now as touching the seven leaued Tree, of the deadly sins, which in
the Supplication are likewise requested to be heawen down, his Suite is
unreasonable, for that grows so rank in every man's garden, and the flowers
of it worn so much in every woman's bosom, till at the last general Autumnian
quarter of the dreadful year, when whole Kingdoms (like sear and sap-lesse
Sin bears from all the year long.
leaves) must be shaken in pic^es by the consuming breath of fire, and all the
fruits of the earth he raked together, by the Spirit of Storms, and burnt in
one heap like stubble, till then, it is impossible to clear the oaken forehead
of it, or to loppe off any of the branches. And let this satisfy itching
Newes-hunters, for so much of mine answer to the poor fellows Supplication,
as I mean to have published to the world: Whatmore I have to utter, shall be in
his care, because he was more busy in his prating then a Barber, with thee my
Servant, about my household affairs, and therefore it is to be doubted he
lu^kes in our C^merian Provinces, but as an Intelligencer, which if (...)
proved, he shall buy it with his soul: Dispa^^lre therefore (my ^aithfull
Incarnate D^uell,) proclaim these things to the next Region above us.

Go and deliver my most hearty condemnations to all those that steal subjects
hearts from their Soueraigns, The Devil sendes his c^mendations.
say to all those, they shall have my letters of Mart for their Pyracie:
factious Guyzards, that lay trains of sedition to blowvp the common wealth, I
hug them as my children, to all those churchmen that bind themselves together
in schisms, like bundles of thorns, only to prick the sides of Religion, till
her heart bleed; I will give them new orders. To all those that vntyle their
Neighbors houses, that whilst storms are beating them our, they themselves
may enter in, bestow upon such officers of mine, a thousand condemnations from
their master, tho they be sitting at King Arthurs Table: When thou do thy
message, they shall have Te^ements of me for nothing in Hell.

In brief, tell all the Brokers in Long-Lane, Houns-ditch, or else where, with
all the rest of rheir Colleagued Suburbians, that deal upon ouerworne
commodities, and whose Souls are to us impawned, that they lie safe enough,
and that no cheater can hook them out of our hands, bid them sweat and swear
in their vocation (as they do^ hourly) if thou being a knight of the Post,
can not help them to oaths, that may make them get the Devil and all, they
have a sound Card on their sides, for I my self will Abi in malam, go^ and
mind thy business.

CHAP. VII.
A Usurer describ'de: his going down to Hell:
The Post to him a strange at scourse does tell:
He teaches him the way, and does discover
What Rivers the departed Souls go over.
HIs warrant being thus sign de, The picture of a Usurer.
the messenger departs, but before he could get to the uttermost Ferrie, he
met with an old, lean, meagre fellow, whose eyes was sunk so deep into his
head, as if they had been set in backward, his hair was thinner then his
cheeks, and his cheeks so much worn away, that when he spoke, his tongue
smoak't, and that was burned black, with his hoar and valiant breath, was
seen to move too and fro so plainly, that a wise man might have taken it for
the Snuff of a ca^dle in a Muscouie Lant-horne, the Barber Surgions had begged
the body of a man at a Sessions, to make an Anatomy, and that Anatomy this
wretched creature begged of them to make him a body, Charon had but newly
landed him: How ^surers get into bell.
yet it seemed he stood in pittyfull fear, for his eyes were no bigger then
pinnes heads, with blubbring and howling, keeping a coile to have some body
show him the nearest way to hell, which he doubted he had lost, the other puts
him into a pathe, that would directly bring him thither, but before he bid him
farewell, our black knight inquired of him what he was: who answered, that he
was sometimes one that lived upon the Lechery of metals, for he could make
one hundred pound be great with child, and be delivered with another in a very
short time, his money (like pigions) laid every month, he had bin in upright
terms, an Usurer; And understanding that he fell into the hands of the hel^
post, he offered him after a penny a mile, between that and ye towns end he
was going too, so he would be his guide.

Which money, when the watermen came to rifle him, he swallowed down, and rakte
for it afterward, because he knew not what need he should have, the ways
being damnable: But the goer of the diue^s errands told him, if he would allow
him Pursiuants sees, he durst not earne them, he would do him any Knights
service, but to play the good Angels part, and guide him, he must pardon him.
Doctor Dives request him (in a whining accen^) to tell him if there were any
rich men in hell, and if by any base d^udgery which the devil shall put him
too, and which beele willingly moile in, he should scrape-any muck together,
whether he may set up his trade in hell, and whither there be any brokers there,
that with picking strawes out of poor thatcht houses to build nestes where
his: twelve pences should ingenner, might get feathers to his back, and their
own too. To all which questions, the vaut curier answers briefly, that he
shall meet a number there, who once went in black velvet coats, and welted
gowns, but of Brokers, there is a Longer lane in He^l, than there is in London.
Marry for opening shops, and to keep a Bawdy house, for Lady Pecunia, Ho^
sifata negant, If the Bay liffe of B^rathrum deny that privilege to those
that have served twice seven years in the Freedom, there is no reason a
Forrayner should taste the favor.

This news tho it went coldly down, yet as those that are troubled with the
toothache, inquire of others what the pain is, that have had them drawn out,
and think by that means they lessen their own, So it is some ease to Sir
Timothy, thirty per centu^, to ha^ken out the worst that others have endured,
he desires therefore to know how far it is from the earth to hell; and being
told that hell is just so many miles from Earth, as earth is from Heaven, he
stands in a brown study, wondering) since: the length of the iournies were
both alike to him, how it should happen, that he took rather the one path then
the other. But then cursing himself that ever he fell in love with money, and
that which is contrary to nature) he ever made a crack French Crown, beget
an English-Angell, he roar'de out, and swore that gold sure would dambe him.
For says he, my greediness to (...) mine eye with that, made me starve my
belly, and have undone those for six pence, that were ready to starve. And
into such an Apoplexy of Soul, fell I into, with the lust of money, that I
had no sense of other happiness: So that whilst in my Closet I sat numbering
my bags, the last hour of my life was told out, before I could tell the first
heap of gold, birdlime is the sweat of the Oak tree, the dung of the Blackbird
falling on that tree, turns into that slimie snare, and in that snare, is the
bird her self taken. So fares it me, money is but the excrement of the earth,
in which covetous wretches (like swine) rooting continually, eat through the
earth so long, till at length they eat themselves into hell. I see therefore,
that as Hearts, being the most cowardly and hartlesse creatures, have also the
largest horns. So we that are drudges to heaps of dross, have base and lean
consciences, but the largest damnation. There appeared to Timotheus, an
Athenian, Demonijvmbra, and that gave him a net to catch Cities in, yet for all
that he died a beggar. Sure it was Vmbr ae daemonis that taught me the rule of
Interest: for in getting that, I have lost the principal (my soul). But I
pray you tell me, says my setter up of Scriueners, Must I be stripped thus out of
all? Shall my Fox-furd gowns be locked up from me? Must I not have so much as a
shirt upon me? Heers worse pilling and polling then amongst my country men the
Usurers, not a rag of linen about me, to hide my nakedness.

No, says the light Horseman of Lymbo no linen is worn here, because none
can be wouen strong enough to hold, neither do any such good (...) come
hither as to make cloth, only the Destinies are allowed to spinne, but their
yarne serves to make smockes for Pr^serpina, You are now as you must ever be,
you shall need no clothes, the air is so extreme hot; ^esides, there be no
Tailors sufferd to live here, because (they as well as Players) have a hell of
their own,) (under their shopboard) and there lie their t^ t^ered souls,
patcht out with nothing but rags.

This Careere being ended, our Lansquenight of Lowe-Germanie, was ready to
purspurres to his ho^^^, and take leave, because he saw what disease hung upon
him, and that his companion was hard at his heels, and was loath to proceed in
his journey.

But he, Qui nummos admiratur, the pawn-groper, clingde about his knees like a
Horsleech, and coniurde him, as ever he pitied a wretch eaten to the bare
bones, by the sacred hunger of gold, that he would either bestow upon him, a
short Table (such a one as is tide to the tail of most Almanacks) chalking out
the hye-waies, be they never so durtie, and measuring the length of all the
miles between town, and town, to the breadth of a hair, or if this
Geographicall request took up too much conceald land to have it granted, that
yet (at last) he would tell him, whether he were to pass over any more rivers,
and what the name of this filthy puddle was, over which he was lately brought
by a dogged waterman, because sithence he must run into the devils mouth, he
would run the nearest way, least he wearied himself.

Of this last request, the Lacquy of this great Leuiathan, promisde he should
be master, but he would not bring him to a miles end by land, The Ri^^rs which
^he s^u^^ passes.
(they were too many to meddle with). You shall understand therefore (says our
wild Irish footeman) that this first water (which is now cast behind you) is
Acheron, It is the water of troub^e, and works like a Sea in a tempest (for
indeed this first is the worst) It has a thousand creekes, a thousand
windings, and ^u^^ings, It vehemently boyles at the bottom (like a Caldron of
molten lead,) when on the top it is smoother then a still stream: Remembrance
of the sins, the first water.
And upon great reason is it calde the River of molestation, for when the soul
of man is upon the point of departing from the Shores of life, and to be shipped
away into another world, she is vexed with a conscience, and an auxie us
remembrance of all the parts that ever she played on the unruly stage of the
world: She repeats not by roate, but by heart, the injuries done to others, and
indignities wrought against her self: She ^urnes over a large volume of
accountes, and finds that sh^ees run out in pride, in lusts, in ^iots, in
blasphemies, in irreligion, in waslowing through so many enormous and
detestable crimes, that to look back upon them, (being so infinite), and upon
her own face (being so foul) the very thought makes her desperate. She never
spoke, or delighted to hear spoken, a^y bawdie language, but it now ^^ngs in
her ^are, never lusted after lu^urious meats, but their taste is now upon her
tongue, never fed the sight witl any licen^ious object, but now they come all
into her eye, every wicked thought before, is now to her a dagger, every
wicked word a death, every wicked act a damnation: If she escape falling into
this Ocaean, she is miraculously saved from a shipwreck, he must needs be a
churlish but a cunning Waterman, that steeres in a Tempest so dangerous: This
first River is a bitter water in taste, and vnsauou^y in sent, but whosoever
drinks down but half a draught of his remem^red former follies, Oh it cannot
choose but be (...) Gall is honey to it, Acheron like is a thick water, and how
can it otherwise choose, being stirred with so many thousand fighting
perturbations.

Having passed over this first River (as now you are) you shall presently have
your way stopped with another, Its a little cut by l^^d thither, but a tedious
and dangerous voyage by water.

Lies there a Boat ready (quor^^ my rich Jew of Malta) to take me in so son
a^ I call? No, says the other, you must wait your mariners leisure, the same
wrangling fellow that was you^ first man, is your last man: Marry you shallie
at every Havens mouth for a wind, L^athing of our (...) the second (...).
til Belzab^^s hale you for Ach^ron (after many circumgirations) fale i^ to the
S^igian Lake (your second River carries that name) It is the water of
Loathsomnes, and runs with a swifter Current then the former ^ f^^ when the
soul sees deaths Barge tarrying for her, she begins to be sorry for her ante
acted euil^, and then she is sailing over Acheron, but when sh^^ drawer the
Curtain, and looks narrowly upon the pictures, which her own hand drew, and
finds them to be ugly, she abhorres her own work-manship, and makes haste to
hoyste up more Sails, and to be transported swiftly over the Stygian
Torrent, whose waters are so reverend, that the Gods have no other oath to
swear by.

The third River is Cocitus, somewhat clearer then both the other, Repentance
of our sins, the third Water.
and is the water of Repentance, being an Arm of Styx: Many have here been
cast away, and frozen to death, when the River has waxen cold, (as oftentimes
it does,) neither are all sorts of Souls suffered to sail upon it, for to
some (as if the water had sense, and could not brook an unworthy burden,) it
swells up into tempests, and drownes them, to others more love cannot appear
in Dolphins to men, then in that does smoothnes.

Besides these, there are Phlegeton and Pyriphlegeton that fall in with Cocytus
(burning Rivers,) In which (tho they be dreadful to look upon,) are no utter
danger: Unless you sail safety over the waters of Repentanc, you are in
danger to be drowned in Despair.
If the Ferry-man waft you safely, over the waters of Repentance, otherwise
those hot liquors will scalde you.

But what a Traytoram I, (to the undiscovered Kingdoms,) thus to bring to
light their dearest Treasury? sworn am I to the Imperial State Infernal, and
what dishonor would it be to my Knighthood, to be found forsworn?

Seal up your lips therefore I charge you, and drink down a full bowl of
this Lethoean water, which shall wash out of you the remembrance of any thing I
have spoken: Be proud thou Grandchild of Mammo^, that I have spent these
minutes upon thee, for neue^ shall any breathing mortal man, with tortures
wring our of me so much again. There ^yes your way: Fare well.

In such a strange Language was this vltimum Vale sent forth, that Mounsieur
Money-monger stood only staring and yawning upon him, but could speak no
more: yet at the last (Coniuring up his best Spirits, he only in a dumb show,
(with pitiful action, like a Player, (when he is out of his part,) made
signs to have a Letter delivered by the Carryer, of condemnation, to his
Son, (a young R^ueller, pricked down to stand in the Mer^ers books for next
Christmasse,) which in a dumb show, likewise being received, they both
turn'de back the Usurer, looking as hungrilie, as if he had kissed the post.

CHAP. VIII.
^ells Sculler and the Pursiuant of Heaven,
Cast merry reckonings up, but grow not even
Tilla Plague ^alls: Soldiers set out a throat
For Char^n: Eps comes mangled to his boat.
AT the Banck end, when Plutoes pursiua^t came to take water, Mercury, (that
runs of all the errands between the Gods) having bin of a message from Ceres,
to her daughter Proserpine, (the Queen of lower Africa, Lucian in Dialog.
finding Charon idle in his boat, because (as if it had been out of Term time)
no Fares was stirring, fell to cast up old reckonings, between himself, and the
weatherbeaten Sculler, for certain tryfling money, laid out about Charons
business. So that the Knight slipping in like a Constable to part a Fray, was
requested to be as Arbitator.

The first Item that stood in his Bill, was, For nails to mend your Wherrie,
when two Dutchmen coming drunck from the Renishwine-house, split three of the
boards with their club fi^ts, thinking they had called for a reckoning. iiij.
pence.

Those Butter-boxes (says Charon) owe me a penny upon the foot of that
account: For I could distill out of them but only three poor drops of silver
for the voyage, and all my loss at Sea. What Is next?

Item, laid out for pitch to trim your boat about the middle of the last
plague, because she might go light and vare, and do her labor cleanly, xj.
pence.

I am ouer-reckoned that odd penny, (quoth Charon, and I Will never yield to pay
it, but vi and armis, that is to say, by law. I disburst it (by my Caducens
says the Herald) nay says Charon, if thou will defile thy conscience with a
pennyworth of pitch, touch ^^^ill: on.

Ite^, for glue and whipcord, to me^d your broke^oar, iij. d.

That Is reasonable; yet I have carried some in my Wherie that have had more
whip-cord given them for nothing^ on.

Item laid out for Juniper to persume the boat, when certain Frenchmen were to
go by water: j. ob. I, a pox on them, who got by that? on.

Item lent to a company of Countrey-players, being nine in number, one sharer,
and the rest Iourneymen, that with strowling were brought to deaths door, xiij.
d. ob. upon their stock of apparel, to pay for boat hyre, because they would
try if they might be suffered to play in the Devils name, which stock
afterward came into your claws, and you dealt upon it: xiij. ob.

They had his hand to a warrant (quoth Charon) but their rags served to make
me Swabbers, because they never fetched it again, so that belike he proved a
god Lord and master to them, and they made new Pergementiri. Tickle the next
Minkin.

Item, when a Cobbler of Poetry, called a Play patcher, was condemned with his
Catte to be duckt three times in the cucking-stoole of Pyriphlegeton, (being
one of the scalding Rivers,) till they both dropped again, because he scolded
against his betters, and those whom he lived upon, laid out at that time for
straw, to have carried pusse away if she had kittend, to avoid any
catterwalling in Hell. j. penny.

Mew, they were not both wroth a penny: on.

Item, for needle and thread to ^arne up above two and fifty holes in your
sails, and to a Botcher for half a days work about it: vij. pence.

That botcher I preferred to be Lucifers Tailer, because he works with a hot
needle and burnt threede, and that seven pence he gave me for my good will, why
should not I take bribes as well as others, I will clip that money, and melt
it. Not for my Bill (says the Herald of the gods) for it went out of my purse,
the Tailor may pay it* back again, it is but stealing so much the more, or
cutting out 5. quarters to a garment, nay, Mercury, you shall filch for us
both, for all the gods know you are a notable Pick-pocket, as the knight of the
Post here can take his oath, but what is your Summa totalis, (quoth Charon)
Summa totalis, answers the other comes to three shillings and a penny. The
Sculler told him, he was now out of Cash, it was a hard time, he doubts there
is some secret Bridge made over to Hell, and that they steal thither in
Coaches, for every Iustic^s wife, and the wife of every Citizen must be
iolted now.

But howsoever the market goes, bear with me, (quoth Charon) till there come
another plague, or till you hear of such another battle as was at Newport,
or till the Dunkirks catch a Hoy of Hollanders, and tumble them ouer-boord, or
til there be more civil Wars in France, or if Pa^ris garden would but fall
down again, I should not only wipe off this old score, but hope to make me
a new boat. Mercury seeing no remedy (tho he knew well enough he was not
without money) took his wings, and away went he to Olympus. The Posts journey
lay nothing near that path, but inquiring whether one Pier^^ Penni^esse came
not over in his Fer^y: and understanding, because he could not pay his Fare,
he was feign to go a great way about to Elysium, thither in an Irish gallop is
our swearing knight gone.

Scarce was he out of kenne, but on the other side of the River stood a
company crying out lustily, William Eps his death.
A Boat, hey, a Boat, hey, and who should they be but a gallant troop of
English spirits (all mangled) looking like so many old Romans, that for
ouercomming death in their manly resolutions, were sent away out of the field,
crowned with the military honor of Arms. The foremost of them was a personage
of so composed a presence, that Nature and Fortune had done him wrong, if ^hey
had not made him a soldier. In his countenance, there was a kind of
indignation, fighting with a kind of exalted joy, which by his very gesture
were apparently descipherable, for he was iocond, that his soul went out of
him in so glorious a triu^ph; but disdainfully angry, that she wrought her
enargement through no more dangers: yet were there bleeding witnesses inow on
his breast, which testified, he did not yield till he was conquered, and was
not conqu^red, till there was left nothing of a man in him to be overcome. For
besides those Mortui and Muti testes, which spoke most for him, when he
himself was past speaking, (though their mouths were stopped with scarres) he
made shift to lay down an ouer-plus of life, (when the debt was discharged at
one mortal payment before) only to show in what abject account he held
deaths tyranny. Charon glowring upon him, demanded who he was, but he
skorning to be his own Chronicle, and not suffering any of the rest to execute
the office, they al leaped into the Ferry. Amongst whom, one that sat out of
his hearing, but within the reach of the Waterman, (to shorten the way)
discoursed all, thus:

England (quoth he) gave him breath, Kent education, he was never
^uer-maistered, but by his own affections: against whom, whenever he got the
victory, there was a whole man in him: he was of the sword, and knew better
how to end quarrels, then to begin them; yet was more apt to begin, then
other (better bearded) were to answer, with which (some that were ever bound to
the peace) vpbraided him as a blemish. His country barring him (for want of
action) of that which he was borne to inherit, (same) he went in quest of it
into the Low Countries, where (by his dear earnings) he bequeathed that to
those of his name, with nothing, but his name seemed to deprive him of in
England. Ost-end being besieged, he lost one of his eyes, whilst he looked
over the walls, which first storm did rather drive him on to more dangerous
adventures, though to the hazard even of a shipwreck, (then like a fearful
Merchant) to run his fortunes and reputation on ground, for the boisterous
threatenings of every idle billow. So this his resolution set upon his rest, to
leave all the remainer of his body to that Country, which had take from him
one of the best jewels of his life, since it had a piece of him, he would not
so dishonor the place, as to carry away the rest broken. Into the field
therefore comes he, the sates putting both his eyes into one, (of purpose)
because he should look upon none but his enemies: where, a battle being to
be sought, the desert advanced him to advance the Colors; by which dignity,
he became one of the fairest marks, which was then to be shot at: and where a
great part of that days glory was to be won; for the Regent that followed
his Ensign, (by being hardly set to) giving ground, and the enemies ambition,
thirsting after his Colors, threw at all, in hope to win them. But the
destinies (who fought on their side) mistook themselves, and in steed of
striking the Colors out of his hand, smote him: in so much, that he was twice
shot, and twice run through the body, yet would not surrender his hold for all
those breaches, but stripping the prize for which they strove, off from the
staff that held it up, and wrapping his dying body in it, drew out his
weapon, with which before his Colors could be called his winding sheet, he
threw himself into the thickest of danger: where after he had slain a
horseman, and two other; most valiantly, he came off (half dead, half
alive,) bravely delivering up his spirit in the ar^es of none but his friends
and fellow soldiers.

So that (as if Fortune had been jealous of her own wavering,) death (at her
entreaty) took him away, in the noone-tide of a happiness; lest any black
euenings ouercasting should spoil it with alteration. He was married to the
honor of a field in the morning, and died in the Arms of it the same day,
before it was spoiled of the mayden-head: so that it went away chaste and
vnblemishable. To conclude, (Father Sculler) because I see we are upon
landing, here is as much as I can speak in his praise: he dyed Ancient in
the very midst of his youth.

Charon hum'de and and cryde well: and having rid his boat of them, dyrected
them to those happy places, which were allotted out to none but Martialists.

CHAP. IX.
The Fields of ^oye describ'de: None there must dwell,
(...) purged Souls, and such as have done well:
Some Soldiers there: and some that (...) in Love,
Poets sit singing in the Baye-tree Grove.
WH^^^ the (...) man was plying his Fares, and following his thrift, the
wandering knight, ( Sir Dago^^) having d^^patch't with the (...) that he (...)
he went, was ^ust at that time walking in one of the (...) Gardens; he meant
to take that in his way, But the internal laws barring him from entrance
into those sacred palaces, he wa^^ed the other to him, and ^hen related (
verbatim) his masters answer and resolution: which the Suppliant receives
(considering he was now where he would be) with as ^^we words as he was wont
to carry pence in his pu^s^. The Post having as little to say to him, cast
only a slight eye upon all the Elizaan (...) (much like to a disdainful
pha^tasticke Frenchman when he comes into a s^raunge country, as though he
traveled rather to be seen then to observe) and up he leapes upon one of the
Devils hackneys* and away he rides, to follow his (...) business* about which
whilst he is damnably swea^ing, let me carry you into those Insul^
Fortunatae, ordained to be the Abydings, for none but blessed Souls.

The walls that incompasse these goodly habitations, are white as the forehead
of Heavens they glyster like pollisht Iuorie, but the stuff is fyner: high
they are, like the pillars that uphold the Court of love; and strong they are,
as Tow^rs built by Enchauntment: there is but one Gate to it All, and that's of
refined Silver: So narrow it is, that but one at once can enter: Round about,
wears it a gyrdle of waters, that are sweet, redolent, and Christalline: the
leaves of the vine are not so pre^ious, the Nectar of the Gods nothing so
delicious.

Walk into the Groves, you shall hear all sor^s of birds melodiously singing:
you shall see Swaynes defly piping, and virgins chaftly dancing. Shepherds
there, live as merrily as Kings, and kings are glad to be companions with
Shepheardes. The widow there complains of no wrong: the orphan sheads no
tears, for Covetousness cannot carry it away with his Gold, nor Cruelty with
the swaye of Greatness, the poor Client needs see no Lawyer to plead for
him, for there is no Jury to condemn him, nor Judges to astonish him, there is
all mirth, without immodestie: all health without base abusing of it: all sorts
of Wines without intemperance: all Riches without Sensuality: all Beauty
without painting: all Love without dissimulation. Winter there plays not the
Tyrant, neither is the Summers breath pestilent: for Spring is all the year
long, tricking up the Boughs: so that the trees are ever flourishing, the
fruits ever growing, the flowers ever budding: yea such cost, and such Art is
bestowed upon the A^bours, that the very benches (whereon these blessed
Inhabitants sit) are sweet beds of violets: the beds whereon they lie, bancks
of Muske-r^ses: their pillows hearts, are hearts-ease, their Sheets the silken
leaves of Willow.

Neither is this a Common Inn, to all Travelers, but the very Palace where
Happiness her self maintains her Court, and none are allowed to follow her,
but such as are of merit. Of all men in the world Landlords dare not quarter
themselves here, because they are Rackers of rents: a pettifogger, that has
taken brybes, will be dambd ere he come near the gates. A Fencer is not allowed
to stand within 12. score of the Place: no more is a Vintner, nor a Farmer, nor
a Tailor, unless he creep through the eye of his Needle: no, and but few
Gentlemen-ushers. Women* (for all their subtlety,) scarce one amongst five
hundred has her pewe there, especially old Myd-wiues, Chamber-maides, and
wayting-wenches, their doings are too well known, to be let into these
lodgings. No, no, none can be free of these Liberties, but such as have
consciences without cracks, hands not spotted with uncleanness; feet not
worn out with walking to mischief, and hearts that never were hollow.
Listen therefore, and I will tell you what Passengers have license to land upon
these shores.

Young Infants that dye at the breast, and have not sucked of their parents
sins, are most welcome thither for their innocency. Holy singers whose divine
Anthemes have bound ^oules by their charms and whose lives are Tapers of
virgin wax, set in silver candlesucks, to guide Men out of errors darkness,
they know their places there* and have them for then Integri^y.

Some Scholars are admitted into this society, but the number of them all is
not half so many as are in one of the Colleges of an University, and the
reason is, they either kindle firebrands (in the the sanctified places) by
their contention; or kill the hearts of others by their coldness.

One field there is amongst all the rest, set round about with willows, It is
called the field of M^urning and in this (upon bancks of flowers that wither
away, even with the scorching sighs of those that (...) upon them,) are a
band of Malcontents: they look for all the world like the mad-folkes in
bedlam, and desire (like them) to be alone, and these are For ^orn lovers: such
as pyn'de away to nothing, for nothing: such as for the love of a wanton wench,
have gone crying to their graves, whilst she in the mean time, went (laughing
to see such a kind coxcombe) into another bed: All the joy that these poor
fools feed upon, is to sit singing lamentable ballades to some doleful tunes*
for tho they have chang'de their old lives, they cannot forget their young
loves; they spend their time in making of myr^^e garlands, and shed so much
water out of their eyes, that it has made a pretty little river, which (...)
so s^^king: continually at the roots of the willow trees, that half the leaves
of them, are almost washed into a whitenes.

There is another piece of ground, where are encamped none but Soldiers: and o^
those, not all sorts of Soldiers neither, but only such as have died nobly
in the wars: and yet of those, but a certain number too: that is to say,
such that in execution were never bloody: in their Countries revenge, severe,
but not cruel: such as held death in one hand, and mercy in the other: such as
never ravished maidens, never did abuse no widows, never gloried in the
massacre of babes: were never druncke, of purpose before the battle began,
because they would spare none, nor after the battle did never quarrel about
pledging the health of his whoare. Of this Garrison, there are but a few in
pay, and therefore they live without Mu^iny.

Beyond all these places is there a Grove, which stands by it self like an
I^and; for a s^^eame (that makes music in the running) cla^p^^ it round about
like a hoope girdle of crystal: Lawrells grew so thick on all the banks of
it, that lighming it self if it came thither, has no power to pierce through
them. It seems (without) a desolate and unfrequented wood, (for those within
are retyrde into themselves) but from th^^ came forth such harmonious sounds,
that birds build nests only, in the trees there, to teach T^nes to their
young ones prettily. This is called The Gro^^ of Bay Trees, and to this Consort
Rome, res^^ one but the children of Pboebus, ( Poets and Mus^^tons:) the one
creates the ditty, and gives it the life or number, the other lends it voice,
and makes it speak music. When these happy Spirits sit asunder, their bodies
are like so many Stars, and when they join together in several troops,
they show like so many heavenly Constellations. Full of pleasant Bowers and
queint Arboures is all this Walk. In one of which, old Chaucer, reverend for
prioritie, blythe in cheer, buxsome in his speeches, and benign in his
hauiour, is circled a round with all the Makers or Poets of his time, their
hands leaning on one another shoulders, and their eyes fixed seriously upon
his, whilst their ears are all tied to his tongue, by the golden chains of
his Numbers; for here (like Euanders mother) they spoke all in verse: no Attick
eloquence is so sweet: their language is so pleasing to the gods, that they
utter their Oracles in none other.

Gra^e Spencer was no sooner entered into this Chapel of Apollo, but these
elder Fathers of the divine Fury, gave him a Lawrer and sung his Welcome:
Chaucer call'de him his Son, and plac'de him at at his right hand. All of
them (at a sign given by the whole Quire of the Muses that brought him
thither,) closing up their lips in silence, and tuning all their ears for
attention, to hear him sing out the rest of his Fayrie Queens praises.

In another company sat learned Watson, industrious Kyd, ingenious Atchlow,
and tho (he had been a Player, molded out of their pens) yet because he had
been their Lover, and a Register to the Muses, Inimitable B^ntley: these were
likewise ca^ rowsing to one another at the holy well, some of them singing
Paeans to Apollo, some of them Hymns to the rest of the Gods, whilst Marlow,
Green, and Peele had got under the shades of a large vine, laughing to see
Nash (that was but newly come to their College,) still haunted with the sharp
and Satyricall spirit that followd him here upon earth: for Nash inueyed
bitterly (as he had wont to do) against dry-fifted Patrons, accusing them of
his untimely death, because if they had given his Muse that cherishment which
she most worthily deserved, he had fed to his dying day on fat Capons, burnt
sack and Sugar, and not so desperately have ventur'de his life, and shortend
his days by keeping company with pickle herrings: the rest ask't him what
news in the world, he told them that Barbarism was now grown to be an
Epidemiall disease, and more common then the toothache: being demanded how
Poets and Players agreed now, troth says he, As Physicians and patients
agree, for the patient loves his Doctor no longer then till he get his health,
and the Player loves a Poet, so long as the sickn^sse lies in the two-penie
gallery when none will come into it: Nay (says he) into so low a misery (if
not contempt,) is the sacred Art of Po^sie fallen, that tho a writer (who is
worthy to ^it at the table of the Sun,) wast his brains, to earne applause
from the more worthy Spirits, yet when he has done his best, he works but
like O^nus, that makes ropes in hell; for as he twists, an Ass stands by and
bites them in sunder, and that Ass is no other than the Audience with hard
hands. He had no sooner spoken this, but in comes Chettle sweafing and blowing,
by reason of his satnes, to welcome whom, because he was of old acquaintance,
all rose up, and fell presently on their knees, to drinck a health to all the
Lovers of Hellicon: in doing which, they made such a mad noise, that all this
Coniuring which is past, (being but a dream,) I suddenly started up, and am
now awake.

Finis.

