Dekker his Dream.

In which, being rapt with a Poetical Enthusiasme, the great Volumes of
Heaven and Hell to Him were opened, in which he read many Wonderful Things.

Est Deus in Nobis, agitante calescimus Illo.

LONDON, Printed by NICHOLAS OAKS. 1620.

TO THE TRVELY-ACCOMPLISHED GENTLEMAN, and worthy Deseruer of all Men's Loves,
Master ENDYMION PORTER.
SIR:

IF you ask why, from the heaps of Men, I pick out you only to be that
Murus ahaeneus, which must defend me, let me tell you (what you know already,)
that Books are like the Hungarians in Paul's, who have a Privilege to hold
out their Turkish History for any one to read. They beg nothing, the Texted
Past-bord talks all; and if nothing be given, nothing is spoken, but God
knows what they think. If you are angry, that I thrust into your hands a
Subject of this Nature; O good Sir, take me thus far into your pardon; that it
was impossible for me to beget a Better: For, the Bed on which seven years I
lay Dreaming, was filled with thorns instead of feathers, my pillow a rugged
flint, my Chamberfellowes (sorrows that day and night kept me company) the
very, or worse than the very Infernal Furies. Besides, I herein imitate the
most Courtly Reuellings; for if Lords be in the Grand Masque, in the Antimasque
are Players: So in these of mine, though the Devil be in the one, God is in
the other; nay in Both. What I send you, may perhaps seem bitter, yet is it
wholesome; your best Physic is not a Iulep; sweet sawces leave rotten
bodies. There is a Hell named in our Creed, and a Heaven, and the Hell comes
before: If we look not into the first, we shall never live in the last. Our
tossing up and down (here) is the Sea, but the land of Angels is our Shore.
Sail so long as we can bear up, through Honors, Riches, Pleasures, and all
the sensual Billows of the World: yet there is one Harbor to put in at, and
safely to arrive (There) is all the Hardness, all the Happiness. Books are
Pilots in such voyages: would mine were but one point of the Compass, for any
man to steer well by I do not think, but even those Courtiers, who are most
taken with the glittering of Palaces, do from those glorious Enter-viewes,
masks, tilt-triumphs, and such like, (with which their eyes are so often
banqueted) read sometimes excellent lectures to their souls, by a comparatiue
laying those transitory Ones, and those immortal beauties of heaven together.
The very Roofes of kings Courts, do almost draw us up to such a contemplation:
For when the Pauements of such Places are at the best but Marble, yet the upper
seelings are like Firmaments of Stars: There you see the golden Embosments,
and curious Enchainings: The true bravery is above.

An excellent Dinner was that in France, when the King and Queen sat at Table,
and with them, Thomas Aquinas and Bonauentura (the two great Schoolmen.)
whilst the others were feeding, one of these cast an earnest and fixed eye upon
the beauty of the Queen: at which the King wondering, asked, why he did so? O
(quoth he) if the great Worke-maister, out of a piece of clay, can mould and
fashion so admirable a creature as your Queen is; I am rapt into an
astonishable amazme^t, to think, how glorious those Bodies are, who are
Courtiers attending upon his Maiesticall Throne. If I hold the Pen longer in my
hand, I shall fall asleep again: But howsoever I wake, or have mine eyes
closed, -- Irest

Ever ready to do you service,

Tho. Dekker.

To the Reader.
OVt of a long Sleep, which for almost seven years together, seized al my
senses, drowning them in a deep Lethe of forgetfulness, and burying me to the
World, in the lowest grave of Oblivion: Meeting in that drowzy voyage with
nothing but frightfull Apparitions, by reason (as now I guess) of the place in
which I lay, being a Cave strongly shut up by most Devilish and dreadful
Enchantments; I did at last fall into a Dream, which presented to my waking
Soul, infinite Pleasures, commix'd with In-vtterable Horrors. More did I
behold thus Sleeping, then ever I could before, when my eyes were wide open. I
climbed to the tops of all the trees in Paradise, and eat sweeter Apples then
Adam ever tasted. I went into the Star Chamber of Heaven, where Kings and
Princes were set to the Bar, and when the Court arose, I fed upon Manna, at
a table with Angels. Jerusalem was the Palace I lived in, and Mount Sion the
hill, from whose top, I was dazzled with glories brighter than Sunbeams.
This was my Banquet: The Course-meate was able to kill me. For I was
thrown (after all this Happiness) into a sea Infernal, and forced to swim
through Torrents of unquenchable fire. All the Iayles of Hell were set open.
And albeit the Arraignements were horrid, yet the Executions were ten-times
more terririble. Joys took me by the hand in the first dance, but fears and
sorrovves whipped me forward in the second. I must not now tell, what I savv,
neither can I now see so much as I have told. What Music led both these
measures, do but open my song-Booke, and the Lessons are there set down.

If the Notes please thee, my pains are well bestowed. If to thine care they
sound untuneable, much are they not to be blamed, in regard they are the Aires
of a Sleeping Man.

Farewell.

Dekker his Dream.
Which being truly Interpreted, is able to Comfort the Good, and terrify the
Bad.
WHen down, the Sun his golden Beams had laid;
And at his western Inn his journey stayed,
That Sleep the eyes of man and beast did seize,
Whilst He gave light to the Antipodes:
I slep'd with others, but my Senses streamed
In frightfull forms, for a Strange Dream I Dreamed.
Signs before the last day.
PEace fled to Heaven (me thought.) And as she went, War.

Her Roabe fell from her, which War finding Rent
Into a thousand Rags, dying them in Gall, As before Christ's coming first
into

Mixed with Man's blood, and chargd the World to call
Those spoils his Ensigns: then (all-Arm'd) bestriding there was an
Universal Peace: So before his last coming, there shall be (if not General
wars) every man's heart fighting one against another Famine.

A Canon, and with Thundering voice dividing
Nations Colleagu'd, down fell the Golden Chain
Of Sweet Commerce, linck'd both by Love and Gain:
Order ran mad, Disorder filled his Room,
When beating at Hell gates the Fatal Dromme,
Out-yssued Vengeance, Horror, Incest, Rape,
Famine and Death, in the most ugly shape
That Hell could send them out in. At these Sights
Seas threatened Shores, The Earth (in strange affrights)
Shook at the Center: then (me thought) one drew
From his Full Quiver, poysned shafts, which flew
With burning feat ^^^^s of Hot Pestilence, Pestilence.

Filling the wide-worlds vast Circumference
With blaines, and blisters, whilst each Kingdom raues,
To see the whole Earth but one field of Graves.
Anon (me thought) Treason, and Murder cry'de Treason.

Kill, Kill; wild Vproares Gates flew open wide:
The Father stabd the Son, the Son the Brother,
Man was not Man, till he destroyed Another;
Each man was both the Lion and the Prey,
And every Corne-field, an Aceldema:
A City on a Cities ruins stood,
And Towns (late peopled) now were Lakes of Blood.
As boystrous billows, boystrous waves confound,
So Nations, are in Nations glories drowned*
The Turkish Half Moon on her silver Horns, Slavery.

Tosses the Christian Diadem, and adornes
The Sphaere of Ottoman with Starry light,
Stolen even from Those, under the Cross who fight:
The Sacred Empire did it Self over whelme, Civil vproares.

State, on State trampled, Realm did beat down Realm:
Religion (all this while) a Garment wore, Religion made a Str umpet.

Stayn'd like a Painters Apron, and turned Whore
To several Countries, till from deep Abysme
Up her Two Bastards came (Error and Schism),
She in That motley Cloak, with her Two Twins,
Trauell'd from land to land, sowing Rank Sins,
Which choked the Good Corn, and from them did rise,
Opinions, Factions, black leau'd Heresies;
Pride, Superstition, Rancor, Hate, Disdain,
So that (me thought) on earth no good did Reign.
All this before named (and more terrible praedictions then the weak Pen of a
silly man can set down) are lively written in Gods Eternal Calendar: where his
Prophet Ezechiel thus thundereth forth the Terrors foregoing the later Day.

The fish of the Seas, Birds of the air, Beasts of the Ezech. 39.
field, and all that creeps on the ground, together with all humane
generations, which live upon the face of the earth, shall be in an vproare.
Hills shall be ouerturned, Hedges broken down, every strong wall fall to the
ground. I will call against them the sword from the tops of all Mountains, and
every man's sword shall be bent against his own brother; my Judgment shall be
in pestilence and blood, etc. And I will rain fire and brimstone.

Mark, how an Evangelist seconds a Prophet, with this new battry upon the
world. When (says he) you shall hear the fame or brute of wars and
vproares, Luke 21.
be not afraid, for that these things must be. And yet presently the end of
the world shall not ensue. One Nation shall rise against another, and one
Kingdom shall invade another; there shall be great earthquakes, pestilence,
and famine, most terrible Signs and tokens from Heaven.

The latter day.
THese transitory, poor Terrestrial terrors,
Served but as Heralds to sound forth the Horrors
Of woes Eternal: this, was but a Scene
To the Great following Tragedy. So that then
(Me thought) one fitting on a Rainbow, sounded
A trumpet, which in earthquakes Earth confounded.
And then a voice, shrill (but Angelical)
Full of Command and Dread, from heaven did call,
To Summon the whole world to stand toth' Bar,
Both All that ever have been, and now are,
To give a strict account how they had spent
That Tallent of their life, which was but lent.
We must All be Summoned before the Tribunal Seat of Christ, and every man
receive either Good or Evil, according as he has behaved himself whilst he
lived upon earth. Christ takes Account of all his Tallents, Luke 12. 16. 19.
10. Math. 26.

Terrors of the later Day.
THe Leaves of Heaven (me thought) the^ rent in sunder, Clouds shruck up like
parchment.

Out of which, Lightning brake, and Horrid Thunder,
Which pash'd (in pieces) Kingdoms: whizzing flakes
Of Brimstone rained, that Seas seemed Burning Lakes:
Rocks crumbled into powder; Scalded Mountains
In their dry Jaws, dranck rivers up and fountains:
Fury, with Snaky locks, and Smeared hands,
(Tossing about her ears two fiery brands)
Met Wrath, and Indignation, raving-mad,
Tearing each others flesh, and wildly clad
In Skins of spotted Tigers: up and down
They ran, and spied (at last) Confusion:
With whom swearing a League, black storms they Hurled.
With whirlewind violence to crush the world,
And bury her in's quick Ruins. All the Floor
Celestial, cracked and fell down in a shower
Of Blood, whilst the Terrestrial Pauement burned, Stars.

In which the Stars to spent-out Snuffes were turned.
The Sun leaped from his Chariot, and in fear Sun.

Of Firing, headlong ran to the Moons cold Sphaere,
But she (for all her Floods, Ice, Frosts and Snow) Moon.

Did like a lamp of steel, in the Furnace glow.
The Sun and Moon were neither Sun nor Moon,
Their Shining could be called, nor Night nor Noone:
This Massy, Universal, Earthly Ball, The world on fire.

Was All one Bonfire, and it burnt out All.
In an eyes Twinkling, more by Fire was lost,
Than Twenty Earthes, and all their wealth e're cost.
Christ his Coming in Glory.
AS in an Army Royal (led by a King)
After the Canons Sulphurous thundering, A Simile.

Battring down Bulwarks, Rampires, Parapets,
Forts, Gabions, Palizadoes, Cazimates,
Horror on all sides Roaring, Wings here flying
At Wings (like armed Eagles) here Troops dying.
A butcherous Execution through the field,
Bellowing with Fiend-like threats, when yet none yield,
Though Death stalks up and down, ghastly and pale,
The Victors Wreath lying in a doubtful Scale;
The King himself, safe guarded on a Hill,
Seeing this black day, yet stirring not until
He finds fit time to Strike: then down, amayne,
Whorrying he comes, a glorious dreadful Train
Of High-Heroick Spirits, circling him round,
Who with swift Vengeance do their Foes confound,
And slaue-like drag them at proud Chariot wheels,
Whilst miseries (worse then Death) tread on their heels: The terror of
Christ's Coming. Veniet splendore Rutilans, pulchritudine Admirandus, (...),
(...) horribilis.

So (but with greater Terror, State, and Wonder)
Heavens Supreme Monarch (one hand griping thunder,
The other storms of Hail, Whirle-winds. and fire,
Ensigns of his hot-burning quenchlesse Ire)
When the Worlds buildings, smothered lay in smoke,
(With sparkling eyes) Maiestically broke
Out of his Palace, never set ope' before,
And stood like a Triumphant Conqueror. Esaias 28.

Trampling on Death and Hell: About him, round
(Like petty Viz-royes) Spirits (me thought) all-Crownde, O Death! Where is thy
sting? etc.

Showed, as if none but Kings, had bin his Guard;
Whole Hierarchies of Saints were then preferred,
With Principalities, Powers, and Dominations, How Christ comes guarded and
attended.

Thrones, Angels, and Archangels, (all att' once)
Filling the Presence: Then like heauen-borne Twins,
Flew fiery Cherubins, and Seraphins,
Whilst the old Patriarchs, clothed all in white, Patriarchs. Math. 13.
Prophets.

Were raped with Joy, to see beams far more bright,
About the Prophets and the Apostles run,
Than those whose Flames were kindled at the Sun.
Martyrs (me thought) with selfsame luster shinde, Martyrs.

As Gold, which seven times was by fire refinde:
Virgins, whose Souls in life from Lust lived clear, Virgins. Psalm. 30.

Had Silver robes, and on their heads did wear
Coronets of Diamonds. Were my Fingers flint,
My Pen, of pointed Adamant t'imprint
Characters in tough Iron, or hammered brass, In imitation of that in Virgill.

Mine ink, a depthlesse Sea; All these (alas!)
Would be worn out, ere I one line should draw,
Of those Full Glories, which (I dreamd) I saw:
Nor could I write this (though it be but mean)
Did not some Angel guide my Fainting Pen.
Gods Heir Apparent (here once made away)
Triumphed in this his Coronation day,
In which Heaven was his Kingdom, Mercy his Throne,
Justice his Scepter, a Communion
Of Sanctified souls, the Courtly Peers,
And his Star Chamber Lords: who now had years
Which never turned them Gray, by Times rough wether,
Greatness was now, no more called Fortunes fether,
Nor Honor held a fruitless golden Dream, The Saints in heaven enjoy all
perfection.

Nor Riches, a bewitching swallowing stream,
Nor Learning laughed at as the Beggars Dower,
Nor beauties painted cheek a Summers Flower.
No, no; life endless was, yet without loathing,
Honor and Greatness wore Immortal clothing,
Riches were Subject to no base Consuming,
Learning burnt bright, without Contentious fuming,
Beauty no painting bought, but still renewed,
Each one had (here) his full Beatitude.
O my weak eyes! how did your Balls (me thought)
Burn out their Ielly, when they had but caught
One little-little glimpse of those Divine
And in-accessible Beams, which did outshine
Hot-glowing coals of Fire? no mortal Sight
Can stand a Majesty so infinite.
That Face whose Picture might have ransomed Kings, As Christ was in every part
of his body crucified by Jews; So will he come Glorified in all perfection, to
the Terror both of Jew and Gentile.

Yet put up Spettings, Baffulings, Bufferings.
Esa. 50. Ierem. 3. Math. 26. Mark. 14. Luke 22.
That Head, which could a Crown of Stars have worn,
Yet spightfully was wrench'd with wreathes of Thorn,
Math. 27. Mark. 15. John 19.
Those Hands, and Feet, where Purest stamps were set;
Yet Naild-vp like to Pieces Counterfeit.
Psalm. 77.
Those Lips, which though they had Command over All,
Being thirsty, Vinegar had to drink, and Gall.
Luke 23.
That Body, scourged and torn with many a wound,
That his dear Blood (like Balm) might leave us Sound.
Luke 23. Psalm. 129. Zach. 13.
The Well of Life, which with a Spear being tried,
Two Streams (Mysterious) gushed out from the Side.
John 19.
Messiah, great Jehovah, God on hie,
Yet Haild, King of the Jews, in Mockery.
Math. 27. Mark. 15. Luke 23.
The Manger-Cradled Babe, the Beggar borne,
The poorest Worm on earth, the Height of Scorn.
Math. 2. Psalm. 22.
That Lord, by his Own Subjects Crucified,
Lo, at this Grand Assize comes Glorified,
With troops of Angels, who his Officers are,
To call by sound of Trumpe his Foes to a Bar.
Thus stood be Armed; Justice his Breast Plate was,
Judgment his Helmet, stronger far than Brass:
On his Right Arm, Truths Shield he did advance,
And turnde his Sharpened Wrath into a Lance: Wisd. 5.

Out of his Mouth, a Two-edged Sword did fly,
To Wound, Body and Soul, eternally; Apoc. 1.

Armed (Cap-a-pe) thus, who against him durst fight?
There was no ground for Strength, nor yet for Flight.
At this (me thought) All Graves that ever held
Dead Coarses, yawn'd wide-open, and compelled
The bones of Dead-men, up with Flesh to rise;
Yea, those on whom the Seas did tyrannize,
And drowned in wrackes, and which were peece-meale eaten,
With lively bodies to the shoares were beaten:
Whom Sword, or Fire, Iibbets, or Wheels had torn,
Had their own limbs again, and new were borne:
From the first Man God made, to the last that died,
The Names of All, were here Examplified,
Emp'rours and Kings, Patriarchs, and Tribes forgotten, The general Sessions.

The Conquerors of the world (moldred and rotten)
Lords, beggars, Men and Women, young and old,
Up (at a Bar set forth) their Hands did hold.
The Judge being set, in open Court were laid The books of Conscience opened.
Vnusquisque cernet ante faciem suam exposita Opera sua, five bona illa, sieve
mala, etc. Item, Formidabiles libri aperientur, in quibus scripta sunt Opera
nostra, and Actus, et Verba; et quaecunque egimus in nec Vita: illic non solum
Actus, verum et cogitationes, et intentiones Cordis, scriptae erunt. Ephra in
lib. De Vera Poenitentia Cap. 4. Quid nobis miseris fiet, cum omnia (orbi
Vniuerso) palam facta, in tam aperto, tamque illustri Theatro de nudata,
Hominum nobis partim cognitorum, partim incognitorum oculis subijcienture etc.
D. Chrysostom: Homil. 5. ad Roman.

Huge Books: at sight of which, All were dismayed,
Would feign have shrunck back, and fell down with fear:
In sheets of Brass, all Stories written were
(Which those Great volumes held) Charactred deep*
With Pens of Steel, Eternal Files to keep
Of every Nation, since the Earth began,
And every Deed, Word, thought, of every Man:
Sins hatched in Caves, or such whose Bawd was Night,
The Minutes of the Act were here set right.
Great men, whose secret Damned sins vizards wore
so close, that none upon their Brows could score
The least Black line (because none durst) had here
A Bill of Items in particular,
What their Souls owed for Sin, to Death and Hell;
Or, if it happened that they e're did well,
In these True Iournals, it at large was found,
And with rich promise of Reward was Crowned.
The Books were opened, etc. Apoc. 20.
Which done (me thought) the Sessions thus began,
Conscience the Crier, called forth every Man,
To make appearance, and (though to my sight
The Numbers that were there were infinite)
In an Eies-twinkling yet they parted were,
The Good from Bad, the Spotted from the clear;
The Wolves and Goats, to the left Hand howling went,
The Lambs, and Harmless Sheep, to the Right were sent.
After this Separation, up did rise
Heauens-Lord-chiefe-Iustice, and this Sentence flies Conscience the Crier of
the Court.

Out of his Dreadful Breast: O you (quoth he)
That have my Lambs bin, and did follow me,
As your true Shepherd, and did know my Voice, Triti^um a zizanijs, bonos
pisces a malis separable.

As I in you, you shall in Me rejoice:
And now is come the day: this is the Hour,
In which my Blessings on your Heads I pour: The Lord-Chiefe-Iustice his
Sentence on the prisoners.

Beloved of my Father, Come and Take
A Kingdom laid up only for your sake;
For me you have bin Mocked, Reuil'd, and Beat,
Mount therefore now into a Glorious Seat: Come you Blessed, etc.

O blessed word! which none but he can speak,
O word of Love Divine! when (not with weak Math. 25.

But Arms Omnipotent-strong, spread ope'-wide-)
He cries, Come, Come? How is Man dignifide Math. 5:

(Being but a Vassaile groueling on the ground)
Next to his Kings own Throne thus to sit Crowned?
Come and possess: O what shall you possess? The excellence of that
Inheritance laid up in heaven for those that do well.

A Kingdom, whose vast Bounds none can express:
Had all the Peebles in the world bin cut
Into Rich Diamonds, and both Indies put
Into Two Hills of Silver, and fine Gold,
Nor all Kings hoorded Treasures down being sold,
Can this Inheritance buy, which for your Good
Is purchased at a High Rate (Christ's dear blood.)
Come, and Possess, what Time can never Rot,
Thieves steal, Wars spoil, or Cank'rous Envy blot;
Come, and possess, a State whose Title, Law,
Attorneys Wiles, no, nor the Scarlet Awe
Of corrupt Judges ever can Entangle,
No Bawling Pleader at the Bar shall wrangle
To prove the Right of This, being Stronglier Grounded
Than Descents Lineall, by which Realms are Bounded.
Sit at his Table, which does Ever lie
Covered with banquets of Eternity:
Saluations Cup stands filled for you to the Brim,
Come Drink, where Immortality does swim.
Come and Possess you blessed. Blessed in This,
The dear Son gives you a Celestial Kiss
For welcome: Come you blessed, and possess
Wealth, Honor, Glories, Pleasures numberless.
Forthwith (me thought) they All were Crowned with Gold, The not-guilty, how
rewarded.

Set thick with Stars, and in their hands did hold
Scepters of sparkling Diamonds, which out shinde
Sunbeams, or Silver, seven times being Re-finde.
The Joy at this, was wondrous: All the Skies
Danced to the soundes of several Harmonies,
Both Angels, and Archangels loudly sung,
All Heaven was but One Instrument well strung,
But They, who on the Left Hand were set by,
(As Outcasts) shook and trembled fearfully, The guilty, how perplexed.

Like falling Towers: their Sins and Souls were black,
And troops of Hel-hounds waited at their Back:
They beat their breasts, they tore their flesh and hair,
And cursed that hour in which they first drew air.
And then with Groans (able to split in sunder If the condemnation be so
grievous, what will the execution be? Osee 10.

Their very Souls, like trees riuen through with Thunder)
They wrung their hands, sobd, shrik'd, and howled, and prayed
That Rocks and Hills might on their backs be laid,
And they to dust be grinded, so that they
Might from the Judges face but turn away:
And seeing themselves enforced to stand the Doom,
They gnash'd their teeth, and cursed their mothers womb. Ierem. 20.

They who on earth were reard (Colossus-high)
Spurned Kingdoms, trod on Thrones, and did de fie Ierem. 25. Psalm. 149.

Omnipotence it self, into base graves
Tombling prow'd Monarchs, here took place with Slaves,
And like to broken Statues down were thrown,
Trampled, and (but in scorn) not looked upon.
Their cries, nor yellings did the Judge regard, The Judge implacable.

For all the doors of Mercy up were bard,
Justice and Wrath in wrinkles knit his forhead,
And thus he spoke: You cursed and abhorred,
You brood of Satan, sons of death and hell,
In fires that still shall burn, you still shall dwell: Be Maledicti.

In hoopes of Iron, then were they bound up strong,
(Shrikes being the Burden of their doleful Song.)
Scarce was the Sentence breath'd-out, but mine eyes
Even saw (me thought) a Caldron, whence did rise
A pitchy Steeme of Sulphur and thick Smoke,
Able whole coapes of Firmament to choke: Souls tormen ted.

About This, Devils stood round, still blowing the fire,
Some, tossing Souls, some whipping them with wire
A-crosse the face, as up toth' chins they stood,
In boiling brimstone, lead, and oil, and blood.
Millions were here tormented, and together
(All at this Sessions doomed) were condemned hither.
My frighted Soul (me thought) with terrors shook
To see such Horrid Objects: blood forsook
The conduite-pipes of each Exterior part,
And ran to comfort and defend the Heart.
But the worlds Glorious Frame being rac'd in fire
And none alive left, I had then desire
(^e thought) to see That black Infernal Court,
Whither (in thousands) Souls did so resort.
The way was quickly found: paths numberless Facilis descensus Auerni.

(Beaten with feet which thither fast did press)
Lay trodden bare, but not One Path returning, Vestigia nulla retrorsum.

Was ever seen from this dark house of Mourning.
This Flaming Kingdom has One Ferriman,
And he One Boat: he rows through Acheron
Styx, and Cocytus, Rivers that in Hell
Spread all the Country over: Fogges still dwell
Stinking and thick, upon them, and there grows
Upon their banks (in wild disordered rows)
The Poplar (white and black) with blasted Ewgh,
The deadly Poppy, Cypress, Gall, and Rue,
(Emblems of Graves, Tombs, Funerals, and beeres)
And on the boughs no other Bird appears,
But Schriches, Owls, and Ravens, and the shrill throats
Of Whistlers; death still listening to their Notes.
These Rivers of Hell, Poetically invented, carry a Moral and Mystical
Interpretation: for Acheron (the first water) A pardon for these Poetical
Fictions, may (without much begging) be given, if the Curious Censor makes but
true use of the Inclusiue moral, no way derogating from Divinity.
signifies Bitterness: Styx, a detestation; and Cocytus, a Sorrow or
Repentance, and are thus applied. When Souls, by reason of their Sins, are
to pass over the troublesome Rivers of Death, being tormented with remembrance
of the loss of worldly Honors, Riches, etc. then they pass Acheron, it is a
bitter draught: Styx is the next, for when they see no remedy, but they must
pass over to their last shore, they begin to have a loathing of their
Ante-acted life: and then coming to ferry over Cocytus, they mourn and howl:
so that all the conflicts, combats, and earthly wrastlings about the time of a
Man's departure, are figured under those Three Rivers.

I hollowed to the Ferriman (me thought)
And with a stretched voice, cried a Boat, a boat.
He came at first call, and when near he drew,
That of his Face and Form, I had full view, Death terrible in countenance.

My blood congealed to ice with a cold fear,
To see a Shape so horribly appear:
His eyes flashed fire, grizled and shagg'd his Hair,
(Snarl'd all in felt-lockes) Terror and Despair
Lay in his wrinckled cheeks, his voice was hoarse,
And grumbling, he looked ghastlier than a Coarse.
This description of the Ugly Ferriman, is but an Argument how terrible the
appearance of death is unto us, at our last voyage, which we take in departing
from the world.

By those who there stood thronging on the Shore,
I heard his name was Charon: A black Oar
And dirty, held he in his brawny hand.
And though amongst those who stood upon the Strond
He saw some Kings, some Beggars, None had room Mors sceptra ligonibus aequat.

For Birth, or Blood, but sat as they did come:
None gave the Cushions here, for there was none,
But in heaps tumbling in, All were as One:
Some thither came, laden with bags of gold,
Some with brave clothes; then did he bark, and scold,
And snatched all from them, with look sharp and grim,
All Fares (he said) must Naked go with him. Job. 4.

As Death has no respect of persons, for the beggars dish and the kings
standing cup of gold, are to him of one weight; so he spoyleth all men of all
that they possess, Princes of their Crowns, Lords of their Manors, Judges of
their Scarlet, Gentlemen of their Revenues, Citizens of Riches, Soldiers of
Strength, Scholars of Learning, Women of Beauty, Age of Experience, Youth of
Comeliness. And as they enter into the Lists of the world, weak and
unfurnished; So must they go forth, Beaten, Vanquished, and Disarmed.

At last (me thought) I leaped into the boat,
Which seen, the Sculler plucked me by the throat
To have his Fare first; asking what it was,
He cried a Penny. I for That did pass:
Being glad for bought experience I could tell,
That Avarice house stood the next door to hell. Covetousness a hag infernal.

Charon, by interpretation is Joy; for after we have ferried What Charon is
over the troublesome passage of death, and landed on the shoares of
Blessedness, then the Ferriman (how churlish and terrible soever he seemed at
first) has a countenance merry and comfortable. Charon also, is pictured Old,
thereby signifying Good Council, and Sweet Persuasion to prepare for death,
and that brings Joy: For what Joy can be greater, than that which arises out
of an assured knowledge of a spotless Innocence, or of an hope that sins
committed are repented and pardoned?

Anon (to see with what a Restless Gyre
The Soul entranced is whirld, some times through fire,
Then waves, then Racking Clouds: earth, heaun and hell
Lying (then) all-open, free, and passible)
Me thought, being in a Twinkling ferried over,
And trembling on the horrid Stygian shore,
I saw the Brazen gates of deep Abyss
In a vast bottom standing: none can miss
The way, it is so beaten, and so wide
That ten Caroches (breast-wise) in may ride.
To is there is a Headlong base Descent,
Slippery in whorrying down, yet turbulent
Through throngs of people daily poasting thither,
For Day nor Night are the Gates closde together. Noctes atque Dies patet atri
Ia^ua Ditis.

As at some direful Tragoedy (before
Not Acted) men prease round-about the door
Crowding for Entrance, yet none entrance have,
But (like tossed billows) this and that way Wave:
So Here; I asked the cause, and thousands cried,
Hell is so Full, there is room for Few beside. Hell extreme full.

In thrust I'mongst the thick'st, and sweating got
(For all the Air me thought was sulphry hot)
With much a-doe to the Gate, where stood a grim
And churlish Porter, being in voice and limb Cerberus Porter to Hell.

A Dog; yet like the Porter of a Iayle,
On new-come guests he Fawned and wagg'd his tail,
But bawled aloud for Fees, ready to tear
Their throats, who without bribes begged Entrance there,
I choked the Curre with what he craved, and went
On with bold steps to the Black Regiment.
The Feeding and Feeing of Cerberus, taxes those in office, who wey the gift,
not the cause; and have no other language in their mouths, but Quid dabis? yet
S. Paul wills him that has an office, to look to his office: And as
for-taking of Bribes, there is a direct Statute against it, set down by the
Upper house of Heaven, in these express words, Thou shall take no Bribe, Exodus
23.

Noise was my Guide (me thought) by which being led,
I got to the Court where Souls were Sentenced:
Full was it of brave Fellows and fine Dames,
Their Hair (once so perfumed) all turned to Flames.
The Prince of Darkness, sat upon a Throne Lucifer in his state.

Of red-hot Steel, and on his head a Crown
Of Glowing Adamant: As in he drew
The noisome Air, flames from his nostrils flew,
His Eyes flashed fire, and when with dreadful sound
He Roared (for that is his Voice) he shook the grownd
Of his Tartarean Palace) massy Keys
(The Ensigns of his Empire) held (as Stays)
A Canopy of Brass above his head,
Which hard (to last) in Hell was Hammered.
Those Keys being Emblems of Eternal pain,
For who there enter never come forth again,
Being lock'd-vp Ever: At his cloven feet
Three Judges sat, whom I did lowly greet.
Those Judges names are Minos, Rhadamanth, and AEacus: the Infernal King is
called Pluto. Now, albeit by The infernal Judges.
the laws of God we both believe, and are bound to acknowledge Him only to
be Supreme Lord and Judge both of Heaven, Earth, and Hell, yet sithence those
former figured Names (drawn from Poetical Invention) carry in them a Moral
and Instructiue Meaning, they are not altogether to be rejected; and the rather
because in Picturing forth so Terrible an Object as the Kingdom of Hell, and
Tortures of the Damned, I strive to shadow the Horrors of them, and to set
them off with heightning both of Profit and Delectation. He will bruise them
with a rod of iron, etc. Psalm 2.


The Judges in their hands held Whips of Wire,
Dipped in boyld brimstone to pay Souls their hire
According to their Facts: The King of Fiends
Spying me there ith throng, roares out and sends
Two of his Furies (Beadles of the Court)
To drag me to him, who in currish sort
(Like flesh-hooke-fingred Sergeants) haled me on:
Being there, the Jaws of Black Damnation
Thus yawnd, and bellowed: Wherefore art thou come
Hither (thou Slave) ere Death sets down thy Doom?
Thou art alive, and not a soul that draws
Breath Vital, by our dread infernal Laws
Must here set Footing. Humbly then (me thought)
With pale and fright full looks I Him besought,
That since I was a Stranger, and alive,
He by his Hellish large Praerogatiue
Would sign my Pass, but to walk all the Rounds
Of his vast Countries and to view their Bownds:
A yelling Outcry all-about was hurld,
That'twas not fit one of the Upper World
Should be a close intelligencing Spy
Of their scorched shores to make discovery.
But the Crim Tartar, with distorted brow
Thwarting their grumbling, held it scorn to bow
To any wish of theirs, and Vnder-writ
The Pass, with to ades blood from the Witches pit,
Charging me as my soul (if ere it fell
Into his Paws) should answer it in hell,
Not to a next World that my Pen betrayed
What there I saw. His threatening being obay'd,
From him I took my way, nor did I fear
To lose my path, Hels path was every where.
Here begin the Descriptions both of the Darkness and fires of Hell, etc.
as also of the particular Torments assigned to every Man, according to his
particular Sins.
ON wings of hot desire I flew from thence
With whirlwind swiftness, noise, and violence,
Being mounted on a Spirits back, which ran
With Mandrake-shrikes, and like a Lubrican:
Whilst round (me thought) about me there did roar
Ten thousand Torrents, beating on a shore
Made all of Rocks, where huge Leuiathans lay Job 27. Esaias. 57.

Gaping to swallow Souls, new cast away.
The Darkness of Hell.
Were all the Rowndure betwixt Hell and Heaven
One Clowd condensd, and into blackness driven, The darkness of Hell (no way
to be described) is here notwithstanding by comparison of others, made
fearful unto Humane understanding by such things as we know.

Not That; no, nor the Chaos vn-refinde,
(When in one Bundle Darkness up did bind
That confused Lump of Mixtures) being put too,
Not That: no nor if since the world was new,
All Nights (that ever were) might grow in One,
Neither could That: nor that Egyptian
Caliginous, Black vapor, which did rise
From Caves infernal to blind Pharaohs eyes,
Clammy as if that pitch from Heaven did melt,
And glutinously-thick it might be felt:
Add to all these, that hideous direful hour,
When all the lamps Celestial out did power,
Their lights like spent oil, dropping from their Sphaere
(As in my dream at first it did appear:)
Not all these Darkenesses together glowd,
And ten-times-ten Redoubled and Renewde,
Are half so dismal as the Night infernal, The properties of hells
darkness.

Black, Stinking, Stiflling, Poysning, and Eternal.
See for this Darkness Math. 22. 13. Iud. 13. Job 10. Prou. 4. 14. Psalm. 107.
10.

Horror of Hell Fire.
HOw then (it may be asked) did my weak Sight
Pierce these thick walls of Horror, where no light
Ever shed Beam? why, on that Sorcerous Coast
Where Hagges and Witches dwelt was not I lost?
My Spirit had balls of Wildfire in his head
For Eyes (me thought) and I by them was led:
For All these coale-pits (faddom'd deep as hell)
Still burn, yet are the Flames Invisible.
This fire is none of that, which God lent Man, Tartare (...) ardor, (...)
(...) (...) Ignem vincit, vt noster pictum, etc. Anselm.

When (driven by sin out) he from Paradise ran,
Bitten with cold, beaten with frosts and Snow,
And in mere pity did that Warmth bestow,
Teaching him how to kindle it at first,
And then with food combustible have it nursed:
No; this Red, Gloomy Furnace is a Firing,
Devouring, yet not wasting nor selfe-tiring.
Arithmetic cannot in Figures set
An Age of Numbered years to swell so Great,
As to fill up that time when these shall dye,
Being NEVER, for it burns Eternally,
From the Worlds first Foundation, to the Confounding:
Were Deluges on Deluges abounding,
Not All that Rain (able to drown the World,
Reached it to heaven) nor thousand Oceans hurld
On top of all those Waters, can ever slake
Or quench the least drop of this brimstone Lake.
For (which most dreadful is) the Flames cease Never Fire without light.

To torture Souls, and yet no light seen Ever:
It is a Burning which does Brightness lack,
The Coals being infinite-hot, and infinite black.
Yet through my horse of Hell gallopp'd amain,
Now plunged in Boiling lakes, then vp-againe;
Leaping into vast Caves, where heat never comes:
For sharper cold then Winters breath, benummes.
The Air so stiff, it freezeth All to ice,
And Clouds of Snow; whose Flakes are harder thrice
Than those Quadrangled Haile-stones, which in Thunder
Kill Teemes, and Plough-men, and riue Oaks in sunder.
The Extremities of Cold in Hell.
THe Hyperborean wind, whose Rough hand flings
Mountains for Snow-balls, and on's Marble wings Simile.

Bears Rocks of ice, fetched from the Frigid zone,
Which stuck ith North Seas, Seas and shoares were One;
Ten thousand wild Waves hardened in the Air
Rattling like Isicles on his grizly Hair,
And in his driueling Beard Snow ten-times more
Than e're the bald-pate Alps in Periwigs wore,
When from his Caves of brass (bound there in Gives
Of Adamant) out he whorries, and' fore him drives
(In whirlewindes,) Hail, Frosts, Sleete, and Storms; and
With rugged Winter, whom he Roaring greetes, (meets
Then clapping their obstreperous Squallid Wings,
Each of them on the frozen Russian dings
Such bitter blasts down, that they fly in Droues
(Though swadled all in furs) to Sweltring Stoues:
The Muffe, the Scythian, nor the Freeze-land-boore,
Nor the Laplandian Witch once peeping over
A threshold, left their Noses, Cheeks, and Eyes
(Pinched off by his Clumzy Nails) be made a prize
To snarling Boreas. O yet! all this cold
(Were it pil'd up in heaps a hundred fold,
In stifned Clouds to freeze ten thousand year)
Is a Warm Thaw, to the piercing Horrors here.
Hells Cold so biting, so Invincible, The effects of the cold in hell

Insufferable, Inexpressible,
That from all cold else the sharp nips does steal;
Should fire come near it, it would fire congeale,
Till Flames turn icy Flakes, and force fire leese
His Virtue so, that coals Red-hot will freeze.
Here I beheld (me thought) Souls Scar-crow-like,
Some bound, some hang bith heels, whose heads did strike
The Icy-knobbed-roofe, tossed too and fro,
By Gusts implacable, able down to throw
Rampires of Brass; which still beat out the Brains.
And still Renewde them with Plangiferous Pains.
Here, I beheld Kennels of fat-paunch'd Dogs,
From one to one howling in Dialogues
Of Hellish Language, cursing that they sat Hard-heartednes punished*

At proud Voluptuous Tables, yet forgot
Numm'd Charity, when at their gaudy gates
She begged but Scraps of their worst Delicates,
Yet starved for want; whilst they at Toasting fires
Bathed their Rank Guts: and with sharp whips of Wires
(But nothing else) heated her Shiuering limbs:
They quaffing Bowls (in the mean time) crowned to the Brims.
And when ragg'd Soldiers, of their Bodies making Soldiers vnpittied.

Anatomies in Wounds, with chill blasts quaking
And shrunke-vp mawes, did to their Worships come,
A Whipping-Poast, and Halter was their Doom.
Or when Thin-pale-cheek'd Scholars held but forth Scholars unrewarded.

Their Threadbare arms, and did beseech their Worth
To pity hapless Learning once so much
As not to see her beg: No, they would not Touch
A Poor books cover, though within it lay
Their Souls wealth, but (in scorn) Shuffled away.
O Divine Vengeance! how most Just thou art?
What they Stung ochers with, is Now their smart.
Bleake Agues, Apoplexies, Murres, Catarrhes,
Coughes, Dropsies, Rhewmes, diseases that make wars,
And in cold blood kill Health, did here reign rife,
And though they could not Wast, yet Worried life.
Death from his earthy hands flung here and there
Cold Snakes, and Scorpions, which did piece-male tear
Frost-bitten Souls, and spewd them up again
Wanting Disgestion: And to whip Pain with Pain,
Ten thousand Salamanders (whose chill thawing
Puts Bonfires out) their stark-stiffe lunges were gnawing:
Harsh was their Music therefore, on no string
But Yels; Teeth-gnashing, Chattring, Shiuering.
When thus far I was transported by my Dream: I called to mind (me thought)
that upon earth I had heard many great Scholars defend, that there was no Cold
in hell: But then (turning over the leaves of my memory) I found writteu there,
that Job once spoke thus.

They shall pass from the waters of Snow, to too much Heat. And that upon
those words Reverend Bid Sebastian Barradas in 4. Euan gcl. lib. 10. cap. 5.
did infer, that Job seemed to point (with his finger as it were) at Two
Hels, the one of Fire, the other of Cold. And that S. Hierome upon the tenth of
Matthew, did avouch the same thing: And again, that Hugo Victorinus, in his
Book De Anima, had ser down, that in Hell Hugo Victorinus lib. 4. cap. 13.
there was a Passage from the waters of Snow, to the heat of Fire, and both of
these were Insufferable, etc. Job 24.

I likewise (me thought) remembered, that the Author of the Book (entitled De
Triplici Habitaculo, that is to say, Of Heaven, Earth, and Hell) being thought
to be the Tom. 9. cap. 2:
work of Saint Augustine, had these words, There are two principal Torments
in Hell; viz. Intolerable Cold, and Intolerable Heat. Whereupon the
Evangelists wrote, there shall be in Hell, Weeping, and Gnashing Math. 13.
Luke 13.
of Teeth: Tears, melting from the eyes through the extremity of Fire, and
that of the Teeth, proceeding from the Sharpness of Cold.

Then called I to mind, that Iustinianus, in his Book De casto Connubio
Animae, said thus: There Iustinia. cap. 16.
is in Hell, a Fire Corporeal, Inextinguible, wanting Combustible matter to
nourish it: It shines to Punishment, not to Consolation. In that place there is
Cold Incomparable, Gnashing of Teeth, and Smoke most Horrible-Stinking, etc.
And that Haymo commenting upon Matthew, sung the same Tune, thus: That among all
Haymo in Ma^^ 8. cap.
the Tortures in Hell, the greatest were Heat and Cold.

My memory (me thought) amongst these mustred, Anselmus in his Elucidary,
Innocentius with his book De Innocent. lib. 6. cap. 4.
Contempta Mundi, with many others, all fighting under the same Opinion.

Again, I took hold upon the 39. Chapter of Ecclesiasticus, speaking thus:
They are Spirits created for Revenge, and in their fury they have fortified
their Torments; when the final Day shall come, they shall power forth the
force and rage of him that created them, Fire, Hayle, Famine, etc.

These, and other Fortifications of Reading defending me, were Armors
sufficient and of proof, that there was Cold in Hell: And that happily the
Infernal torments did Bid in Job. 24.
so change, that some times the Souls of men were scorched in fires, and anon
as grievously plagued with inexpressible anguish of cold: yet considering with
my self, that it was no Pillar for Salvation to lean upon, to believe that
there was or was not any such thing, it could (me thought) be no offense to
Persuade, It was so, or not so: and the rather, because it was but a Dream.

My Mephostophilan Nag (which foamed before
With a white frothy Sweat, by scudding over
The Fields of Flames) had now the Glanders got
Through sudden Cold, when he was Extreme hot:
Foundred he was besides (halting downright)
So that I durst nor on, nor yet Allight;
My self (me thought) being almost frozen dead.
Back therefore did I reyne his stubborn Head,
When quick as Thought, he gallopp'd thence away,
And came again where Souls all broyling lay:
Upon them fell down storms of burning Spears,
Trumpets red-hot, blowing Flames into their Ears,
Each Sense, and Member, that on earth had bin
An Armor in the quarrel of Damned Sin
To fight' against Heaven, were (here) in pieces rent,
And Faults weighed out with equal punishment. Esa. 27.

The Glutton roared for Cooks to give him meat, I will exercise Judgment in
weight, and Justice in measure. Iere. 25. Esa. 27.

Drunkards for Wine, to quench their scalding Heat,
Adulterers for their Whoores, to cool those Fires
Which now burnt hotter then their old Desires:
Some for Caroches cried, some for their Train
Of Vassailes to attend, but cried in vain.
They shall cry to the gods whom they served in this life, and they shall not
save them in this time of affliction. Ier. 2.

Gay gaudy women, who spent years of Noones
In tricking up their Fronts with Chaperoones, Pride of women (and in that the
effeminacy of men in this age) is here taxed, and rewarded.

And powdered Hair: whose Tailors sheares did quarrel
With Pride, how to cut only their apparel,
Whose Backs wore out more Fashions then their Wit,
Phantasticknesse being short to alter it
Into so many shapes, as they did vary
The loades, being more then those when fed Mules carry
(In Sumpters) Great Lords things: whose heads were
In The Air high as a Stags, boue all the Heard; reard
And when they rode (their Foote-men running by)
They seemed proud Ships in all their Gallantry,
Newly-arriu'd, full-fraighted, under sail,
Slight empty Cock-boates dancing at their Tail;
These Dames, who each day in French Chariots sat
Glistring like Angels, a prowd-bounding Trot
From four fair Steedes drawing all on them to wonder,
That the Clouds echoed, and the Earth shook under:
But when their Coursers took their full Cariere,
It looked like that Day, when the Thunderer
Struck with his Triple-fire Heavens Rider down; Phaetunt. Fab. Ovid. Metam.
lib. 2.

For (from their horses nostrils) Breath was thrown
Hot-quick as lightning, and their Hoofs vp-hurld
Such Clouds of Smoke, as when he fired the world.
O horrid sight! These (once so much Adored)
In hell were drudges, spurned at, and abhorred;
Their Painted cheeks, turned into Witches looks,
Bright Hair to Snakes, long Fingers into hooks,
Pearle-Chaines to roapes, their gaudy Robes to Rags,
And delicate bodies, vglier far then Hagges.
They that for Table-crums refused to buy
And (for their souls) hoord up Eternity,
Here offered worlds of Treasure, but to get
One drop of Water: (O hels infinite Heat!)
Yet not a drop was sufferd once to fall:
To quench their thirst, Devils held out caps of Gall.
Dives the pattern of such uncharitable wretches, cries out in that Language:
O Father Abraham, have compassion upon me, and send down Lazarus unto me, that
he may dippe the top of his finger in water and cool my tongue, etc. Luke 16.

Cram'd-vp in stinking corners I beheld What rabble are in Hell.

Base Heaps tumbled together, who all yell'd
Like bandogs tied in kennels: High-way-standers,
Foists, Nips, and Iylts, Prinadoes, Bawdes, Pimpes, Pan- Thieves. Panders.
Bawdes.

Old sunck-eyde Beldames, hired to keep the doors, (ders,
Till their own Daughters were by slaves made whoores:
Catchpolles, and Varlets, who did poor men fleece Catch-polles.

(To their undoing) for a Twelue-peny piece.
Among these were mingled Perjured common- Bail, Commonbail. Petti-foggers
Light weights breed heaviness.

With Petti-foggers, that set Law to sale
With Cauterized Consciences; Thieves, Cheates,
Tradesmen that fed upon the Broken Meats
Of Oaths and Rotten-wares; and those to sell
Cared not for single money to buy Hell.
Ten thousand Packs (like these) were basely thrown
Into a Warehouse of Damnation,
Where Fire their food was, Adders galls their Drink, Good cheer in hell for
sinners.

And their Tobacco, a strong Brimstone stink.
His bread (speaking of the wicked Worldling) in his Job. 20.
belly shall be turned into the gall of Serpents, he shall be constrained to
vomit out again the riches which he has devoured, God shall pull them forth
of his belly, he shall be constrained to suck the gals of Cockatrices, and the
tongues of Adders shall slay him, etc. Job 10.

The Worm of Conscience.
THe whips that lashed the Damned, were some of wire,
And some of Iron; others were roapes of Fire
Knotted with ragged stones of glowing Flint,
Which though in thousand forms they did imprint
Tortures upon their Souls, yet there was One
To which all Torments else compared, were None.
A kind of Worm there was, all speckled black,
That shot tenthousand Prickles from his back, The Worm of conscience.

Sharper then quils of Porcupines, and longer,
And further flying, and more swift and stronger;
It bare a Tearing forked sting behind,
Which in the Striking did so strangely wind,
It wounded every way where it did Hit,
Nor could it be put by, by force or Wit:
This Worm had Teeth of needles, and lay gnawing
Both night and day, Black Souls in pieces drawing:
The more it is racked, it lives; the more it Fries
In Flames, the less it Burns, and Never dies.
Our Savior speaking of the pains of the Damned, says; that their Worm
dies not. Mar. 9. 44.

To call but this Worm to mind (amongst the other Torments of that Infernal
Lake) mark in what passions one powers forth his fears: Gehennam timeo,
quippe interminatam, exhorreo Tartarum vt cui nimium insit Cyrillus
Allexandrinus in Oratione de Exitu Animae.
Caloris, paueo Tenebras quoniam nihil admittunt Lucis, Formido pectiferum
VERMEM, quoniam est perennis, etc.

I fear Gehenna, because it has no end, Hell to me is horrible, because it
has too much Fire, the Darkness I Gehenna, one of the Names of Hell, taken
from Hinmon valley, etc.
tremble at, because it has no Light, the Deadly WORM affrights me, because
it is Euer-lasting.

Holy Bernard being pierced to the Soul with the same Agony of Fear, thus
confesses it: Paueo Gehennam, Bernard. Sermon. 16. in Cantic.
Contremisco a Dentibus Bestiae infernalis, Horreo VERMEM rodentem, et ignem
torrentem, Fumum, et Vaporem, et Sulphur, et Spiritum Procellarum, etc.

I am (says he) afraid of Hell, I tremble at the teeth of the Infernal
Dragon, the Gnawing WORM is a Horror to me, and the Roasting Fire, and the
Smoke, and the Brimstone, and the Spirit of Storms, etc.

One Soul, me thought, boiling in Sulphurous flame, A soul bitterly accusing
God of injustice.

Cursed God, and on his Rigor did exclame,
Railed at him for Injustice, and thus Cried:
If for my Sin thy Son was Crucified,
Why am I hell'd in Execution
In this Damned Iayle, ever to be Undone?
If He laid down his life to set me Clear
From all my Debts, why am I Dungeon'd Here?
Why for a life no longer then a Span,
Am I an Everlasting damned Man?
He whom the First bad woman did entice,
Was but once driven out of Paradise,
Yet he (even then) was Sole Monarchall Lord Adam a Monarch after his deposing.

Over the whole Globe, Seas did to him Accord
In sweet Obedience: all the Beasts on Earth,
As under his Dominion they took birth,
So from him had they Names, they all did Bow
Their knees to him, and did observe his Brow.
He lost a Garden, but an Orchard found,
Walled in with Seas, with Sunbeams compast round,
Where Birds (whose Notes were never since so clear)
Served as Musicians All, to tune his Ear:
A Serpent cozened Him by sorcerous Charms,
But (in his stead) a woman filled his Arms:
A woman! in whose Face more Beauties shone
Then all the Beauties after made in One:
He was Man's Maister-thiefe, Robbed him of All,
Drove him from Eden, and (so) forced him Fall
Out of the Sphaere of Innocence: and yet
Those Crowns of Blessings God on him did set.
Why then for Sin but of a minutes date,
Must I for Ever be a Rebrobate?
Gods holy hunger though it often did kill me,
Gods holy Banquet yet did never fill me; Auri sacra Fames.

The Silk worm never for me wrought in her Loome,
I never slept in a Rich Lordly Room,
Never eat Pies of Nightingales Tongues, or sat
Like Dives at my table served in Plate.
My Beldame Nurse (the Earth) when she gave Suck
To me, her left Breast still she forth did pluck,
Being Iuicelesse; or from thence if Drops did fall,
How could I quench my thirsty Jaws with Gall?
I never lackeyed by proud Fortunes wheel:
For all the taste of Pleasures I did feel,
Was in the warm Embracements of my Whore:
If that were Sin, why then did Nature store
My Veins with hot blood, blowing lust full fire?
'Twas her Corruption, and not my Desire.
I likewise (now and then) was washed within
All-o're with Wines, but why should that be Sin,
When God the Vineyard planted, and in's word
Bid Man drink wine? Thou art a Rigorous Lord,
(Me thought) the Hell-hound howled, for trifling Crimes
To Damn me in a World out-lengthning Times.
Say, that full sixty years my Glass did run,
More then that half I slept, there was won
Little to Hell in sleep: but my life's thread
Reached but to thirty, so that I lay dead
Fifteen of those, and of those fifteen, five
At least were childish: O must I alive
Be held for Ever in Damnations Iayle
For poor ten years! when I perhaps did sail
Some part of them toward Heaven? What cursed wave
Threw'st Thou to drown me in the Infernal Grave?
My Parents blessed me Mornings, Noones and Nights,
Were all those spent in Vain? I took delights
Inplucking Apples from t'Hesperian Trees,
Which Eating, I grew Learned: add to All these
My Private Readings, which more Schooled my Soul,
Then Tutors, when they sternliest did Control
With Frowns or Rods: some Days in This were Spent:
So that if All my Faire-writ leaves were Rent
Out of Gods Memory, alack! it were
A Thin Book of the Foul: yet must I (here)
For sowing some Few Acres vn-awares
Of Bad Corn, reap an Endless Field of Tares?
At this, ten thousand Souls (rauing mad) Roard
That on their Heads the selfsame shot was scoard:
But then, a Voice (tuned to an Angels Sound)
With repercussiue Echoes did rebound
Through all the Court of Barathrum, thus Thundering
Terrors that shook Hells Center: Cease thy wondering
(Thou Bawling Reprobate,) a recompense
Is given thee to the Weight of thine Offense.
For had thy years out-reach'd Methuslem's Age,
Thy Black life's Torrent (with impetuous rage)
Had Boundless, Bottomless, Restless bin;
So that as Thy Eternity did Sin Peccas Homo in AEterno tuo: Pu nit Deus in
AEterno suo.

Tortured thou art in Gods Eternity:
Thy faults to him, his rods for thee do buy:
Nor can he in his Justice pity those,
Who pity not themselves, but do expose
Their Souls to Foul Acts, scorning threatened Pain,
Like Whoores, who buy Damnation for small Gain.
Thou on the bread thy Sins did earne do feed,
Not paying by the Day, but by the Deed.
What was thy whole life but a Mutinous War
Against thy Creator? Every Sense did Jar
From his Obedience: like to Mad-mens swords
Thy works were wounds, and blows flew from thy words:
Thy Lips, Ears, Eyes, have still bin Gates set wide
To let in Blasphemy, Lust, Avarice, Pride,
And Legions of such Devils. Thou did Dwell
First in a House of Flesh, but now in Hell:
That was thy Partner, and (as Partners do) The soul and body being
Partners, undo one another.

Has thee Undone for Ever: Thou shall Rue
His Ryots, VVhorings, Swearings, his Disorders
Are thy Damnations: every Sense now furders
Thy Torments; the loose Glances of the Eyes,
The Liquorishnesse of Taste, the Melodies
To the Lascivious Ear; All-all these turn
To thy Perdition, thou for these shall burn.
To no hand holden-vp can help be given,
The Left is Hels, the Right beat back from Heaven:
In Flames go it Where, and grow Green again;
Pain kill thee, yet thou still shall live in pain.
On was he going but to drown this Voice,
All Hell broke loose, and then were heard no Noise
But Vlulations, Shrikings, Horred Soundings
Of Ratling-Chaynes, and thousand strange Confoundings
Of Indisting guishable dire-mix'd Terrors: (rors.
At which (I Trembling) WAKDE; and though the Er-
Of my Sleepe-wandring-Soule, were now left Clear,
And that my cold hands had taken leave of fear,
Yet my Heart panted, and my Hair turned white,
More through the Ghastly Objects of this Night,
Then with the Snow of Age: And yet even then,
Collecting up my self, I read of Men
The Volumes over, and the world, so well
That I found Here worse Devils then are in Hell
FINIS.

